WOODLAKE, CALIFORNIA MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
1996 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
Woodlake, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 2, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
PREFACE 
The Woodlake, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1996, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 2, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Ruth Gonzales, city clerk. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 2, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance 604, passed February 8, 2016. 
Municipal Code Corporation
1700 Capital Circle SW
Tallahassee, FL 32310
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 2, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 2, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 2, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 2, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 2, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com. 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation
P.O. Box 2235
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation
1700 Capital Circle SW
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
There is adopted the "Woodlake Municipal Code," as complied, edited, and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, one copy of which shall remain on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. 524 § 1, 1996: Ord. 523 § 1, 1996) 
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code shall be known as the "Woodlake Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the "Woodlake Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Woodlake Municipal Code." References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections, and subsections of the "Woodlake Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections, or subsections, as they appear in the code. 
(Ord. 524 § 2, 1996: Ord. 523 § 2, 1996) 
1.01.030 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Woodlake Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections, and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 524 § 3, 1996: Ord. 523 § 3, 1996) 
1.01.040 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 524 § 4, 1996: Ord. 523 § 4, 1996) 
1.01.050 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such references shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 524 § 5, 1996: Ord. 523 § 5, 1996) 
1.01.060 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
The last ordinance included in this Code was Ordinance No. 520 passed on February 9, 1996. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 520, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made part of this code: Ordinances No. 521, 522 and 523. 
(Ord. 524 § 6, 1996: Ord. 523 § 6, 1996) 
1.01.070 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 524 § 7, 1996: Ord. 523 § 7, 1996) 
1.01.080 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 524 § 8, 1996: Ord. 523 § 8, 1996) 
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
"City" means the city of Woodlake, or the area within the territorial limits of the city, and such territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
"Council" means the city council of the city of Woodlake. "All its members" or "all council members" means the total number of council members holding office. 
"County" means the county of Tulare. 
"Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
"May" is permissive. 
"Month" means calendar month. 
"Must" and "shall" are each mandatory. 
"Oath" means and includes affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
"Owner," as applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
"Person" means and includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of them. 
"Personal property" means and includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
"Preceding" and "following" means next before and next after, respectively. 
"Property" means and includes real and personal property. 
"Real property" means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
"Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
"State" means the state of California. 
"Street" means and includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other property so designated in any law of this state. 
"Tenant" and "occupant," as applied to a building or land, means and includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
"Written" means and includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
"Year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. 525A § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 521 § 1 (part), 1996) 
1.04.020 - Interpretation of language. 
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 525A § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 521 § 1 (part), 1996) 
1.04.030 - Grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
A.	Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine, and neuter genders.
B.	Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.	Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Ord. 525A § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 521 § 1 (part), 1996) 
1.04.040 - Acts by agents. 
When an act is required by ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. 525A § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 521 § 1 (part), 1996) 
1.04.050 - Prohibited acts include causing and permitting. 
Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 525A § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 521 § 1 (part), 1996) 
1.04.060 - Computation of time. 
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is a Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. 
(Ord. 525A § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 521 § 1 (part), 1996) 
1.04.070 - Construction. 
The provisions of the ordinances of the city, and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. 525A § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 521 § 1 (part), 1996) 
1.04.080 - Repeal shall not revive any ordinance. 
The repeal of any ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 525A § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 521 § 1 (part), 1996) 
Chapter 1.08 - ARREST AND CITATION PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - Notice to appear. 
A.	If any person is arrested for a violation of any city ordinance, and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate as is more fully set forth in the Penal Code of the state of California, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court. 
B.	The time specified in the notice to appear must be at least ten days after such arrest.
C.	The place specified in the notice to appear shall be either:
1.	Before the judge of the justice court of the Woodlake judicial district;
2.	Before an officer authorized by the county of Tulare, city of Woodlake, or the city and county, to receive a deposit of bail. 
D.	The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person and the arrested person in order to secure release must give his written promise so to appear in court by signing the duplicate notice which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon the arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. 
E.	The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file the duplicate notice with the magistrate specified therein. Thereupon the magistrate shall fix the amount of bail which in his judgment, in accordance with the provisions of Section 1275 of the Penal Code, will be reasonable and sufficient for the appearance of the defendant and shall endorse upon the notice a statement signed by him in the form set forth in Section 815a of the Penal Code. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail thus set. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant shall not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited, and may in his discretion order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. 
Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings be had, all sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid into the county treasury for distribution pursuant to Section 1463 of the Penal Code. 
F.	No warrant shall be issued on such charge for the arrest of a person who has given such written promise to appear in court, unless and until he has violated such promise or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment, as required by law. 
(Ord. 504 § 1 (part), 1995; Ord. 154 § 1, 1961) 
1.08.020 - Violation of promise to appear—Misdemeanor. 
Any person wilfully violating his written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
(Ord. 154 § 2, 1961) 
1.08.030 - Failure to appear—Warrant for arrest—Delivery of papers to magistrate. 
When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided in Section 853.6 of the Penal Code, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within twenty (20) days after his failure to appear as promised, or if such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date which he promised to appear, then, within twenty (20) days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the office to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense. 
(Ord. 504 § 1 (part), 1995: Ord. 154 § 3, 1961) 
Chapter 1.12 - ADMINISTRATIVE FINES AND PENALTIES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 600, §§ 3 and 4 adopted January 11, 2016, repealed former ch. 1.12, §§ 1.12.010 and 1.12.020 and enacted a new ch. 1.12, §§ 1.12.010—1.12.140 as set out herein. Former ch. 1.12 pertained to general penalty and derived from Ord. 520, adopted in 1995, and Ord. No. 583, adopted June 25, 2012.
 
1.12.010 - Purpose. 
The city council finds that there is a need for an alternative method to enforce provisions of its ordinances, as amended from time to time. The city council further finds that the assessment of civil fines and penalties through an administrative hearing procedure for code violations in accordance with Government Code Section 53069.4 is a necessary, alternative method of ordinance enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 4, 1-11-2016)  
1.12.020 - Cumulative with other remedies. 
The enforcement remedy of administrative assessment of civil fines and penalties established in this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any other applicable statutory, administrative or judicial remedy authorized by any applicable law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 4, 1-11-2016)  
1.12.030 - Definitions. 
A.	"Enforcement officer" means the code enforcement officer designated by the city manager, including any deputies of the code enforcement officer, and any sworn peace officer employed by the city. 
B.	"Property owner" means the owner of record of the real property, upon which a violation of a city ordinance exists, as shown on the most recent equalized tax roll, the occupant of that real property, the person in possession of that real property and any other interested person responsible for such property or the violation. 
C.	"Notice of violation" means the "notice of violation, order to correct and notice of assessment of administrative fines and penalties" or its substantial equivalent, issued by the enforcement officer in compliance with this chapter. 
D.	"Person" means any natural person, partnership, trust, corporation, limited liability company, association, society, club or other entity but shall not include the city or any of its employees and agents acting within the scope and course of such employment or agency. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 4, 1-11-2016)  
1.12.040 - Imposition of civil fines and penalties. 
A.	Any person violating any provision of an ordinance enacted by the city, as amended from time to time, shall be subject to the assessment of civil fines and penalties pursuant to the administrative procedures established in this chapter and authorized by Government Code Section 53069.4. 
B.	Each and every day that a violation of any city ordinance exists shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 4, 1-11-2016)  
1.12.050 - Enforcement authority. 
A.	The enforcement officer shall have the authority and powers necessary to determine whether a violation of a city ordinance exists and the authority to take appropriate action to gain compliance with the provisions of all ordinances enacted by the city. These powers include the power to issue a notice of violation; the power to assess and collect civil fines and penalties as provided in this chapter; and the power to enter and inspect private property within the boundaries of the city pursuant to the consent of the property owner or other person in charge, or a warrant. 
B.	These inspections may include, but are not limited to, the taking of photographs or video recordings and the taking of samples or other physical evidence. All entries, examinations, inspections and surveys shall be conducted in a reasonable manner. If all property owners, tenants or other responsible persons refuse to consent to the entry or inspection by the enforcement officer, the enforcement officer may seek and obtain an inspection warrant pursuant to Part 3, Title 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure (commencing with Section 1822.50) except that, notwithstanding Section 1822.52 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the warrant shall be issued only upon probable cause. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 4, 1-11-2016)  
1.12.060 - Amount of fines and penalties. 
Any person who violates any provisions of any ordinance enacted by the city, as amended from time to time, or any person who owns property upon which a violation exists, irrespective of whether that person caused the violation, shall be subject to an administrative fine or penalty up to the maximum amounts set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 4, 1-11-2016)  
1.12.070 - Amount of fine. 
The enforcement officer may impose as the administrative fine, an amount up to the maximum fine or penalty amounts for infractions set forth in subsection (b) of California Government Code Section 36900, to the extent permitted by law; the enforcement officer may impose the fine if the violation is not abated by the date specified in the notice of violation issued in compliance with Section 1.12.100 of this chapter. If each day the violation exists is deemed a separate violation, the amount of the fine which may be imposed shall be calculated based upon the number of calendar days from the date of transmittal of the notice of violation through the date of abatement. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 4, 1-11-2016)  
1.12.080 - Interest. 
Any administrative fine and penalty shall accrue interest at the same annual rate as any civil judgment. Interest shall accrue commencing on the twentieth (20th) day after the penalty becomes a final decision or order. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 4, 1-11-2016)  
1.12.090 - Determination of fine. 
A.	The enforcement officer shall determine the amount of fines or penalties in the first instance. In making the determination, the enforcement officer may take into account the facts and circumstances of the violation, including without limitation the following factors: 
1.	The length of the time the violations existed;
2.	The culpability of the owner and the willfulness of the violation;
3.	The number of previous violations of the same or related type committed by the owner within the preceding twelve (12) months; 
4.	The extent of the violation and the effect of the violation on other residents within the boundaries of the city; 
5.	Attempts, if any, to comply with the applicable ordinance(s);
6.	The time necessary to abate the violation; and
7.	Any other information relevant to a determination of the fine.
B.	In making a determination of the amount of the fine, the enforcement officer may consider any relevant information including, without limitation, any information submitted by the property owner. In the event that the enforcement officer determines that the violation was not caused by, or with the knowledge of, the present property owner, the enforcement officer may reduce or eliminate the fine. In the event the enforcement officer determines that the correction of the violation is not feasible, and the violation does not impact other residents within the boundaries of the city, the enforcement officer may reduce or eliminate the fine. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 4, 1-11-2016)  
1.12.100 - Notice of violation, order to correct and notice of assessment of administrative fines and penalties. 
Upon determining that a violation exist of any ordinance enacted by the city, the enforcement officer may take the following steps: 
A.	Issue a "notice of violation, order to correct, and notice of assessment of administrative fines and penalties" to the property owner by certified mail or by personal service. The notice of violation shall specify or contain: 
1.	The name and address of the property owner, and the address and assessor's parcel number ("APN") of the real property where the violation exists; 
2.	A statement that a determination has been made that a violation of the particular ordinance exists on the identified property and specifying the sections of the ordinance violated and the conditions constituting each and every violation; 
3.	A specified time period of not less than thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice of violation within which the violation must be abated; 
4.	A statement advising the property owner that in the event the violation is not abated by the deadline specified in the notice of violation, the property owner shall be subject to administrative fines and penalties under this chapter and specifying the maximum amount of such fines and penalties; 
5.	A statement that the property owner may submit in writing to the hearing officer any information relating to the determination of the existence of the violation or violations or the amount of the fine to be imposed; 
6.	A statement of any additional potential consequences that could occur if the violation continues after the expiration of the deadline specified in the notice of violation including, but not limited to, criminal prosecution, civil injunction, administrative abatement, judicial abatement, summary abatement, revocation of permits, recordation of notice of violation, and withholding of future city permits. 
7.	A statement that the property owner affected by the notice of violation may appear before the hearing officer at the date and time specified in the notice of violation to appeal the findings, determinations and amount of potential fines and penalties set out in the notice of violation. 
8.	A statement that should the property owner fail to appear at the appeal hearing specified in the notice of violation, the findings, determinations and amounts of administrative fines set out in the notice of violation shall be final. 
B.	The enforcement officer may, in her/his discretion, record a copy of the notice of violation with the county recorder. In the event of such recordation, and in the event that the notice of violation is subsequently modified, the enforcement officer shall record an amended notice of violation. Correction or abatement of the violation shall not excuse the owner's liability for costs incurred during the administrative abatement process. In the event that the notice of violation is eliminated through the appeal process or because the violations have been corrected within the deadline specified in the notice of violation, the enforcement officer shall record a "notice of withdrawal of notice of violation" or a "notice of satisfaction and compliance with notice of violation," as warranted. 
C.	If the enforcement officer determines that an effort is being made to correct the violation, he or she may grant an additional period of time for correction of the violation. Unless the notice of violation is appealed as provided in Section 1.12.110 of this chapter, the notice of violation shall constitute the final administrative order or decision of the city and the assessment of administrative fines and penalties shall become a final order or decision within the meaning of Government Code Section 53069.4(b)(1). 
D.	Notwithstanding subsection A. above, the enforcement officer may require immediate abatement of a violation if the violation creates an imminent danger to the health and safety of other persons or property within the boundaries of the city, including city staff and city property. Such summary abatement must comport with all applicable laws and any requirements enacted in this Code or such other uniform code which has been adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 4, 1-11-2016)  
1.12.110 - Initial appeal of notice of violation. 
A.	The notice of violation shall set an appeal hearing which shall be no sooner than twenty (20) days and no later than forty-five (45) days following the issuance of the notice of violation. Failure of the property owner to timely appear will result the notice of violation and the assessment of administrative fines and penalties to immediately become a final order or decision. 
B.	During the appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall: review the notice of violation; review any relevant evidence submitted by the property owner; consider the factors set forth in Section 1.12.090 of this chapter; and either uphold, withdraw or modify the notice of violation and the fines and penalties specified in the notice of violation. The hearing officer shall serve a copy of his or her written decision on the property owner. The written decision shall also include or be accompanied by a description of the right to appeal the hearing officer's decision to the city council as provided in Section 1.12.120 of this chapter. Service of the hearing officer's decision shall be complete within five calendar days after the date it was mailed by first-class U.S. mail to the property owner at the address shown on the last equalized tax roll. 
C.	The decision of the hearing officer shall constitute the administrative order or decision of the city and be final and confirmed within the meaning of Government Code Section 53069.4(c) unless appealed to the city council as set out in Section 1.12.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 4, 1-11-2016)  
1.12.120 - Appeal to the city council. 
A.	The person who appealed the notice of violation pursuant to Section 1.12.110 of this chapter may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to the city council pursuant to Title 1 of this Code and subject to all of the requirements of this chapter which shall be controlling to the extent of any inconsistency with Chapter 1.13 of Title 1. 
B.	A notice of appeal must be in writing, must be filed with the city clerk and must state specifically all of the claimed errors, abuses of discretion and other grounds for the appeal. The city council shall consider only the issues raised in the timely notice of appeal as a basis for appeal. The appellant, with approval of the city council, may amend the written notice of appeal to include additional issues, before submission to the city council for decision. 
C.	At the time of filing the appeal, the appellant must pay a fee in an amount adequate to cover the cost of processing and hearing the appeal, as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The city shall also recover from the appellant the costs of preparation of any transcript of testimony requested by the appellant. 
D.	The city clerk shall cause a notice of hearing to be mailed to the appellant by first-class mail specifying the date, time and location where the city council will meet and hear the appeal, which date shall be not less than five calendar days after the date of mailing the notice. The city clerk shall also give a copy of said notice to the responding city officer or employee. Upon receipt of the notice of hearing from the city clerk, the responding city officer or employee shall transmit to the city clerk copies of all documents pertaining to the matter under appeal, a transcript of testimony as the appellant shall specifically request and pay for, and a summary of all of the evidence presented to the responding city officer or employee. The city clerk shall also give such other notices as may be required by law or ordinance. 
E.	At the time fixed by the city clerk, the city council shall meet to review the appeal. The appellant may appear and be heard on the matter. 
F.	The notice of violation and the written decision of the hearing officer shall be admitted into evidence. The appellant shall bear the burden of proving that the decision of the hearing officer should be vacated or modified. 
G.	In reviewing the decision of the hearing officer, the city council shall consider the factors set forth in Section 1.12.090 of this chapter, and shall uphold, repeal or modify the decision of the hearing officer; and the city council shall uphold, eliminate, or modify any fines and penalties assessed by the hearing officer. The written decision shall also include or be accompanied by a description of the appellant's right to appeal the decision as provided in Government Code Section 53069.4 and Section 1.12.130 of this chapter. 
H.	At the hearing on appeal, the city council shall review the documents pertaining to the matter, offered summaries of the evidence, such transcript of testimony as may be furnished; and will hear such testimony as is relevant to the issues raised in the appellant's notice of appeal and any amendments thereto. Oral evidence shall be taken on oath or affirmation. Each side shall have the right to call and examine witnesses; to introduce exhibits; to cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues on appeal even though that matter was not covered in the direct examination; to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him to testify; and to rebut the evidence against him. If a party does not testify on her/his own behalf she/he may be called and examined as if under cross-examination. The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules of evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence upon which responsible persons are accustomed to rely upon in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule, which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence but may be rejected by the city council if deemed unreliable. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the extent that they are otherwise required by statute to be recognized at a hearing. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may affirm, reverse or modify the finding, decision or action, or may refer the matter back for further action. 
I.	The decision of the city council shall constitute the final administrative order or decision of the city within the meaning of Government Code Section 53069.4(b)(1) and (c). The city clerk shall cause a copy of the city council's written decision to be served by first-class mail on the appellant specified in the written notice of appeal. Service of the city council's decision shall be complete on the fifth day after the date it is mailed by the city clerk to the address provided by the appellant on the notice of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 4, 1-11-2016)  
1.12.130 - Judicial review. 
A.	Any person aggrieved by a final administrative order or decision imposing an administrative fine after an appeal under Section 1.12.120 of this chapter may seek review in the Tulare County Superior Court pursuant to the terms of Government Code 53069.4(b). 
B.	Judicial review of a decision of the city council made after a hearing pursuant to Section 1.12.120 shall be made pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure where and to the extent said section may be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 4, 1-11-2016)  
1.12.140 - Enforcement and collection. 
When an administrative fine or penalty becomes a final order under this Chapter or Government Code Section 53069.4, the city may proceed to collect the fine or penalty as follows: 
A.	The city may commence a civil action to enjoin and/or collect the administrative fines and penalties. In the event a civil action is commenced to collect the administrative fines and penalties, the city shall be entitled to recover all costs associated with the collection of the fines and penalties. Costs include, without limitation, staff time incurred in the collection of the penalty and those costs set forth in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1033.5. 
B.	The amount of any unpaid final administrative fine, plus interest, plus any other costs as provided in this chapter, may be declared a lien on any real property owned by the property owner against whom an administrative penalty has been imposed, as follows: 
1.	Notice shall be given to the property owner before recordation of the lien, and shall be served in the same manner as a summons in the civil action pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 415.10 et seq.; 
2.	The lien shall attach when the city records it with the county recorder's office. The lien shall specify the amount of the lien, the date of the code violations, the date of the final decision, the street address, legal description, and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the record owner of the parcel; and 
3.	In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, the city shall record a notice of the discharge containing the information specified in Section 1.12.100 8.B. 
C.	The city may withhold issuance of licenses, permits and other entitlements to the property owner on any project, property, or application of any kind whenever an administrative penalty remains unpaid. 
D.	The city may take such other actions as are allowed for enforcement of a civil judgment as provided for pursuant to the Enforcement of Judgments Law, commencing with California Code of Civil Procedure Section 680.010. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 4, 1-11-2016)  
Chapter 1.13 - ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS 
Sections: 
 
1.13.010 - Appeal to the city council. 
As to any matter, which the city council by ordinance or resolution makes subject to the provisions of this section, the appeal to the city council and its review shall be controlled by the following rules: 
A.	An appeal from a finding, decision or action of an official of the city shall be taken by filing a written notice of appeal within ten calendar days after the finding, decision or action is announced to the person affected, or, in those cases where written notice of the finding, decision or action is required, within ten calendar days after the mailing of the notice of the finding, decision or action. The finding, decision or action shall be final unless such written notice of appeal is filed within said ten day period. A notice of appeal must be in writing, must be filed with the city clerk and must state specifically the claimed error or abuse of discretion. The city council shall consider only the issues raised in the notice of appeal as a basis for appeal. The appellant, with approval of the city council, may amend the written notice of appeal to include additional issues, before submission to the city council for decision. 
B.	Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the city officer or employee shall transmit to the city clerk copies of all documents pertaining to the matter under appeal, a transcript of testimony as the appellant shall specifically request and pay for, and a summary of all of the evidence presented. The city shall recover from the appellant the costs of preparation of any transcript of testimony requested by the appellant. 
C.	The city clerk shall give notice to the appellant, the applicant (if the applicant is not the appellant) and to the responding city officer or employee of the date when the appeal will be heard by the city council. In addition, the city clerk shall give such other notice as may be required by law or ordinance. 
D.	At the hearing on appeal, the city council shall review the documents pertaining to the matter, offered summaries of the evidence, such transcript of testimony as may be furnished; and will hear such testimony as is relevant to the issues raised in the notice of appeal and any amendments thereto. Oral evidence shall be taken on oath or affirmation. Each side shall have the right to call and examine witnesses; to introduce exhibits; to cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues on appeal even though that matter was not covered in the direct examination; to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him to testify; and to rebut the evidence against him. If a party does not testify on her/his own behalf she/he may be called and examined as if under cross examination. The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules of evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence upon which responsible persons are accustomed to rely upon in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule, which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence but may be expressly or implicitly rejected by the council if deemed unreliable. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the extent that they are otherwise required by constitution or statute to be recognized at a hearing. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may affirm, reverse or modify the finding, decision or action, or may refer or remand the matter back to staff for further action. 
E.	The decision of the city council shall constitute the final administrative order or decision of the city. The city clerk shall cause a copy of the city council's written decision to be served by first-class mail on the appellant specified in the written notice of appeal. Service of the city council's decision shall be complete on the fifth day after the date it is mailed by the city clerk to the address provided by the appellant on the notice of appeal. 
F.	Except when otherwise mandated by applicable law, judicial review of a decision of the city council made after a hearing pursuant to this section shall be made pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure where and to the extent said section may be applicable. 
G.	The provisions of this section shall be applicable only where there is a specific reference to this section by resolution or ordinance, directing that the provisions of this section shall control, or where the right of appeal is expressly granted but no superseding appeal procedures are specifically provided. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 3, 1-11-2016)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 
 
2.04.010 - Meetings. 
The city council shall establish by resolution the day of the week, time and place of its regular meetings. 
(Ord. 522 § 2, 1996) 
Chapter 2.08 - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 
Sections: 
 
2.08.010 - Office created. 
The office of the city administrator is created and established. 
(Ord. 390 § 1, 1983) 
2.08.020 - Appointment and tenure. 
The city administrator shall be appointed by the council wholly on the basis of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the council. The city administrator may also concurrently serve as the head of one or more other city departments at the pleasure of the council. 
(Ord. 390 § 2, 1983) 
2.08.030 - Eligibility—Residence. 
Residence in the city of a city administrator shall not be required as a condition of the appointment. 
(Ord. 390 § 3, 1983) 
2.08.040 - Councilman ineligible for administrator position when. 
No person elected to the city council shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as city administrator until one year has elapsed after such councilmember shall have ceased to be a member of the council. 
(Ord. 390 § 3.1, 1983) 
2.08.050 - Bond required. 
The city administrator shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the council and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city administrator as herein prescribed. 
(Ord. 390 § 4, 1983) 
2.08.060 - Bond premium. 
Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. 
(Ord. 390 § 4.1, 1983) 
2.08.070 - Compensation. 
The city administrator shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution; and such compensation and expenses shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the council shall designate. 
(Ord. 390 § 5, 1983) 
2.08.080 - Reimbursement. 
The city administrator shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him in the performance of his duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the council. 
(Ord. 390 § 6, 1983) 
2.08.090 - Claim. 
Reimbursement shall only be made, however, when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested, and has been presented to the city council for approval. 
(Ord. 390 § 7, 1983) 
2.08.100 - Temporary administrator. 
The city administrator shall appoint, subject to the approval of the council, one of the other officers or department heads of the city to serve as administrator pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the city administrator. 
(Ord. 390 § 8, 1983) 
2.08.110 - Appointment by council. 
In case of the absence or disability of the city administrator and his failure to so appoint a manager pro tempore, the council may designate some qualified city employee to perform the duties of the city administrator during the period of absence or disability of the city administrator, subject, however, to such person furnishing a corporate surety bond conditioned upon faithful performance of the duties required to be performed as set forth in Sections 2.08.050 and 2.08.060. 
(Ord. 390 § 9, 1983) 
2.08.120 - Routine administration. 
The city administrator shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 390 § 10, 1983) 
2.08.130 - Responsibility. 
He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his control. 
(Ord. 390 § 11, 1983) 
2.08.140 - Enumerated powers. 
In addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his duty and he shall have the powers of this section. 
A.	Law Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the city administrator to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed. 
B.	Authority Over Employees. It shall be the duty of the city administrator and he shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his jurisdiction through their department heads. 
C.	Recommendations to Council on Appointment. It shall be the duty of the city administrator to recommend to the city council the appointment, removal, promotion and demotion of any and all officers and employees of the city, except the city clerk, city attorney, city treasurer and the city engineer. 
D.	Reorganization of Officers. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city administrator to recommend to the city council such reorganization of officers, positions, departments or units under his direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city's business. 
E.	Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the city administrator and he shall recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient. 
F.	Attendance at Council Meetings. It shall be the duty of the city administrator to attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom, except when his removal is under consideration. 
G.	Financial Reports. It shall be the duty of the city administrator to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
H.	Budget. It shall be the duty of the city administrator, with the assistance of the finance director, to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval. 
I.	Purchasing Agent. It shall be the duty of the city administrator to supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget; let contracts necessary for operation or maintenance of city services for amounts up to and including one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), receive sealed bids for purchases or contracts in excess of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and present them to the council for approval, and advise the council on the advantages or disadvantages of contract and bid proposals. No purchase shall be made, contract let or obligation incurred for any item or service which exceeds the current budget appropriation by the council. No contract in excess of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and no contract for new construction shall be let except by the city council. The city administrator may issue such rules governing purchasing procedures within the administrative organization as the council shall approve. 
J.	Investigations. It shall be the duty of the city administrator to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of the city. 
K.	Public Utilities—Franchises. It shall be the duty of the city administrator to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in this city, and to see that all franchises and permits granted by the city are faithfully performed and observed. 
L.	Public Buildings. It shall be the duty of the city administrator and he shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the council. 
M.	Hours of Employment. It shall be the duty of the city administrator to devote his entire time to the duties of his office in the interests of the city. 
(Ord. 390 § 12, 1983) 
2.08.150 - Additional duties. 
It shall be the duty of the city administrator to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other action of the council. 
(Ord. 390 § 13, 1983) 
2.08.160 - Council-administrator relations. 
The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city administrator, except for the purpose of inquiry; and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city administrator. The city administrator shall take his orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the council; and no individual councilman shall give any orders or instructions to the city administrator. 
(Ord. 390 § 14, 1983) 
2.08.170 - Departmental cooperation. 
It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city clerk, city engineer, city treasurer and city attorney to assist the city administrator in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 390 § 15, 1983) 
2.08.180 - Attendance at commission meetings. 
The city administrator may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission, recreation or park commissions, and any other commissions, boards or committees hereafter created by the city council, upon his own volition or upon discretion of the city council. At such meetings which the city administrator attends, he shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof, and he shall inform said members as to the status of any matter being considered by the council and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the council. 
(Ord. 390 § 16, 1983) 
2.08.190 - Emergencies. 
In case of accident, disaster or other circumstances creating a public emergency, the city administrator may award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting said emergency; but he shall file promptly with the council a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
(Ord. 390 § 17, 1983) 
2.08.200 - Removal of administrator. 
To the extent permitted by the State and Federal Constitution, the city council may remove the city administrator at any time without cause. 
Discretion of Council. In removing the city administrator, the council shall use its uncontrolled discretion, and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon cause for removal. 
(Ord. 390 § 18, 1983) 
Chapter 2.12 - CITY TREASURER 
Sections: 
 
2.12.010 - Bond. 
The bond of the city treasurer is fixed at ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(Ord. 131 § 1, 1959) 
Chapter 2.16 - ELECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
2.16.010 - General municipal election date. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 36503.5, the general municipal election date of the city is changed from the second Tuesday in April in each even numbered year to the same day as the Statewide General Election in even numbered years. 
(Ord. 373 § 1, 1982) 
2.16.020 - Voting precinct. 
For all municipal elections held after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, there shall be one consolidated precinct, comprising all of the territory within the boundaries of the city. Such consolidated precinct shall consist of all portions of county and city precincts lying within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. 16 § 1, 1942) 
2.16.030 - Polling place—Election officials. 
The city council shall, at least thirty-five (35) days before any election, by resolution, designate the polling place, the hours the same shall remain open, the names of the persons appointed as precinct election officials or officers. The city clerk shall maintain a register of applicants for election officers, and in the event that no persons apply, or an insufficient number of persons apply, or it is not deemed by the council to be in the best interests of city to appoint any applicant, any person who is a qualified voter of the city may be appointed as an election official. Oral applications may be received as a part of the register, at the time of appointment of the officers. 
(Ord. 16 § 2, 1942) 
2.16.040 - Failure to perform election duties. 
Should the city council or any officer of the city fail, or appear about to fail to, do any duty enjoined upon him or by law with regard to any election, the city clerk is empowered to do said act. 
(Ord. 16 § 3, 1942) 
2.16.050 - Provisions directory only. 
The provisions of Sections 2.16.020 through 2.16.050 are directory only, and the failure to do any required act shall not invalidate or impair the conduct or validity of any election. If at any time any provision of said sections shall become in conflict with any state law regulating any election, to that extent said sections shall not have any force or validity. 
(Ord. 16 § 4, 1942) 
Chapter 2.20 - FINANCE DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 
 
2.20.010 - Department created. 
A finance department is created and established and shall be subject to the general administrative direction of the city council. 
(Ord. 505 § 1 (part), 1995: Ord. 376 § 1 (part), 1982) 
2.20.020 - Functions and duties. 
The finance department shall be responsible for the entire financial and accounting operation of the city government, to include but not necessarily be limited to the receipt, disbursement and deposit in the treasury of all city moneys, assist in the preparation of the city budget, maintenance of all accounting procedures and records, and any other duties and responsibilities that may be assigned by the city administrator, city council or state law. 
(Ord. 505 § 1 (part), 1995: Ord. 376 § 1 (part), 1982) 
2.20.030 - Finance director—Position created. 
The position of finance director is created and established, and the position shall be filled by appointment of and serve at the pleasure of the city council. The finance director shall be fully responsible for all functions and duties of the finance department, as established by state law, ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. 505 § 1 (part), 1995: Ord. 376 § 1 (part), 1982) 
2.20.040 - Finance director—Other duties. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 37209 and 40805.5 of the Government Code of the state of California, all financial and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk by Sections 40802 through 40805 and Sections 37201 through 37208 of the Government Code are transferred to the finance director. 
(Ord. 376 § 1 (part), 1982) 
2.20.050 - Finance director—Bond required. 
Before entering upon the duties of the office, the finance director shall execute a bond to the city. Except as may otherwise be provided, the bond shall conform to the provisions of the Government Code relating to bonds of public officers, and the penal sum of the bond shall be in a reasonable amount recommended by the city attorney and fixed by the city council by resolution. Any premium for the required bond shall be assumed by the city. 
(Ord. 376 § 1 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 2.24 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.24.010 - Created. 
There is created a city planning commission appointed by the city council who shall be known as the "planning commission" composed of five members who reside within the city limits of the city of Woodlake. 
(Ord. 529 § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.24.020 - Member restrictions. 
A.	No member of the planning commission may serve on the city council or serve as the city clerk at the same time. 
B.	Planning commissioners may hold no other city office or position.
(Ord. 529 § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.24.030 - Terms of office. 
A.	The terms of office of the members of the planning commission shall be four years, except that each planning commissioner shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed from office by majority vote of the city council at any time. 
B.	Vacancies other than those created by an expiration of terms of offices shall be filled by majority vote of the city council by appointment for the unexpired term. The term of office of members of planning commission shall commence on March 1st and terminate on the last date of February, four years thereafter. 
(Ord. 529 § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.24.040 - Compensation. 
No compensation shall be paid to members of the planning commission for services performed as a member. Expenses shall be reimbursed which are incurred, by a commission in the performance of his day which have been previously budgeted and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 529 § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.24.050 - Members to be registered voters. 
No person shall be appointed as a planning commissioner who is not a registered voter. 
(Ord. 529 § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.24.060 - Meetings. 
A.	The planning commission shall make such rules as it deems proper for the conduct of its meetings except that any action by the planning commission shall require the affirmative votes of at least three members of the planning commission. 
B.	Any member of the planning commission who misses three consecutive regular meetings of the planning commission without notice may be removed from his office and the city council of the city shall declare the office vacant and fill the office as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 529 § 1 (part), 1998) 
Chapter 2.28 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
Sections: 
 
2.28.010 - Findings. 
Pursuant to Section 33101 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California, the city council declares that there is a need for an agency in the city to function in the city as a redevelopment agency. The council further finds and determines that this need exists because there are certain areas in the city which are characterized by one or more of the conditions set forth in Sections 33031 and 33032 of the Health and Safety Code and these areas constitute physical, social and economic liabilities to the city and require development. The council further finds and determines that it is the interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city to form an agency. 
(Ord. 476 § 1, 1993) 
2.28.020 - Designated. 
The city council declares itself to be such an agency, contemplated and authorized by the Health and Safety Code, and hereby designates the official name of such agency as the Woodlake redevelopment agency. 
(Ord. 476 § 2, 1993) 
Chapter 2.32 - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
Sections: 
 
2.32.010 - Findings. 
In accordance with the California Industrial Development Financing Act (Title 10, commencing with Section 91500, of the Government Code of the state of California) (the "Act"), the city council finds and declares that there is a need for an industrial development authority to function in the city. 
(Ord. 377 § 1, 1982) 
2.32.020 - Established. 
A.	The city council further declares that an industrial development authority shall function in the city, in accomplishment of the purposes provided in the Act, and to carry out and complete projects and perform and exercise derivative obligations and powers as set forth in the Act. 
B.	The city council further declares itself to be the board of directors of such industrial development authority, and all the rights, powers, privileges, duties, liabilities, disabilities and immunities vested in such a board under the Act shall be vested in this city council as such board. 
(Ord. 377 §§ 2, 3, 1995) 
2.32.030 - Title for citation of authority. 
The authority established in the city by the Act and authorized to transact business and exercise its powers thereunder by this chapter shall be known as the industrial development authority of the city. 
(Ord. 377 § 4, 1995) 
Chapter 2.36 - PURCHASING SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
2.36.010 - Authority. 
The provisions of this chapter are adopted in accordance with Sections 54201 through 54205 of the Government Code. 
A.	The city administrator shall have control of the city purchasing and contracting system, and may delegate such authority by written executive order as permitted by this code, resolutions, and rules and regulations promulgated in conformance therewith. 
B.	The city administrator is designated as purchasing officer and as such shall have all duties set forth herein. The city administrator shall function as such until his successor is appointed pursuant to Section 2.36.030. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.020 - Limitation. 
Contracts and purchases made in accordance with Section 2.36.070 cumulatively totaling seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00), or more, in any three-year period awarded to any one vendor or contractor are prohibited, such being evidence of "bid splitting," which practice is prohibited. 
A.	In such event vendor or contractor shall be required to comply with the competitive bidding process set out in this code prior to being awarded a further contact or purchase order within the three-year period. 
B.	Splitting contracts or purchases to avoid dollar limits set out in this chapter is prohibited. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.030 - Purchasing officer duties. 
There is created the position of purchasing officer. The duties of this officer (hereinafter described) shall be handled by the city administrator until such time as it may, in the opinion of the council, be advisable to appoint another individual as purchasing officer. 
A.	Purchase or contact for all supplies, equipment and contractual personal services, excluding professional services, needed by all city departments or agencies which derive financial support wholly or in part from the city, in accordance with purchasing procedures as prescribed by this chapter, relevant administrative regulations and such rules and regulations as the purchasing officer shall adopt and the city administrator approve; 
B.	Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment and for the contacting for services from the lowest responsible bidder; 
C.	Act to procure for the city acceptable quality of supplies, equipment and services at the least expense to the city; 
D.	Discourage uniform bidding by purveyors and induce full competition on all purchases and for all purchases and contracts; 
E.	Adopt administrative regulations, subject to prior approval of the city administrator, including revisions and amendments thereto, governing the purchase of goods and the contracting for services or supplies and equipment for the city; 
F.	Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing and contracting, price, costs, market conditions, new products and new contractual situations prevailing in the industries which might be supplying goods or services to the city; 
G.	Prescribe, design and issue forms needed for the operation of the procedures and requirements set out in this chapter, and such other applicable rules as may seem necessary to fulfill the requirements of this chapter; 
H.	Regulate the transfer of surplus property between departments as needed, or sell or otherwise dispose of surplus property when designated as such by other department heads or city administrator; 
I.	Maintain a bidders list, vendors and contractors catalog file, and such other records as might be used in modern procurement; 
J.	Assure that every bidder complies with all applicable city, state and federal health, employee, safety and occupational laws and regulations; 
K.	Such other matters as shall be required to fulfill the requirements and procedures of this chapter, the City Charter and requirements of the city council and the city administrator. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.040 - Purchasing procedures generally. 
Generally, the purchasing procedures of the city shall consist of the following: 
A.	Determination of requirements by the purchasing officer, in consultation with the requesting department heads; 
B.	The negotiation of or processing of appropriate procurement actions;
C.	Referral of bids to using departments or agencies for analysis and recommendation;
D.	Award of purchase order or contract to the lowest responsible bidder;
E.	Supervision of receipt and acceptance procedures;
F.	Approval of invoices for payment.
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.050 - Specifications. 
As needed, the purchasing officer, in conjunction with using departments or agencies, shall develop standard specifications for repetitively procured items and services. 
A.	Every specification shall be prepared to assure the broadest possible bidder participation, consistent with the needs of the using agency. 
B.	Alternative specification provisions for any particular bid invitation may be established with concurrence of the purchasing officer and the using department or agency. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.060 - Annual adjustment of limits. 
Annually, as part of the city budget, city staff shall provide data, and by resolution, the city council may adopt new dollar limits affecting sections of this chapter in which dollar limits are set up, but not exceeding the amounts set forth in Sections 54201 through 54205 of the Government Code and Sections 2.36.070, 2.36.080 and 2.36.090 of this chapter. 
A.	Such dollar limits for purchases of goods and supplies shall be adjusted by the same percentage as the Municipal Price Index (MPS), as determined by City & County Magazine, shall have changed during the prior calendar year, either upward or downward. 
B.	Such dollar limits for construction and equipment purchases and contracts shall be adjusted by the same percentage as the McGraw Hill Index of Construction Prices shall have changed during the prior calendar year, either upward or downward. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.070 - Informal purchases procedure. 
The city administrator may delegate in writing to the department heads, purchasing officer or other city officer as he shall determine, the authority to make purchased and to contract for items and services involving less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). Such delegated authority shall be exercised as set out in this section, and shall be subject to other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
A.	Purchases under this section shall be based whenever possible on competitive quotations and award to the lowest responsible bidder. 
B.	Either verbal or written quotations shall be received from prospective vendors or contractors, and notations made thereof in every case involving any purchase or contract of amount greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
C.	Verbal or written quotations shall be solicited and received from prospective vendors or contractors and made a part of the file for each, specific proposed acquisition of goods or services involving expenditures of five thousand one dollars ($5,001.00) up to and including twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
D.	A written and signed statement of the city officer or employee who made such solicitation shall be included as a part of each purchase order issued under the provisions of this section, which statement shall swear under penalty of perjury that the procedures set out in this section were complied with and that the award was made to the lowest responsible bidder. 
E.	Award of all contracts and purchases made pursuant to the procedures of this section shall be made to the lowest responsible bidder or vendor meeting specifications, except as specifically otherwise authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.080 - Informal bid procedure. 
All purchases and contracts involving amounts between twenty-five thousand one dollars ($25,001.00) and seventy-four thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($74,999.00) shall be purchased and contracted for only under the procedures set out in this section. 
A.	Award of all contracts and purchases made pursuant to the procedures of this section shall be made to the lowest responsible bidder or vendor meeting specifications, except as specifically otherwise authorized in-this chapter. 
B.	Written quotations shall be secured in all cases from at least three prospective and qualified vendors or contractors, and such quotations shall be made a part of the file of each purchase made or contract awarded under this section. Such file shall be maintained for three years after award of the contract or· purchase order. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.090 - Formal bid procedure. 
The procedure set out in this section shall be utilized for all purchases or contracts involving amounts of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) or more. 
A.	Award of all contracts and purchases made pursuant to the procedures of this section shall be made to the lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications, except as specifically otherwise authorized by this chapter. 
B.	Written specifications and plans, if appropriate, shall be prepared for all purchases proposed to be made and contracts proposed to be awarded under this section. Such specifications and plans, together with the deadline for and place to file sealed bids with the city, and other requirements, shall be circulated to publications appropriate to the subject of the call for bids, posted at City Hall, and advertised in a legally adjudicated newspaper in geographic areas appropriate to reaching prospective bidders. 
C.	Such notices and advertisements shall be designed to cause full public notification of all calls for sealed bids by providing at least ten days written notice to prospective bidders prior to the proposed deadline for the receipt of sealed bids. 
D.	Sealed bids shall be accompanied by a bid bond or cashiers check in amount set forth by the city administrator, and failure to include such bid bond or cashiers check with any bid shall be disqualifying. 
E.	Sealed bids shall be received and opened by the city official designated by the bid call, at the place an time specified in said bid call. 
F.	A written analysis shall be made of all sealed bids received under the procedures of this section, and shall contain information relative to all bidders, including a recommendation by the affected department head and the city administrator as to which bidder is recommended to be the lowest responsible bidder. 
G.	The city council shall award, or may reject, all purchases or contracts developed under the procedures of this section and proposed to be awarded pursuant to this section. 
H.	All bid calls shall contain a statement that the city council may reject any and all bids for any goods or service, and may cancel any call for bids at any time in the process. 
I.	At the option of the city administrator an alternate purchasing and contracting procedure may be followed for any specific purchase or construction contract bid process, which procedure would follow California Government Code Sections 54205, or appropriate Public Contract Code provisions. The use of such alternate procedure shall be solely discretionary to the city council or city administrator, and generally will not be followed, merely being an optional procedure which might be utilized, if desired. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.100 - Professional and specialized services. 
The acquisition of copyrighted and/or patented items and services for which there is no reasonable alternative which is of equal to or of better quality or nature shall be made by following the procedures set out in this section. 
A.	The purchase order or contract award for such professional or specialized services or materials shall have a copy of a statement attached thereto by both the vendor or contractor and the city administrator stating the reasons and the specific copyright or patent circumstances which have given rise to the invoking of this exception to the competitive acquisition process set out in this chapter. The original of such statement shall be filed with the city clerk. 
B.	Professional or specialized services which involve a qualitative judgment in addition to qualitative and dollar amount shall be involved when the procedure set out in this section is utilized. 
C.	When this exception to the competitive purchasing and contracting procedures set out in this chapter is utilized, a written finding shall be filed with the contract and the city clerk regarding the reason for such noncompetitive acquisition and, further, the process utilized in the selection of contractors to be interviewed, the interview process used, those firms contacted and interviewed, and the results of such interviews, cumulatively which shall have resulted in the decision to award the contract to which the contract was subsequently awarded. 
D.	The criteria utilized for exception to the competitive process of this chapter in subsections B and C of this section: 
1.	Shall be a requirement for specialized abilities and knowledge in addition to qualify and price; 
2.	Shall not be utilized without the prior written approval of the city administrator.
E.	Professional services means work performed by specially trained and experienced persons, firms or corporations rendering professional services and advice such as accounting, auditing, financial advisory, securities underwriting, legal, medical, engineering, architectural, environmental, economic, real estate, insurance, appraisals, lobbying, public relations, ordinance codification and publication, or similar such highly specialized services. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.110 - Federal grant requirements. 
All supplies, equipment, construction and services for federally-assisted grant or loan programs shall be procured in accordance with "Attachment O" of "OMB Circular No. A-102," contained in the "Standards Governing State and Local Grantee Procurement." 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.120 - Receipt of goods and services. 
The using department or agency shall inspect all goods and equipment, and: 
A.	Certify to the finance director that all goods and services received conform in quality and quantity with the specifications accompanying the purchase order for such goods and services; 
B.	Before payment is authorized, satisfactory receipt of goods and services must be certified as prescribed in the administrative regulations governing processing of purchase orders and contracts. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.130 - Cooperative purchasing. 
Without complying with other sections of this chapter, the purchasing officer may participate in, sponsor, conduct or administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the procurement or any supplies, equipment, service or construction with one or more public procurement units, in accordance with an agreement entered into between the participants. 
A.	Such cooperative purchasing may include, but not limited to joint or multiparty contracts between public procurement units; and 
B.	Open-ended state public procurement contracts which are made available to the city.
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.140 - Emergency purchases. 
The provisions of this chapter may be waived when the following circumstances exist: 
A.	During emergencies which have been declared by a unanimous vote of the city council, or by order of the Governor or President, which emergency shall encompass the city and/or its services. 
B.	An emergency determined by the city administrator and the purchasing officer if:
1.	There is a great public calamity; or
2.	There is immediate need to prepare for national or local defense; or
3.	There is a breakdown in machinery, equipment or essential service which requires immediate purchase of supplies and equipment to protect public health, welfare or safety; or 
4.	An essential departmental operation affecting the public health, welfare or safety would be greatly hampered if the prescribed purchase would cause an undue delay in procurement of the needed item or service. 
C.	A statement of the nature of the declared emergency shall be attached to each purchase order issued pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
D.	The purchasing officer is authorized to make emergency purchases for all supplies, equipment and services which cost ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or less, the city administrator is authorized to make such purchases which cost twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or less, but the city council shall authorize any such purchases in amount exceeding twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.150 - Local preference. 
To promote the economic health of the city and to encourage local participation in the city procurement process, the city, in determining the lowest responsible bidder, may take into consideration the sales tax which would be returned to the city, as well as reduced delivery costs, service and any other savings features that are known of as a result of the award to a bidder who has an established place of business within the Woodlake City limits. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.160 - Central store. 
Selected commodities with recurring high usage rates may be stocked and issued from central stores under the direction and control of the purchasing officer. 
A.	The purchasing officer shall examine usage rates for various commodities and, in coordinating with using department, expend or reduce the quantities and types of items in such central stores. 
B.	Central stores items shall be replenished as needed from the purchasing revolving account through regular purchasing procedures. 
C.	Inventory levels of commodities on hand in central stores shall be determined by the purchasing officer, based on economic and demand factors. 
D.	Detailed instructions for ordering and accounting methods for such central stores shall be set forth in administrative regulations governing such operation. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.170 - Purchase orders. 
Purchase of supplies and equipment and the award of public works contacts shall be made in accordance with prescribed administrative regulations governing the preparation and issuance of purchase orders. Except as otherwise prescribed in this chapter, the administrative regulations governing purchasing and contracting shall establish responsibilities for the signing and processing of purchase orders, and no exceptions may be made unless specifically provided for in said regulations. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.180 - Estimates of requirements. 
All using departments or agencies shall file detailed estimates of their requirements for supplies and equipment in such a manner, at such a time, and for such future periods as the purchasing officer may request. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.190 - Inventory and status reports. 
Each using department or agency shall submit at lest annually to the purchasing officer, or more often if required, in the form and manner he shall prescribe, reports describing all supplies, equipment, materials, fixtures and other personal property of the city in the custody of the department or agency which personal has become obsolete or unserviceable. 
A.	Subject to the provisions of subsection E of this section, the purchasing officer is authorized from to sell or to exchange any and all such supplies or unserviceable equipment, materials, fixtures and other personal property of the city, including trade-in value if such property is to be replaced. 
B.	The purchasing officer may sell for the best price obtainable on the open market or, when he deems it advisable, to the highest bidder at public sale, or he may exchange such surplus property for credit on other property. 
C.	In the event the purchasing officer determines that any such obsolete or surplus property has no salvage value he may dispose of it as he deems advisable. 
D.	All sales of such surplus or obsolete personal property shall be for cash or certified check or money order payable to the city. 
E.	The purchasing officer shall have authority to sign bills of sale and any other papers or documents for and on behalf of the city evidencing transfer of title of the property. 
F.	Prior to disposing of any obsolete or surplus personal property having an apparent market value in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) the purchasing officer shall inform the city council of the nature of the personal property proposed for disposition and the price offered and shall obtain the council's approval for such disposition. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.200 - Public works by city forces. 
The city administrator may determine which public works projects may be performed by city forces, or what portions of any public works project which is to be bid to be performed by city forces and thus excluded from such bid process. 
A.	Such determination shall be made by the city administrator after consultation with the appropriate city department head, and shall take into consideration the skills and abilities, wage and benefit rates, and time availability of the specific city employees who would be involved in such specific public works project. 
B.	Reasons for the decision made by the city administrator shall be filed with the bid documents should such project be performed in part by city forces, and in the construction files for the project should such public works project be performed in whole by city forces. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.210 - Bid wage determination. 
All public works projects proposed to be let based upon sealed bids, pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 2.36.090 of this chapter, shall have as a part of the call for bids a statement by the city administrator, or his nominee, concerning the requirement of the payment of prevailing wages to be paid by bidders and his subcontractors. All public works projects shall have as a part of its bid call, a provision stating that the wages shall be paid as determined by the state of California, Department of Labor, and commonly referred to as "prevailing wages." 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.220 - Contract bulk purchases. 
Purchase contracts to supply the city's needs may be entered into for up to three years for specified types and groupings of goods or services, provided that the procedures of this chapter are complied with. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.230 - Electronic purchase procedure. 
In absence of council action prohibiting such activities, all purchase contracts to supply the city's needs may be entered into for specified types and groupings of goods or services, provided that all provisions of this chapter are otherwise complied with. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.240 - Security for public works projects. 
All contracts for the construction of a public works project in an estimated amount of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) or greater shall require the contacting party to furnish security for the completion of the project and the payment of labor, materials and equipment. 
A.	The provisions of Chapter 5 of Division 2 of Title 7 of the California Government Code (Sections 66499 through 66499.10) as the same now reads or is hereafter amended shall govern the kind of security (G.C. Section 66499); the form of bond (G.C. Section 66499.1 and 66499.2); the amount of the security (G.C. Section 664.99.3); the costs, expenses, and fees included in the amount of the security (G.C. Section 66499.4); the provisions for reduction of improvement security (G.C. Section 66499.5); exemption of security from enforcement of money judgment (G.C. Section 66499.6); release of security (G.C. Section 66499.7); restriction on release of security (G.C. Section 66499.8); limitation on security on security liability (G.C. Section 66499.9); and party against whom suit on security maintained (G.C. Section 66499.10). 
B.	Said Government Code provisions are incorporated in this section of this chapter by reference, as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.250 - Changes in procedures. 
Changes in the general method or policy of purchasing and contracting by the city and the operation of central stores, shall be made only by amending this chapter. Changes affecting only the details or forms used in the administration of these provisions concerning purchasing officer or city manager as administrative revision to the pertinent procedural regulations. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.260 - Definitions. 
"Lowest responsible bidder" means the lowest bidder whose offer best responds in quality, fitness and capacity to the requirements of the proposed work or usage, as specified. In determining the lowest responsible bidder the following shall be considered, in addition to price: 
A.	The quality of supplies offered;
B.	The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or to provide the supplies or services required; 
C.	Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the supplies or services promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
D.	The sufficiency of the bidder's financial resources and the effect thereof on his ability to perform the contract or to provide the supplies or service; 
E.	The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder;
F.	The quality of the bidder's performance on previous orders or contracts for the city;
G.	Litigation by the bidder on previous orders or contacts with the city;
H.	Previous and existing compliance by the bidder with local laws and ordinances relating to the subject of the purchase or contact; 
I.	The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service where such maintenance and service is essential. 
(Ord. 530A § 1 (part), 1998) 
2.36.270 - Conflict of interest. 
No member of the Woodlake city council and no other official, employee, or agent of the city government who exercises policy or decision-making functions or who has responsibilities in connection with the planning and implementation of federally funded programs shall be directly or indirectly eligible for said program unless the application has been reviewed and approved in accordance with the regulations of the specific federally funded program. This ineligibility shall continue for one year after an individual's relationship with the city ends. 
A contractor with a vested interest in a property cannot bid on a rehabilitation job for said property. Such a contractor may act as an owner-builder, subject to standard construction procedures. Owner-builders are reimbursed for purchases of materials used on the job which are verified by invoice or receipt. Reimbursement occurs after installation is verified to be part of the scope of work by the construction supervisor. Owner-builders are not reimbursed for labor. 
(Ord. 539 § 1, 2000) 
Chapter 2.40 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
Sections: 
 
2.40.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for disaster and emergency services, the protection of persons and property within the county in the event of an emergency, the direction of the emergency organization, and the coordination of emergency functions of the county with all other affected persons and agencies, both public and private. Any expenditures made in connection with such disaster or emergency services, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property in the county. 
(Ord. 425 § 2, 1988) 
2.40.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter: 
"Disaster" means actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other public calamity. 
"Emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this county caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this county, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
"Emergency services" means the preparation for carrying out disaster functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, and to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters. It shall not include, nor does any provision of this chapter apply to, any condition relating to a labor controversy. 
"Emergency services office" means those physical facilities of the Tulare County department of health service constituting the Tulare operational area's emergency services office, the primary emergency operating center and the necessary staff and personnel to operate such facilities on a day-to-day or disaster emergency basis. 
"Tulare operational area" means the unincorporated area of the county, and the cities of Dinuba, Exeter, Farmersville, Lindsay, Porterville, Tulare, Visalia and Woodlake. 
(Ord. 425 § 3, 1988) 
2.40.030 - Emergency council—Membership. 
The emergency council of the Tulare operational area is created and shall consist of the following members: 
A.	The chairperson of the board of supervisors of the county who shall serve as chair. The board of supervisors shall appoint an additional member of the board to serve as an alternate member of the emergency council when the chairperson is absent from the county or is not immediately available to perform his duties; 
B.	The Tulare County executive;
C.	The coordinator of emergency services who shall serve as vice chair;
D.	Such county department heads as are provided for in the current emergency plan of this county; 
E.	Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the board of supervisors. 
(Ord. 425 § 4, 1988) 
2.40.040 - Meetings. 
The emergency council shall meet upon call of the chair or, in his absence from the county or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chair at a time and place established by the council. Special meetings of the council shall be called in accordance with Section 54950 et seq. of the Government Code of the state of California. Special meetings may be called by the chair or the vice chair. The council shall meet at least one time each year. The council shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations governing the conduct of its meetings. 
(Ord. 425 § 5, 1988) 
2.40.050 - Emergency council—Powers of the chair. 
The chair of the emergency council is empowered to perform the following acts: 
A.	Serve as the emergency services director of the Tulare operational area;
B.	Request the Governor to proclaim a state of disaster when in the opinion of the chair the resources of the area are inadequate to cope with the disaster on a local basis. 
(Ord. 425 § 6, 1988) 
2.40.060 - Emergency council—Powers and duties. 
The Tulare County emergency council shall be responsible for the development of the county of Tulare multihazard functional plan. 
(Ord. 425 § 7, 1988) 
2.40.070 - Multihazard functional plan. 
The Tulare County multihazard functional plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this county, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of Woodlake City council. 
(Ord. 425 § 8, 1988) 
2.40.080 - Coordinator of emergency services—Powers and duties. 
There is created the position of coordinator of emergency services. The health services director shall be the coordinator of emergency services. There is created the position of emergency services programs manager who shall be appointed by the coordinator to administer the day-to-day functions of emergency services in accordance with this chapter. The powers and duties of the coordinator of emergency services are: 
A.	Request the board of supervisors to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the board of supervisors is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the board of supervisors is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the coordinator, the board of supervisors shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect; 
B.	Recommend that the chair of the board of supervisors request the Governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the coordinator, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
C.	Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this county for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
D.	Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this county; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
E.	Represent this county in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein; 
F.	In the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the coordinator is hereby empowered to perform the following acts: 
1.	To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the board of supervisors, 
2.	To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the county for the fair value thereof and, if required, immediately to commandeer the same for public uses, 
3.	To require emergency services of any county officer or any statute, by any agreement approved by the board of supervisors, and by any other lawful authority; 
G.	The coordinator of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the coordinator is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency; 
H.	The emergency programs manager shall, under the supervision of the coordinator, and with the assistance of department heads or their designees, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this county; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the coordinator. 
(Ord. 425 § 9, 1988) 
2.40.090 - Emergency service organization. 
All officers and employees of this county, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this county during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency service organization of the county of Tulare. 
(Ord. 425 § 10, 1988) 
2.40.100 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts during a disaster: 
1.	Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency service organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter; 
2.	To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the county, or to prevent or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
3.	To wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the Federal Government or the state of California. 
B.	Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter which are declared to be unlawful shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 425 §§ 11, 12, 1988) 
Chapter 2.44 - PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING 
Sections: 
 
2.44.010 - Penal Code requirements accepted. 
A.	The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state of California under the Provisions of Section 13522; Chapter 1, of Title 4, of the California Penal Code. 
B.	Pursuant to Section 13510(c) Chapter 1, the Woodlake police department will adhere to standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and training (POST). 
C.	Pursuant to Section 13512. Chapter 1, the commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the commission to ascertain that the Woodlake police department's public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Ord. 430 §§ 1—3, 1988: Ord. 167 §§ 1, 2, 1962) 
Chapter 2.48 - UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
2.48.010 - Unclaimed property defined. 
As used herein "unclaimed property" means tangible personal property of every kind and description except: 
A.	Official property of the city and property belonging to officers and employees of the city; 
B.	Property which the chief of police determines as valueless;
C.	Property having a possible use as evidence in a judicial hearing or processing;
D.	Weapons as they are defined by California Penal Code, Section 12028;
E.	Vehicles as they are defined by California Vehicle Code Section 670.
(Ord. 514 § 3, 1995; Ord. 431 § 3, 1988) 
2.48.020 - Procedure. 
A.	Various items of personal property have from time to time been accumulated in the police department of the city, and the Civil Code of the state of California Section 2080.4 authorizes the legislative body of any city to provide by ordinance for the care, restitution, sale or destruction of such property. 
B.	Such unclaimed property shall be held by the police department or sheriff for a period of at least three months and that thereafter such property will be sold at public auction to the highest bidder or donated to nonprofit corporations approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 514 §§ 2, 4, 1995; Ord. 431 §§ 1, 2 and 4, 1988) 
2.48.030 - Proceeds from sale of unclaimed property. 
The proceeds from such sale shall be immediately turned in to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. 431 § 5, 1988) 
Chapter 2.52 - CALIFORNIA PUBLIC EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
2.52.010 - Amendment to the contract. 
An amendment to the contract between the city council of the city of Woodlake and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees' Retirement System is authorized, a copy of said amendment being attached hereto, marked "Exhibit" and by such reference made a part hereof as though herein set out in full. 
(Ord. 533 § 1 (part), 1999) 
2.52.020 - Execution of amendment. 
The mayor of the city is authorized, empowered, and directed to execute said amendment for and on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. 533 § 1 (part), 1999) 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.04 - TRANSFER OF TAX ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - Transfer to county. 
A.	The duties of assessing property and collecting taxes provided by law to be performed by the assessor and the tax collector of the city shall be performed by the county assessor and the county tax collector until such time as the city shall elect to have such duties performed by its own assessor and tax collector. 
B.	The duties of the county tax collector and county assessor shall begin with the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter and shall continue until provisions for the assessment and collection of the taxes are otherwise provided for by ordinance. The officers are authorized, empowered and required to do all lawful acts which properly should be done on behalf of the city in and concerning the assessment and collection of the taxes. 
(Ord. 10 §§ 1, 2, 1941) 
Chapter 3.08 - CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Generally. 
The provisions of this chapter recognize that the general claim procedure against local public agencies, including the city, is governed by the provisions of Chapter 1, of Division 3.6 of the California Government Code commencing with Section 900 and following. 
(Ord. 515 § 2, 1995) 
3.08.020 - Special claims procedures. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 935 of the California Government Code, the city adopts the following claims procedure for those claims against the city for money or damages not now governed by state or local law. 
A.	Notwithstanding the exception contained in Section 905 (c) of the California Government Code, all claims by public officers or employees for fees, salaries, wages, overtime pay, and other expenses or allowances claimed due from the city, shall be presented within the time limitations and in a manner prescribed by Sections 910 through 915.2 of the California Government Code, and the claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Section 945.4 of the Government Code. 
B.	In addition to the requirements of subsection A of this section, and not withstanding the exemption set forth in Section 905 (c) of the California Government Code, all claims against the city for damages or money, shall be presented within the time limitations and in a manner prescribed by Section 910 through 915.2 of the California Government Code, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by state or local law, and such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Section 945.4 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 515 § 3, 1995) 
3.08.030 - Authorization to approve claims. 
The city administrator and/or acting city administrator is authorized to approve payment of all claims against the city except those required by law to be approved by the council. 
(Ord. 515 § 4, 1995) 
3.08.040 - Signatures required. 
A.	At least two signatures shall be required on all checks, drafts, or warrants for and on behalf of the city; provided however, that payroll checks may be issued in accordance with the terms of the contract which may be entered into with an outside agency for payroll services. 
B.	Facsimile signatures on checks or warrants of the city in lieu of personal signatures are hereby authorized, except where personal signature is required as part of the claims approval procedure. 
(Ord. 515 § 5, 1995) 
3.08.050 - Reimbursement authorized. 
All officers and employees for the city shall be entitled to reimbursement for expenses incurred for transportation, meals, lodging and incidentals necessarily incurred in performance of their official duties in addition to such compensation as is otherwise provided. In case of any doubt as to the necessity for incurring such expense, the city administrator shall determine whether such necessity existed and may allow, reject or modify claim or item or items thereof. 
(Ord. 515 § 6, 1995) 
3.08.060 - Payment procedure. 
All expenses shall be audited and paid in accordance with the procedure established by the city administrator. The city administrator may prescribe and provide forms to be used in making such claims, and may require in any case receipts or other evidence of payment of the amounts claimed by the party entitled thereto. 
(Ord. 515 § 7, 1995) 
3.08.070 - Advance payment. 
The city administrator shall have the authority to authorize the advance payment of budgeted funds to city officers or employees to cover estimated official expenses to be incurred in the performance of authorized travel. The payee shall account for the expenditures of the funds within ten days after completion of the authorized travel and reimburse the city for any unexpended portion of the advance. 
(Ord. 515 § 8, 1995) 
Chapter 3.12 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance. 
(Ord. 269 § 1, 1973) 
3.12.020 - Purpose. 
The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.	To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.	To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.	To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviations from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
D.	To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 269 § 4, 1973) 
3.12.030 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be .95 of one cent ($.01). 
(Ord. 269 § 2, 1973) 
3.12.040 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. 269 § 5, 1973) 
3.12.050 - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.12.030 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. 
(Ord. 269 § 6, 1973) 
3.12.060 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 269 § 7, 1973) 
3.12.070 - Use tax. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.12.030 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 269 § 8, 1973) 
3.12.080 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 269 § 9, 1973) 
3.12.090 - Limitations on adoption of state law. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "state" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 269 § 10, 1973) 
3.12.100 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 269 § 11, 1973) 
3.12.110 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.	The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.	The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in this state shall be exempt form the tax due under this chapter. 
C.	There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
D.	In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 395 § 1, 1983: Ord. 269 § 13, 1973) 
3.12.120 - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 269 § 15, 1973) 
3.12.130 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 269 § 16, 1973) 
3.12.140 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 269 § 17, 1973) 
Chapter 3.14 - TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX LAW 
Sections: 
 
3.14.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Transactions and Use Tax Law of the City of Woodlake." The city of Woodlake hereinafter shall be called "city." This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. 
(Ord. 551 § 1 (part), 2004) 
3.14.020 - Operative date. 
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten (110) days after the adoption of this chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. 
(Ord. 551 § 1 (part), 2004) 
3.14.030 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.	To impose a retail transactions and use tax to be used for general fund purposes in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt the tax ordinance codified in this chapter which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the ordinance vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
B.	To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.	To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides an ordinance therefor that can be administered and collected by the state board of equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully a practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
D.	To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 551 § 1 (part), 2004) 
3.14.040 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this chapter; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the state board of equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. 551 § 1 (part), 2004) 
3.14.050 - Transactions tax rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the incorporate territory of the city at the rate of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in such territory on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for a period of ten years from the operative date. 
(Ord. 551 § 1 (part), 2004) 
3.14.060 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the state board of equalization. 
(Ord. 551 § 1 (part), 2004) 
3.14.070 - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in such territory at the rate of one-half of one percent of the sales price of the property, for a period of ten years from the operative date. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 551 § 1 (part), 2004) 
3.14.080 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 551 § 1 (part), 2004) 
3.14.090 - Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.	Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
1.	The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the state controller, state treasurer, state board of control, state board of equalization, state treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California; 
2.	The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the state board of equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; 
3.	In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.	Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property that would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or 
b.	Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property that would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code; 
4.	In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.	The word "City" shall be substituted for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 551 § 1 (part), 2004) 
3.14.100 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 551 § 1 (part), 2004) 
3.14.110 - Exemptions and exclusions. 
A.	There shall be excluded from the ordinance of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state administered transactions or use tax. 
B.	There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax, the gross receipts from: 
1.	Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government; 
2.	Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied: 
a.	With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Chapter 2 of Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence, and 
b.	With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address; 
3.	The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter; 
4.	A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this chapter; 
5.	For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
c.	There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use of other consumption in this city of tangible personal property: 
1.	The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance; 
2.	Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California; 
3.	If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter; 
4.	If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease that is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this chapter; 
5.	For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised; 
6.	Except as provided in subsection (C)(7) of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of businesses of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer; 
7.	"A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Chapter 2 of Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city. 
D.	Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. 551 § 1 (part), 2004) 
3.14.120 - Amendments. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 551 § 1 (part), 2004) 
3.14.130 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 551 § 1 (part), 2004) 
Chapter 3.16 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - County ordinance adopted by reference. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, Article 4 of Chapter 3 of Part I of the Ordinance Code of Tulare County, as adopted by Tulare County Ordinance No. 971, is referred to, adopted as a city ordinance, and made a part of this chapter with the same effect as if fully set forth herein, and all the provisions thereof shall be applicable within the city. 
(Ord. 191 § 1, 1964) 
3.16.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever any of the following terms are used in Article 4 of Chapter 3 of Part I of the Ordinance Code of Tulare County, such terms shall have the following meanings: 
"Board of supervisors" means the city council of the city of Woodlake. 
"Clerk of the board of supervisors" means the city clerk of the city of Woodlake. 
"County of Tulare" or "county" means the city of Woodlake, or the incorporated territory of the city of Woodlake, as the text may require. 
"Tax collector" means the tax collector of the county of Tulare (or city of Woodlake). 
"Unincorporated area of Tulare County" means the incorporated territory of the city of Woodlake. 
(Ord. 191 § 2, 1964) 
3.16.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of Article 4 of Chapter 3 of Part I of the Ordinance Code of Tulare County, as adopted by the ordinance codified in this chapter, which are declared to be unlawful shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 191 § 3, 1964) 
Chapter 3.20 - UTILITY USERS TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.20.010 - Findings. 
To provide funds to pay the expenses incurred by the city and chargeable to its general fund, the city council finds and determines that a general utility users tax should be imposed upon users of utility services within the city limits.  
3.20.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section. 
"City" means the city of Woodlake. 
"Month" means a calendar year month. 
"Nonutility supplier" means a service supplier, other than an electrical corporation franchised to serve the city, which generates electrical energy in capacities of at least fifty (50) kilowatts for its own use or for sale to others. 
"Person" means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, Massachusetts business or common law trust, society, individual or public entity or municipal corporation within the city. 
"Tax administrator" means the finance director of the city. 
"Telephone corporation," "electrical corporation," "gas corporation," "water corporation" and "cable television corporation" shall have the same meanings as defined in Sections 234, 218, 222, 241 and 215, respectively, of the California Public Utilities Code except "electrical corporation" shall be construed to include any municipality, city-franchise organization, or agency engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power to a service user, however, as specified by Section 218 of such code, does not include a corporation or person employing cogeneration technology or producing power from other than a conventional power source for the generation of electricity within the city. 
"Service supplier" means any entity required to collect or self-impose and remit a tax as imposed by this chapter. 
"Service user" means a person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 439 § 2, 1989) 
3.20.030 - Telephone users tax. 
A.	There is imposed a tax on the amounts paid for any intrastate telephone services by every person in the city using such services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such services and shall be paid by the person paying for such services. 
B.	As used in this section, the term "charges" shall not include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due; nor shall the term "charges" include charges for any type of service or equipment furnished by a service supplied subject to public utility regulation during any period in which the same or similar services or equipment are also available for sale or lease from persons other than a service supplier subject to public utility regulation; nor shall the words "telephone communication services" include land mobile service or maritime mobile services as defined in Section 2.1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as that section existed on January 1, 1989. The term "telephone communication services" refers to that service which provides access to a telephone system and the privilege of telephone quality communications with substantially all persons having telephone stations which are part of such telephone system. The telephone users tax is intended to, and does, apply to all charges billed to a telephone account having a situs in the city, irrespective of whether a particular communication service originates and/or terminates within the city. 
C.	The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the person providing the intrastate telephone communication services, or the person receiving payment for such services. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax collected, measured by the tax bill in the previous month, shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of each month. 
D.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the tax imposed under this section shall not be imposed upon any person for using intrastate telephone communication services to the extent that the amounts paid for such services are exempt from or not subject to the tax imposed under Division 2, Part 20 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, or the tax imposed under Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
E.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the tax imposed under this section upon any person shall not exceed the sum of five hundred sixty dollars ($560.00) for any one calendar year of service. 
(Ord. 439 § 3, 1989) 
3.20.040 - Electricity users tax. 
A.	There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using electrical energy in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such energy by an electrical corporation franchised to serve the city and shall be paid by the person using the energy. The tax applicable to electrical energy provided by a non-utility supplier shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the energy used had been provided by the electrical corporation franchised by the city. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the city. Nonutility suppliers shall install and maintain an appropriate utility-type metering system which will enable compliance with this section. "Charges," as used in this section, shall include charges made for: (1) metered energy; and (2) minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges, and annual and monthly charges, fuel, cost adjustments and the like. 
B.	As used in this section, the term "using electrical energy" shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by him for use in an automobile or other machinery device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided, however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include electricity used and consumed by an electric utility supplier in the conduct of its business as an electric public utility; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric public utility or governmental agency at a point within the city for resale; or the use of such energy in the production or distribution of water by a public utility or other governmental agency. 
C.	The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by an energy service supplier. The tax shall be self-imposed by nonutility suppliers as to their own use. The amount of tax collected or self-imposed in one month shall be remitted by U. S. mail to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of the following month; or at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax, measured by the tax billed in the previous month, shall be remitted by U. S. mail to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of each month. Remittance of tax may be predicated on a formula based upon the payment pattern of the supplier's customers. 
D.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the tax imposed under this section upon any person shall not exceed the sum of five hundred sixty dollars ($560.00) for any one calendar year of service. 
(Ord. 439 § 4, 1989) 
3.20.050 - Gas users tax. 
A.	There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city, using in the city, gas which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such gas and shall be paid by the person paying for such gas. "Charges" as used in this section shall include: (1) gas which is delivered through mains or pipes; (2) minimum charges for such services, including customer charges, service charges and annual and monthly charges. 
B.	There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed: (1) charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains or pipes; (2) charges made for gas sold for use in the generation of electrical energy or for the production or distribution of water by a public utility or governmental agency; (3) charges made by a gas public utility for gas used and consumed in the conduct of the business of gas public utilities; and (4) charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California, utilizing natural gas; and (5) charges related to late payments and returned checks. 
C.	The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person selling or transporting the gas. A person selling only transportation services to a user for delivery of gas through mains or pipes shall collect the tax from the service user based on the transportation charges. The person selling or transporting the gas shall remit by U. S. mail to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of the following month, the amount of tax collected. At the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax, measured by the tax billed in the previous month, shall be remitted by U. S. mail to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of each month. Remittance of tax may be predicated on a formula based upon the payment pattern of the supplier's customers. 
D.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the tax imposed under this section upon any person shall not exceed the sum of five hundred sixty dollars ($560.00) for any one calendar year of service. 
(Ord. 439 § 5, 1989) 
3.20.060 - Cable television users tax. 
A.	There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using cable television service. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such service and shall be paid by the person paying for such service. 
B.	The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person furnishing the cable television service. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. 
C.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the tax imposed under this section upon any person shall not exceed the sum of five hundred sixty dollars ($560.00) for any one calendar year of service. 
(Ord. 439 § 6, 1989) 
3.20.070 - Exemptions. 
A.	Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or that of the state of California. 
B.	Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose a tax upon the city.
C.	The city council may, by ordinance adopted from time to time, establish one or more classes of persons or one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes or persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part from such tax. 
D.	The tax administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. 
(Ord. 439 § 7, 1989) 
3.20.080 - Duty to collect—Procedures. 
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be performed as follows: 
A.	Every person receiving payment of charges from a service user subject to a tax imposed hereby shall collect the amount of tax imposed by this chapter from the service user. 
B.	The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the collection of charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier. 
C.	The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing. 
(Ord. 439 § 8, 1989) 
3.20.090 - Interest and penalty. 
A.	Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the tax administrator on or before the due dates provided in this chapter are delinquent. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return may be postmarked on the first regular working day following a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
B.	Penalties for delinquency in remittance of any tax collected or any deficiency determination shall attach to and be paid by the person required to collect and remit at the rate of fifteen percent of the total tax collected or imposed which were not timely remitted. 
C.	Should the tax administrator determine that a person having the duty to collect and remit a tax imposed by the ordinance has been guilty of fraud or negligence in collecting, reporting or remitting the tax, he may after making such finding after an evidentiary hearing, assess a charge against the person committing the fraud or negligence in the amount not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of tax in question. 
D.	Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be remitted. 
(Ord. 439 § 9, 1989) 
3.20.100 - Administrative remedies for failure to pay or remit tax. 
A.	The tax administrator may make an assessment for taxes not paid or remitted by a person required to pay or remit. A notice of the assessment which shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes and penalties imposed and the time and place when such assessment shall be submitted to the city council for confirmation or modification. The tax administrator shall mail a copy of such notice to the person selling the service and to the service user at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing and shall post such notice for at least five continuous days prior to the date of the hearing at a public place in the city hall of the city. Any interested party having any objections may appear and be heard at the hearing provided his objection is filed in writing with the tax administrator prior to the time set for the hearing. 
At the time fixed for considering the assessment, the city council shall hear the same together with any objection filed as aforesaid and thereupon may confirm or modify the assessment by motion. 
B.	Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of tax owed by him from the amount remitted to a service supplier, or that a service user has failed to pay the amount of the tax for a period of two or more billing periods, or whenever the tax administrator deems it in the best interests of the city, he may relieve the service supplier of the obligation to collect taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods. The tax administrator shall notify the service user that he has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which the billing was made by the service supplier; or should the service user have changed his address, to his last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within fifteen days from the date of the service of the notice upon him, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more than twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax due for each billing period for which the tax has not been paid as set forth in the notice, shall be imposed. The penalty shall become part of the tax otherwise required to be paid. 
(Ord. 439 § 10, 1989) 
3.20.110 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of such amount, together with attorneys' fees and costs. 
(Ord. 439 § 11, 1989) 
3.20.120 - Records. 
It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 439 § 12, 1989) 
3.20.130 - Additional powers and duties of tax administrator. 
A.	The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.	The tax administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator's office. 
C.	The tax administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this chapter so that collection of any tax imposed here may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of particular service supplier so long as the agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator's office. 
D.	The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from the tax imposed by this chapter. The tax administrator shall provide the service supplier with the name of any person who the tax administrator determines is exempt from the tax imposed hereby, together with the address and account number to which service is supplied to any such exempt person. The tax administrator shall notify the service supplier of termination of any person's right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person. 
(Ord. 439 § 13, 1989) 
3.20.140 - Refunds. 
A.	Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section. 
B.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, a service supplier may claim a refund; or take as credit against taxes remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established that the service user from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to collect and remit. 
C.	No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto and the claim for refund is made in writing to the tax administrator within twenty-four (24) months of the payment of the tax for which a refund is claimed. 
D.	Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. 
E.	A service supplier may refund the taxes collected to the service user in accordance with this section. 
F.	A service user who desires to obtain the benefits of the maximum tax limitations in Sections 3.20.030(E), 3.20.040(D), 3.20.050 (D), 3.20.060(D) and 3.20.070(C), shall file a claim for refund with the tax administrator and the claimant must establish his right to a refund by written records or other relevant evidence. 
(Ord. 439 § 14, 1989) 
Chapter 3.24 - INVESTMENT OF CITY FUNDS 
Sections: 
 
3.24.010 - Delegation. 
Pursuant to Sections 53607 and 53608 of the Government Code, the authority to invest and reinvest money of the city, to sell or exchange securities so purchased, and to deposit such securities for safekeeping is delegated to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. 403 § 1, 1986) 
3.24.020 - Investment. 
The city treasurer is authorized to purchase, at their original sale or after they have been issued, securities which are permissible investments under Sections 53601 and 53635 of the Government Code, as they now read or may hereafter be amended, from money in his custody which is not required for the immediate necessities of the city and as he may deem wise and expedient, and to sell or exchange for other eligible securities and reinvest the proceeds of the securities so purchased. 
(Ord. 403 § 2, 1986) 
3.24.030 - Redemptions. 
From time to time the city treasurer shall redeem the securities in which city money has been invested pursuant to Section 3.24.020 so that the proceeds may be applied to the purposes for which the original purchase money was designated or placed in the city treasury. 
(Ord. 403 § 3, 1986) 
3.24.040 - City bonds. 
Bonds issued by the city and purchased pursuant to Section 3.24.020 may be canceled either in satisfaction of sinking fund obligations or otherwise; provided, however, that the bonds may be held uncanceled and while so held may be resold. 
(Ord. 403 § 4, 1986) 
3.24.050 - Reports. 
The city treasurer shall make a monthly report of all such investments to the city council. 
(Ord. 403 § 5, 1986) 
3.24.060 - Deposits. 
The city treasurer is authorized to deposit for safekeeping with a trust company or a state or national bank located within this state or with the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco or any branch thereof located within this state or with any Federal Reserve Bank or with any state or national bank located in any city designated as a reserve city by the board of governors of the Federal Reserve System, the securities in which the city money has been invested pursuant to Section 3.24.020; provided, however, that the city treasurer shall take from such trust company or bank a receipt for the securities so deposited and shall not be responsible for such securities delivered to and receipted for by such trust company or bank until they are withdrawn therefrom by the city treasurer. 
(Ord. 403 § 6, 1986) 
Chapter 3.28 - RECOVERY OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE COSTS 
Sections: 
 
3.28.010 - Negligent operation of motor vehicle while under influence of alcoholic beverage or drug. 
Any person who is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any drug, whose negligent operation of a motor vehicle caused by that influence proximately causes an incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response, and any person whose intentionally wrongful conduct proximately causes any incident resulting in appropriate emergency response, is liable for the expense of an emergency response by the city police department to the incident. 
(Ord. 426 § 1, 1988) 
3.28.020 - Influence of alcoholic beverage or drug—Inability to operate motor vehicle—Defined. 
For purposes of this chapter, a person is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any drug, when as the result of drinking an alcoholic beverage or using a drug, or both, his or her physical or mental abilities are impaired to a degree that he or she no longer has the ability to operate a motor vehicle with a caution characteristic of a sober person or ordinary prudence under the same or similar circumstances. For purposes of this chapter the presumption as described in Sections 23152 and 23515 of the California Vehicle Code shall apply. 
(Ord. 426 § 2, 1988) 
3.28.030 - Intentionally wrongful conduct defined. 
"Intentionally wrongful conduct" is defined as that conduct intended to injure another person or property, whether or not in the operation of a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. 426 § 5, 1988) 
3.28.040 - Collection of costs. 
The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person liable for expenses under this chapter. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, express or implied. Any action brought on behalf of the city under this chapter may be brought in small claims court by the city's finance director, or his designee, if appropriate. Those actions not appropriate for small claims court may be brought by the city attorney on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. 426 § 3, 1988) 
3.28.050 - Expense of an emergency response. 
Upon adoption of this chapter the city council shall, by resolution, determine a schedule of costs which reflect reasonable costs incurred by the police department in making an appropriate emergency response to an incident to which this chapter shall apply. This schedule of costs shall take into consideration those costs directly arising because of the response to the particular incident and shall include primary costs of providing police and other emergency personnel at the scene of the incident, including the salaries of the personnel responding to the incident, and those secondary costs relating to generation of reports of the particular incident, as well as fingerprinting and photographing the person liable, including the salaries of the personnel involved in the secondary activities. The council may, from time to time, revise the schedule of costs by resolution. 
(Ord. 426 § 4, 1988) 
Chapter 3.32 - GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.32.010 - Created. 
A.	To comply with the provisions of Article 5, of Chapter 1, of Division I of the Streets and Highways Code, with particular reference to the amendments made thereto by Chapter 642, Statutes of 1935, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the "Special gas tax street improvement fund." 
B.	All moneys received by the city from the state of California under the provisions of the Street and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than State Highways shall be paid into this fund. 
C.	All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purpose authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division I of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 17 §§ 1—3, 1942) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
  
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
5.04.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Business" means professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of calling carried on for profit or livelihood. 
"Employee" means all persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, any member of the owner's family, partner agent, manager, solicitor and any and all other persons employed or working in such business. 
"Person" means all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts, business, or common law trusts, societies and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city. 
(Ord. 119 § 1, 1956) 
5.04.020 - Revenue measure. 
The ordinance codified in this section is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes, and is not intended for regulation. 
(Ord. 119 § 2, 1956) 
5.04.030 - Substitute for other revenue ordinances. 
Any person required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter shall be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business which has been required under any other ordinance of the city, but shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of such other ordinances. This section shall not apply to inspection fees. 
(Ord. 119 § 3, 1956) 
5.04.040 - Effect of provisions on past actions and obligations previously accrued. 
Neither the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section nor its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any general provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to effect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 119 § 4, 1956) 
5.04.050 - License required. 
There are imposed upon the businesses, trade, professions, callings and occupations specified in this chapter, license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed, and it is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from the city so to do or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 119 § 5, 1956) 
5.04.060 - Branch establishments. 
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business at the same location, and each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, that warehouses, other businesses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishment. 
(Ord. 119 § 6, 1956) 
5.04.070 - Exemptions. 
A.	Constitution of Statutes of the United States or of the state of California. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California from the payment to corporations of such taxes as are herein prescribed. 
B.	Other Exemptions.
1.	The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license tax (fee) to conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation or activity, from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes or from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual, firm or corporation; nor shall any license tax (fee) be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical literary, religious or moral subjects within the city, whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated to any church or school, or to any religious or benevolent purpose; nor shall any license tax (fee) be required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association, whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose and objects for which such organization or association was formed, and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual, firm or corporation; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be deemed to exempt any such organization or association from complying with the provisions of any ordinance of the city requiring a permit from the city council or any commission or officer to conduct, manage or carry on any profession, trade, calling or occupation. 
2.	The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license tax (fee) to conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation or activity located in any residential district as defined by Title 17 of this code. 
3.	The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license tax (fee) to own and rent or own and lease any real property regardless whether said property is for residential, commercial or industrial use. 
C.	Every honorably discharged sailor, soldier, marine or coastguardsman of the United States, who is unable to earn a livelihood by manual labor, shall have the right to hawk, peddle or vend goods, wares and merchandise, except spirituous, malt, vinous or other intoxicating liquors, without any license tax or fee whatsoever, and it is made the duty of the city clerk to issue a license therefor to such honorably discharged soldier, sailor, marine or coastguardsman, upon producing his discharge, and making proof of his disability as herein provided. 
D.	Claim for Exemption. Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a verified statement with the city clerk stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed. 
E.	License. The city clerk shall, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under subsection B of this section without payment to the city of the license tax required by this chapter. 
F.	Revocation. The city clerk may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided herein. 
(Ord. 540 § 1, 2001; Ord. 119 § 7, 1956) 
5.04.080 - Application—Contents of license. 
Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application for the same to the city clerk, and upon the payment of the prescribed tax the city clerk shall issue to such person a license which shall contain: (1) the name of the person to whom the license is issued, (2) the business licensed, (3) the place where such business is to be transacted and carried on, (4) the date of the expiration of such license, and (5) such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 119 § 8, 1956) 
5.04.090 - Affidavit—First license. 
Upon a person making application for the first license tax to be issued hereunder or for a newly established business, in all cases where the amount of license tax to be paid is based upon gross receipts, or average number of persons employed, such person shall furnish to the city clerk for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement, upon a form provided by the city clerk, sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth such information as may be therein required and as may be necessary properly to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant. 
If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is based upon the gross receipts, he shall estimate the gross receipts for the period to be covered by the license to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the city clerk as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of the license tax so determined shall be tentative only, and such person shall, within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish the city clerk with a sworn statement, upon a form furnished by the city clerk, showing the gross receipts during the period of such license, and the license tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by this chapter for the ascertaining and paying of renewal license taxes for other businesses, after deducting from the payment found to be due, the amount paid at the time such first license was issued. 
The city clerk shall not issue to any such person another license for the same or any other business, until such person shall have furnished to him the written statement and paid the license tax as herein required. 
(Ord. 119 § 9, 1956) 
5.04.100 - Affidavit—Renewal license. 
In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the city clerk for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement, upon a form to be provided by the city clerk, sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth such information concerning the applicant's business during the next preceding year or quarter as may be required by the city clerk to enable him to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid by said applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 119 § 10, 1956) 
5.04.110 - Statements not conclusive. 
No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. 
The information furnished or secured pursuant to this section or Sections 5.04.090 and 5.04.100 shall be confidential. Any unwarranted disclosure or use of such information by any officer or employee of the city shall constitute a misdemeanor and such officer or employee shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 119 § 11, 1956) 
5.04.120 - Failure to file statement or corrected statement. 
If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand therefor made by city clerk he fails to file a corrected statement, the city clerk may determine the mount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain. 
In case such a determination is made the city clerk shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States post office at Woodlake, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his last known address. Such person may, within ten days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the city clerk for a hearing on the amount of the license tag. 
If such application is made, or if application is not made within the time prescribed, the city clerk must cause the matter to be set for hearing within fifteen (15) days before the city council. The city clerk shall give at least ten days notice to such person of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed above for the service of notice of assessment. The council shall consider all evidence produced, and written notice of its findings thereon, which findings shall be final, shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed above for the service of notice of assessment. 
(Ord. 119 § 12, 1956) 
5.04.130 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of an administrative officer or agency with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue such license may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the council. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The clerk of the council shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States post office at Woodlake, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known address. 
(Ord. 119 § 13, 1956) 
5.04.140 - Additional power of city clerk. 
In addition to all other powers conferred upon him, the city clerk shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise accrue; and shall have the further power, with the consent of the council, to compromise any claim as to the amount of license tax due. 
(Ord. 119 § 14, 1956) 
5.04.150 - No license transferable—Amended license for changed location. 
No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable; provided, that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may upon application therefor and paying a fee of one dollar ($1.00) have a license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under the license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved. 
(Ord. 119 § 15, 1956) 
5.04.160 - Unexpired licenses heretofore issued. 
Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any business by the city and the tax paid therefor under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore enacted and the term of such license has not expired, then the license tax prescribed for the business by this chapter shall not be payable until the expiration of the term of such unexpired license. 
(Ord. 119 § 16, 1956) 
5.04.170 - Duplicate license. 
A duplicate license may be issued by the city clerk to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing an affidavit attesting to such facts, and at the time of filing such affidavit paying to the city clerk a duplicate license fee of one dollar ($1.00). 
(Ord. 119 § 17, 1956) 
5.04.180 - Posting and keeping licenses. 
All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner: 
A.	Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
B.	Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. 
(Ord. 119 § 18, 1956) 
5.04.190 - License tax—How and when payable. 
All annual license taxes herein provided to be paid may be paid on a quarterly basis. All licenses herein provided to be paid shall be paid in advance as follows: 
A.	Annual license taxes on the first day of July of each year;
B.	Quarterly license taxes on the first day of January, April, July and October of each year; 
C.	Daily license taxes each day in advance.
(Ord. 119 § 19, 1956) 
5.04.200 - Failure to pay tax when due—Penalty. 
A.	Penalty for Nonpayment of Annual License. Every annual license which is not paid within a period of thirty (30) days from the time the same becomes due and payable is declared to be delinquent, and the city clerk shall thereupon add to the license and collect a penalty of ten percent of the license so delinquent; if such license is not paid within sixty (60) days from the time such license becomes due and payable, an additional sum of fifteen (15) percent of the license shall be added to the license and collected as a penalty. 
B.	Penalty for Nonpayment of a Quarterly License. Every quarterly license which is not paid within a period of ten days from the time the same becomes due and payable is declared to be delinquent and the city clerk shall thereupon add to such license and collect a penalty of ten percent of the license so delinquent; if such license is not paid within twenty (20) days from the time such license becomes due and payable an additional sum of fifteen (15) percent of the license shall be added to the license and collected as a penalty. 
C.	Penalty for Nonpayment of a Daily License. Every daily license which is not paid at the close of business on the day when the same was due and payable is delinquent, and the city clerk shall thereupon add to the license and collect a penalty of ten percent of the license as delinquent; if such license is not paid within ten days from the time such license becomes due and payable, an additional sum of fifteen (15) percent of the license shall be added to the license and collected as a penalty. 
(Ord. 119 § 20, 1956) 
5.04.210 - License tax—Generally. 
A.	Manufacturing. Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of steel fabrication, foundry, forging or the business of manufacturing, compounding or preparing for sale, any article, substance or commodity not otherwise specifically licensed by any other provisions of this chapter shall pay a license fee in the amount set forth in Schedule I of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference. 
B.	Wholesaling, Retailing, Jobbing and Other Business Not Specifically Licensed. Every person conducting, managing or carrying on any wholesale or retail or jobbing business, or otherwise engaged in the selling of goods, wares, merchandise or other things of value, and not otherwise specifically licensed by this chapter, and every person conducting, managing or carrying on any business that is not specifically licensed by this chapter, shall pay a license fee based on the amount of business done in accordance with Schedule I of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. 393 § 1, 1983: Ord. 381 § 1, 1983: Ord. 262 § 1, 1973: Ord. 119 § 21, 1956) 
5.04.220 - License tax—Professional-Semiprofessional connected business. 
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on any business hereinafter in this section enumerated, or any combination thereof, shall pay a license fee as set forth in Schedule II, Classification A, of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference: 
Accountant, auditor; advertising, advertising counsel, outdoor advertising; appraiser; architect; assayer; attorney-at-law; certified public accountant; chiropodist; chiropractor; civil engineer; collection agency or mercantile agency; consulting engineer; dentist; designer or decorator; draftsman; drugless practitioner (provided, however, that this section shall not apply to persons who treat the sick through prayer or spiritual means); electrical engineer; electrologist; geologist; illustrator or show car writer; landscape gardener or landscape architect; lapidary; mechanical engineer; money lender or money broker, or person engaged in buying or selling obligations; newspaper and commercial printing; oculist; osteopath; physician; real estate broker; surgeon; surveyor; taxidermist; mortician; veterinarian. 
Nothing in this section contained shall be deemed or construed as applying to any person engaged in any of the professions or occupations herein before enumerated solely as an employee of any other person conducting, managing or carrying on any such business in the city. 
(Ord. 381 § 2, 1983: Ord. 119 § 22, 1956) 
5.04.230 - Theaters and moving pictures. 
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of producing theatrical or vaudeville performances, or the exhibition of motion pictures, or lecturers or entertainments, or shows, or contests or exhibitions, not otherwise specifically licensed by this chapter, shall pay a license fee in an amount set forth in Schedule II, Classification A, of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. 381 § 3, 1983: Ord. 119 § 23, 1956) 
5.04.240 - Fruit packing business. 
Every person conducting, carrying on or managing the business of packing or preparing green or dried fruits, for hire or otherwise, for shipment or otherwise, or for sale upon commission, or otherwise, shall pay a license fee in an amount shown in Schedule II, Classification A, of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. 381 § 4, 1983: Ord. 119 § 24, 1956) 
5.04.250 - Job printing. 
Any person doing business outside the city, soliciting job printing within the city, shall pay a license fee in an amount shown in Schedule II, Classification A, of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. 381 § 5, 1983: Ord. 119 § 25, 1956) 
5.04.260 - Billboard advertising. 
Every person conducting, carrying on or managing the business of bill posting, sign advertising, by means of billboards or advertising signboards, fences, posts and buildings, shall pay a license fee in the amount shown in Schedule II, Classification A, of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference; provided, that this section shall not apply to bulletin boards or newspapers, nor to signs posted on any building by the person conducting business therein, advertising his own business, nor to owners of real estate, or their agents, advertising their property for sale or lease, when posted upon the property advertised for sale or lease. 
(Ord. 381 § 6, 1983: Ord. 119 § 26, 1956) 
5.04.270 - Hotels. 
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on a hotel or apartment house shall pay a license fee in the amount set forth in Schedule II, Classification A, of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference. For the purpose of this section, the words "apartment house" and "hotel" shall be construed as defined in the State Housing Law of California. 
(Ord. 381 § 7, 1983: Ord. 119 § 27, 1956) 
5.04.280 - Junk collector. 
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of junk collector shall pay an annual license for each person employed in such business in an amount set forth in Schedule II, Classification B, of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference. 
For the purpose of this section, the words "junk collector" shall be defined as any person who goes from place to place for the purpose of engaging in or carrying on the business of collecting, buying or selling, either at wholesale or retail, any old rags, bottles, sacks, cans, papers, metals, or any other worn out or discarded material. 
(Ord. 381 § 8, 1983: Ord. 119 § 28, 1956) 
5.04.290 - Handbills. 
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of posting and distributing advertisements for any store or other business carried on outside the city, shall pay a license fee in the amount set forth in Schedule II, Classification C, of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference. For the business of posting and distributing advertisements for any store or other business within the limits of Woodlake, the license shall be included in the regulation license paid by the business pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and any ordinance amendatory thereof. 
(Ord. 381 § 9, 1983: Ord. 119 § 29, 1956) 
5.04.300 - Circuses and carnivals. 
Every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on a circus, carnival, caravan, menagerie, exhibits, or the business of palmistry, shall pay a license fee in the amount set forth in Schedule II, Classification C, of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference. (Amended during 1996 codification; Ord. 381 § 10, 1983: Ord. 119 § 30, 1956)  
5.04.310 - Outside firms making deliveries inside city. 
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of operating and running any dray, automobile, truck or other vehicle used for the purpose of making deliveries of goods, wares or merchandise to retail and wholesale merchants within the city, shall pay a license fee in the amount set forth in Schedule II, Classification A, of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. 381 § 11, 1983: Ord. 119 § 31, 1956) 
5.04.320 - Card tables. 
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of running a card room shall pay a license fee in the amount set forth in Schedule II, Classification B, of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. 381 § 12, 1983: Ord. 119 § 32, 1956) 
5.04.330 - Juke boxes and mechanical or electronic amusement devices. 
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of operating or maintaining any mechanical or electronic instrument, device or contrivance which is solely for the purpose of furnishing music, whether coin operated, or otherwise, shall pay a license fee in the amount shown in Schedule II, Classification A, of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference, for each instrument, device or contrivance. 
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of operating or maintaining any mechanical or electronic instrument, device or contrivance for the furnishing of amusement, whether coin operated, or otherwise, shall pay a license fee in the amount shown in Schedule II, Classification A of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference, for each such mechanical or electronic instrument, device, contrivance or game of amusement. 
The license required by this section shall be in addition to any other business license required to be paid by this chapter by any person engaged in a business other than that of the operation or maintenance of a mechanical or electronic instrument, device, contrivance or game of amusement such as described herein. 
(Ord. 381 § 13, 1983: Ord. 122 § 1, 1956: Ord. 119 § 33, 1956) 
5.04.340 - Contractor. 
Every person conducting, carrying on or managing the business of contractor or sub-contractor in the building trades, in the erection in whole or in part of buildings, structures or any additions, alterations or improvements thereon, or in wrecking, demolishing or removing buildings or structures, or partially destroying buildings and debris, or excavating, or in construction, or grading of any streets, sidewalks, pavement, sewer, engineering structure, whether such work shall be done under a percentage basis or otherwise, shall pay a license fee in the amount set forth in Schedule II, Classification A of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference. 
For the purpose of this section, the tax shall be paid in advance on the first day of January, April, July and October of each year, except for new license taxes which shall be payable when application is made for the license. 
(Ord. 381 § 14, 1983: Ord. 262 § 2, 1973: Ord. 179 § 1, 1963: Ord. 119 § 34, 1956) 
5.04.350 - Pool rooms and billiard parlors. 
Every person conducting, managing, carrying on or operating a pool room or billiard parlor, shall pay a license in the amount set forth in Schedule II, Classification A, of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference, for each pool or billiard table. 
(Ord. 381 § 15, 1983: Ord. 119 § 35, 1956) 
5.04.360 - Miscellaneous businesses. 
The following businesses shall pay a flat license fee in the amount set forth in Schedule II, Classification B, of the Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference: rooming-house, boarding house, auto court, bakery, laundry, trailer camp. 
(Ord. 381 § 16, 1983: Ord. 119 § 36, 1956) 
5.04.370 - Keeping records. 
All persons doing business within the city shall at all times maintain and keep such books of record as will enable them to easily and readily furnish such information to the city clerk as the city clerk will require in order to enforce and collect the license fee herein provided to be paid. 
(Ord. 119 § 37, 1956) 
5.04.380 - Place license to be paid. 
All licenses hereinabove provided to be paid shall be paid at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 119 § 38, 1956) 
5.04.390 - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk, and he is directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof and the collection of license taxes hereunder as may from time to time be required by the city clerk and/or the city council. 
The city clerk, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him hereunder, and acting through his deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall exercise or cause to be examined all places of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this ordinance have been complied with. 
The city clerk and each and all of his assistants and any police officer shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge, and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed herein, and demand an exhibition of its license certificate. Any person having such license certificate theretofore issued, in his possession or under his control, who wilfully fails to exhibit the same on demand, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided for by the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the city clerk and each of his assistants to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all persons found to be violating any of these provisions. 
(Ord. 119 § 39, 1956) 
5.04.400 - License a debt. 
The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city and any person carrying on any business without first having procured a license from the city so to do shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of complaint jurisdiction, for the amount of license tax and penalties imposed on such business. 
(Ord. 119 § 40, 1956) 
5.04.410 - Both criminal and civil action authorized for failure to pay license tax. 
The conviction and imprisonment of any person for engaging in any business without first obtaining a license to conduct such business shall not relieve such person from paying the license tax to conduct such business, nor shall the payment of any license tax prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. 119 § 41, 1956) 
5.04.420 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of this city any material fact in procuring the license or permit herein provided for shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 381 § 17, 1983: Ord. 119 § 42, 1956) 
5.04.430 - Amendment of schedule. 
The Business License Tax Schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference, may be amended, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 381 § 18, 1983) 
5.04.440 - Maximum amount of tax. 
The business license tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall, in no event, exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) per quarter. 
(Ord. 393 § 2, 1983: Ord. 388 § 1, 1983) 
Chapter 5.08 - BINGO 
Sections: 
 
5.08.010 - Allowed when. 
Pursuant to Section 19, Article IV of the Constitution of the state of California, bingo games may be conducted in the city for the benefit of mobilehomes park associations, senior citizen organizations and organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code and a contribution or gift to which would be a charitable contribution under Section 170(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. 
(Ord. 506 § 1 (part), 1995: Ord. 311 § 1, 1976) 
5.08.020 - Minors. 
No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. 
(Ord. 311 § 2, 1976) 
5.08.030 - Place of game regulated. 
A nonprofit, charitable organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned, donated or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. 
(Ord. 506 § 1 (part), 1995: Ord. 311 § 3, 1976) 
5.08.040 - Open to public. 
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the nonprofit charitable organization. 
(Ord. 311 § 4, 1976) 
5.08.050 - Operation regulations. 
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the nonprofit charitable organization which organized it. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. 
No individual corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. 
(Ord. 311 §§ 5, 6, 1976) 
5.08.060 - Use of profits. 
All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. 
(Ord. 311 § 7, 1976) 
5.08.070 - Players to be physically present. 
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(Ord. 311 § 8, 1976) 
5.08.080 - Value of prizes limited. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. 
(Ord. 311 § 9, 1976) 
5.08.090 - Bingo defined. 
As used in this chapter "bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. 
(Ord. 311 § 10, 1976) 
5.08.100 - Permit required. 
Any organization wishing to conduct bingo games in the city shall apply to the city clerk for a permit and receive a permit before conducting any such games. 
(Ord. 311 § 11, 1976) 
5.08.110 - Violation—Penalty. 
The city may bring an action to enjoin any violation of this chapter. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(Ord. 311 § 13, 1976) 
Chapter 5.12 - CARD ROOMS 
Sections: 
 
5.12.010 - Public card room defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter the term "public card room" shall be construed to mean any building, business establishment, tent, trailer or place open to the public where any game of skill or chance played with cards is dealt, played, carried on or at which persons are permitted to play or do play any game played with cards. 
(Ord. 454 § 1, 1990) 
5.12.020 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct, manage, operate or carry on a public card room in the city unless such person, firm or corporation shall be the holder of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 454 § 2, 1990) 
5.12.030 - License issuance. 
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to conduct, manage, operate or carry on a public card room shall apply to the police department for approval. Once the conditional use permit is approved the finance department of the city shall issue a license to operate such public card room, if all other necessary conditions pursuant to the Municipal Code are met. Each card room shall be assigned a separate license, and the card room may not be moved or the license transferred to a new location without the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 536 (part), 1999: Ord. 454 § 3, 1990) 
5.12.040 - License fee. 
The license fee for the operation of a public card room shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 454 § 4, 1990) 
5.12.050 - Restrictions. 
A.	Conformance with State Law. It is the stated purpose of Chapters 5.12 and 5.16 to regulate card rooms, licenses and permits in the city concurrently with the state, and to impose local controls and conditions upon establishments operating card rooms and card tables as permitted in the "Gambling Control Act" as codified in Division 8, Chapter 5 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
B.	Hours of Operation. Playing at all card tables shall absolutely cease and terminate at two a.m. of each day; and it is declared to be unlawful for any person to deal, participate in, play, carry on or bet at, against, rent, open up, carry on, conduct or have charge of or to control any card room in the city between the hours of two a.m. and eight a.m. of each day. 
C.	Patron Security and Safety. All licensees shall have in effect a security plan to address the safety and security of patrons in and around the cardroom. The plan, and any amendments thereto, must be filed with and approved by the chief of police. The licensee shall be liable for the security and safety of its patrons to the extent required by law. Any information about security measures that is provided to the city by a licensee shall be confidential and not open to public inspection. The physical arrangements of the gambling area and parking lots of the licensee shall meet the requirements and specifications determined necessary by the chief of police for the security and safety of citizens, patrons, and police officers. During all hours of operation the outside doors to the card rooms and the main doors to establishments wherein the card rooms are located must be unlocked and accessible to the general public. Any part and all of the establishment where a card room is operated shall be open to police inspection during all hours of operation. 
D.	Wagering Limits. Unless otherwise authorized by the chief of police based upon a finding of necessity because of the rules relating to a particular game, a maximum of ten hands may be dealt at any one table. The maximum number of persons who may participate in play at a table may be limited by the licensee consistent with the provisions of this chapter, provided that in any event, the number of persons present in any establishment or room shall not exceed the occupant load as otherwise prescribed by law. There shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the establishment premises the minimum buy-in and wagering limits. Not later than July 1st of each calendar year, the licensee shall execute under penalty of perjury and file with the chief of police a declaration stating the following: (1) the minimum buy-in, table and wagering limits and any and all charges or other fees assessed of all players at a table; and (2) a set of the then current posted detailed house rules applicable to the games played. All table and wagering limits shall be fixed by the licensee in its discretion, shall be posted as required in this subsection, and shall comply with all state laws and all ordinances of the city. 
E.	Number of Gambling Tables. Not more than two card tables shall be located at each card room. Not more than four tables total shall be located in the city, and not more than two card rooms operating such tables shall be located in the city. 
F.	Location. No license shall be issued except for a location deemed suitable by the city council. 
(Ord. 536 (part), 1999: Ord. 454 § 5, 1990) 
5.12.060 - Minors. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, including licensees hereunder, to suffer or permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to remain in, or loitering in or about any premises in which there is a licensed public card room. 
(Ord. 548 § 1, 2003: Ord. 454 § 6, 1990) 
5.12.070 - License terminated when. 
Any public card room license shall terminate forever when and if such public card room is closed for a period in excess of sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. 454 § 7, 1990) 
5.12.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and each such person, as principal, agent, or otherwise shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which the violation of, or failure, neglect or refusal to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person. 
(Ord. 454 § 9, 1990) 
Chapter 5.16 - CARD DEALERS* 
Sections: 
 
5.16.010 - Card dealer defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "card dealer" means any person who engages in the business of dealing cards in a public card room and who receives compensation for his services. 
(Ord. 283 § 1, 1974) 
5.16.020 - License requirements. 
A.	License Required for Dealers and Employees. Any person who engages in the business of a card dealer within the city shall have a valid license issued by the city to engage in such business, and it is unlawful for a person to engage in such business in the city without a valid license. All card room dealers and employees shall be required to obtain a license from the chief of police. In addition, all card room dealers and employees are required to submit to a fingerprint based criminal history background check by the Department of Justice. The chief of police shall deny said license for any of the following reasons, as set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 19850A(a): 
1.	Failure of the applicant to clearly establish eligibility and qualification in accordance with California Business and Professions Code, Division 8, Chapter 5; 
2.	Failure of the applicant to provide any information, documentation, and assurances required by said chapter of the Business and Professions Code or requested by the director of the Division of Gambling Control, Department of Justice, or failure of the applicant to reveal any fact material to qualification, or the supplying of information that is untrue or misleading as to a material fact pertaining to the qualification criteria; 
3.	Conviction of the applicant for any crime punishable as a felony;
4.	Conviction of the applicant for any misdemeanor involving dishonesty or moral turpitude within the ten-year period immediately preceding the submission of the application, unless the applicant has been granted relief pursuant to Section 1203.4, 1203.4a, 1203.45 of the Penal Code; 
5.	Association of the applicant with criminal profiteering activity or organized crime, as defined by Section 186.2 of the Penal Code; 
6.	Wilful and obstinate defiance by the applicant of any legislative investigatory body, or other official investigatory body of any state or of the United States, when that body is engaged in the investigation of crimes relating to gambling; official corruption related to gambling activities; or criminal profiteering activity or organized crime, as defined by Section 186.2 of the Penal Code; or 
7.	The applicant is less than twenty-one (21) years of age.
The Department of Justice's Division of Gambling Control may object to the issuance of a license by the city for any cause deemed reasonable by the Division. 
B.	License Revocation and Appeal.
1.	By the chief of police: the chief of police may refuse to issue or may revoke the license of a card room dealer or employee at any time if, in his judgment, such action is necessary. A person whose application for a license is denied or a person whose license is revoked, if the decision to deny or revoke was made solely by the chief of police, may appeal the action of the chief of police to the city council. 
2.	By the Division of Gambling Control: if the Division objects to the issuance of a license, the license shall be denied. Any person whose application for a license has been denied because of an objection by the Division may apply to the California Gambling Commission for an evidentiary hearing in accordance with regulations. In addition, the California Gambling Control Commission may notify the chief of police to revoke a license, if the Commission makes the necessary findings after a hearing, pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 19912A. (Editorially amended during 12/99 supplement; Ord. 536 (part), 1999: Ord. 283 § 2, 1974)  
5.16.030 - License application. 
Application shall be made to the chief of police of the city for a license to engage in business as a card dealer in the city. 
(Ord. 283 § 3, 1974) 
5.16.040 - License fee. 
The annual fee for a license to engage in business as a card dealer shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 358 § 1, 1981: Ord. 283 § 4, 1974) 
5.16.050 - Photograph for license required. 
Every card dealer license shall bear one photograph of the licensee. The licensee shall furnish two photographs to the chief of police of the size requested by the chief of police. The chief of police will affix one photograph to the license and one to the department file folder. The licensee is required to possess the license whenever engaging in the business of a card dealer with the city. 
(Ord. 283 § 5, 1974) 
5.16.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and each such person, as principal, agent or otherwise, shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which the violation of, or failure, neglect or refusal to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person. 
(Ord. 283 § 7, 1990) 
Chapter 5.20 - CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS 
Sections: 
 
5.20.010 - License required. 
No person shall conduct, manage or carry on a circus or carnival in the city without first obtaining a permit. 
(Ord. 401 § 1, 1985) 
5.20.020 - Carnival defined. 
"Carnival" includes circus, fair, menagerie, tent show, exhibit, game of skill and ride. 
(Ord. 401 § 2, 1985) 
5.20.030 - Permit application. 
Applicants for a permit to conduct a circus or carnival shall file with the city clerk an application in writing. The applicant will be required to abide by the conditions set forth in the permit form. 
(Ord. 401 § 3, 1985) 
5.20.040 - Application fee. 
A.	Application Fee. A person who conducts a carnival shall pay a daily fee for each day of operation, payable at the time application is made as provided in Section 21 (b) Schedule II Classification C, Daily Rates of Exhibit A of Ordinance No. 393. 
B.	The city manager may reduce the daily fee by one-half upon submission of satisfactory evidence that: 
1.	The carnival is an incidental part of an over-all business promotion activity conducted by an organized group of merchants licensed to do business in the city; 
2.	The carnival is sponsored by a tax-exempt, religious, charitable, fraternal, veteran or education organization or organization or association, or a school student body group for purpose of raising funds, and if the proceeds received by the sponsoring tax-exempt organization, association, or group are used entirely for the purpose for which the organization was formed. 
The application for a reduced license fee shall be accompanied by a confirmed copy of agreement or contract between the carnival operator and the sponsoring organization showing the agreement regarding division of the proceeds. 
C.	The city manager may waive any license fee for an amusement activity, which is sponsored or conducted by a tax-exempt, religious charitable, fraternal, veteran or education organization, association or group operating within the Woodlake City boundaries that does not employ the services of a professional carnival operator to conduct the amusement activity. 
D.	Upon written application the city manager may waive the license fee except for twenty-five dollars for amusement activity which is sponsored or conducted by a tax exempt, religious, charitable, fraternal, veteran or education organization, association or group that does employ the services of a professional carnival operator to conduct the amusement activity. 
(Ord. 507 § 1, 1995; Ord. 401 § 4, 1985) 
5.20.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months in the county jail, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 401 § 5, 1985) 
Chapter 5.24 - NUT CROP OWNERSHIP RECORDS 
Sections: 
 
5.24.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted under the authority of Food Agriculture Code Section 866. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a means of verifying ownership of specified agricultural commodities in order to prevent and deter theft of these commodities and to provide a means for local enforcement of laws and regulations pertaining to the purchase and sale of these commodities. 
(Ord. 484 § 1, 1993) 
5.24.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter: 
"Agricultural commissioner" means the agricultural commissioner of Tulare County and designated representatives. 
"Agricultural commodities" or "commodity" means any nut crop of a weight of twenty-five (25) pounds or more. 
"Buyer" means an individual or entity engaged in the purchase of one or more agriculture commodity and who is licensed to engage in such business by the state. 
"Gleaning" means the process through which nuts remaining on the ground following the grower's completion of the harvest are gathered with the permission of a grower. 
"Grower" means the person who has personally or through the employment of others, grown and harvested an agricultural commodity. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other entity possessing, buying, transporting or selling an agricultural commodity as a principal or as an agent of another. 
"Proof of ownership" means: 
1.	If the possessor of the agricultural product is the grower of the commodity, proof that the commodity was grown by that grower. Proof of ownership in this context shall mean documents or information sufficient to verify that the possessor is the grower of the commodity. 
2.	If the possessor of the agricultural commodity is other than the grower of the possessed agricultural commodity, a completed proof of ownership certificate in a form approved by the Tulare County department of agriculture, or the requisite information set out in any alternative written form acceptable to the agricultural commissioner. Any form utilized for this purpose shall be signed by the possessor of the agricultural commodity and signed by the person who sold the agricultural commodity to the person in possession. 
"Seller" means a person who sells or attempts to sell an agricultural commodity to a buyer or other person. 
(Ord. 484 § 2, 1993) 
5.24.030 - Proof of ownership certificate. 
The proof of ownership certificate form, or any alternative written proof of ownership found to be acceptable to the agricultural commissioner shall contain, as applicable, the following information. 
A.	Name, address, telephone number and signature of the seller;
B.	Name, address, telephone number and signature of the buyer;
C.	The vehicle license plate number of the seller;
D.	The driver's license number of seller;
E.	The weight of the agricultural commodity purchased;
F.	The date and time of the transaction;
G.	The variety and condition of the agricultural commodity;
H.	Specific identification of the source of the commodity being sold. This shall mean, the seller is the grower of the commodity, the address at which the product was grown. This shall mean, if the seller is not the grower of the commodity, the name and address and phone number of the person from whom that seller obtained the commodity and if known the address where the commodity was grown. 
It is the responsibility of a buyer to obtain the requisite information to permit completion of the proof of ownership certificate forms. The proof of ownership certificate forms shall not be valid unless signed by both the person in possession of the commodity and by the person from whom the possessor obtained the commodity. 
(Ord. 484 § 3, 1993) 
5.24.040 - Proof of ownership certificate—Inspection, presentation and retention. 
The proof of ownership certificate forms shall be retained with the agricultural commodity to which they pertain while the commodity is in any person's possession, while being transported and until sold. 
Upon probable cause to believe that any agricultural commodity is in the unlawful possession of any person, any agricultural commissioner or peace officer may inspect the commodity and request that proof of ownership be provided. The possessor of the commodity shall permit inspection of the commodity and of corresponding proof of ownership certificates, or alternative proof. If the possessor is a grower, the grower shall provide information sufficient to verify that status. Upon reasonable notice, copies of proof of ownership certificate forms or other proof shall be provided. 
To facilitate inspection by the Tulare County agricultural commissioner, the buyer shall purchase and keep the commodity at a place of business in compliance with the city of Woodlake building and planning/zoning ordinance until transported for resale or other handling. 
Following any sale of the agricultural commodity by the buyer, the proof of ownership certificate forms, or alternative written proof shall be retained by the buyer for a period of two years from the date of such sale. Buyers shall also retain any records pertaining to the resale of agricultural products to which the proof of ownership certificate forms pertain for a period of two years. 
(Ord. 484 § 4, 1993) 
5.24.050 - Falsification of proof of ownership. 
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly falsify or cause the falsification of, any proof of ownership certificate, or other document presented as evidence of a person's proof of ownership. 
(Ord. 484 § 5, 1993) 
5.24.060 - Vehicle stops. 
Any peace officer may, upon having probable cause to believe that a person is in illegal possession of an agricultural commodity, stop and search and inspect the agricultural commodity and request proof of ownership. If an agricultural commissioner has probable cause to believe that any agricultural commodity is unlawfully possessed, he or she may request a peace officer to stop a vehicle for inspection. 
(Ord. 484 § 6, 1993) 
5.24.070 - Retention of seized commodity. 
Upon reasonable belief that a person is in unlawful possession of an agricultural commodity, the commodity, or any portion of a commodity, which is reasonably determined to be unlawfully possessed, may be seized and held by the agricultural commissioner or any peace officer. The commodity so seized shall be held at such place and in such manner as is reasonable under the circumstances and until disposed of as provided in this chapter. The commissioner or peace officer shall record the date and place of seizure and information pertaining to the person from whom the commodity was seized, and to the extent practical, the quantity, type, condition and other information pertaining to the commodity. 
(Ord. 484 § 7, 1993) 
5.24.080 - Investigation to ascertain ownership. 
The commissioner or any peace officer may investigate to ascertain the ownership of any commodity that has been held pursuant to this chapter and if the lawful owner is located, the commodity shall be released to the owner or agent. The commissioner may require reasonable payment, not to exceed the value of the commodity, to cover costs incurred for storage of the commodity. 
(Ord. 484 § 8, 1993) 
5.24.090 - Disposition of agricultural commodities. 
If for any reason the commodity cannot be released to the rightful owner within forty-eight (48) hours after coming into the custody of the agricultural commissioner, or for any shorter period of time that the commissioner deems necessary in the case of perishable commodities, the commissioner may sell the commodity by public auction or by private sale at fair market value to a commercial packer of the commodity. Prior to any such sale the commissioner shall determine that the hostile and direct confrontations between growers and those they find on their property, which has considerable potential to result in violence. The most pressing problem at this time involves the theft of walnuts during this growing season which is completed in early December. This chapter is necessary at this time to address these concerns for this growing season and thus it is required to be adopted on an emergency basis. 
(Ord. 484 § 12, 1993) 
Chapter 5.28 - PAWNBROKERS 
Sections: 
 
5.28.010 - Pawnbroker defined. 
Every person engaged in the business of a receiving goods in pledge as security for a loan, is a pawnbroker within the meaning of this chapter. 
(Ord. 516 § 2, 1995) 
5.28.020 - License requirement. 
A.	Each person doing business as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall have a license to engage in such business as provided in Chapter 3, of Division 8 of the California Financial Code commencing with Section 21300 et seq. 
B.	Each person doing business as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer within the city shall also have a city business license to engage in such activity duly issued by the city. 
(Ord. 516 § 3, 1995) 
5.28.030 - Compliance with Business and Professions Code required. 
Each person doing business as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall comply with the holding and reporting requirements for retaining property as prescribed in Chapter 9, of Division 8 of the California Business and Professions Code, Sections 21628, 21630, 21631 and 21636, and California Financial Code, Section 21208. 
(Ord. 516 § 4, 1995) 
5.28.040 - Time limits for daily operation. 
No pawnbroker and no person employed by any pawnbroker shall accept any item in pawn, nor make any loan of any item of personal property except between the hours of eight a.m. and seven p.m. of any day. 
(Ord. 516 § 5, 1995) 
5.28.050 - Minors. 
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to receive on any pretext whatsoever, any article or thing from any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years and/or to receive from any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years any junk, metal, mechanical tools or implements. 
(Ord. 516 § 6, 1995) 
5.28.060 - Place of business restricted. 
If any person conducts the business of pawnbroker in any room or building wherein another business is conducted, the room, place or space where the business of pawnbroker is conducted shall be separate from the room, place or space where the other business is conducted. In the event the business of pawnbroker is conducted in the same room that another is conducted or maintained, it shall be enclosed by either a permanent partition, screen or some other suitable material with a height of at least seven feet and the room, place or space wherein the business of pawnbroker is conducted and during the times when the business of pawnbroker is to be closed, shall have and keep displayed on the other side of the partition, screen or other suitable material, a sign bearing the following inscription: "Loan Office Closed." This sign shall be in letters of not less than four inches in height and shall be kept in a conspicuous place. 
(Ord. 516 § 7, 1995) 
Chapter 5.32 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
Sections: 
 
5.32.010 - Definitions. 
A.	A "peddler" is defined, for the purposes of this chapter, as any individual or person, not having an established place of business in the city, who, for himself or as agent for another travels either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, bicycle, motorcycle or any other type of conveyance and who goes from place to place or from house to house or from street to street or who by telephonic communication, offers for sale or sells subscriptions for newspapers, magazines, periodicals, books and publications or takes orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and other personal property of every nature whatsoever for current or future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether or not has collected advance payments on such sales; provided, however, that this definition shall not include any individual or person attempting to sell subscriptions for any newspaper regularly circulated within the city; provided further, however, that this definition shall not include persons who call upon retail and wholesale businesses doing business within the city; provided further, that such definition shall not include any person or individual who calls upon prospective customers in the place of business or office in which the customer conducts his business or profession; provided further, that this definition shall not include any student under the age of eighteen (18) years enrolled in a public school in the city; provided further, that this definition shall not include any veteran described in Section 16001 and 16001.5 of the Business and Profession Code of the state of California. 
B.	A "canvasser" or "solicitor" is defined as any individual or person, not having an established place of business in the city, who, for himself or as agent for another, travels either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, bicycle, motorcycle or any other type of conveyance and who goes from place to place or from house to house or from street to street or by telephonic communication, canvasses or solicits orders or subscriptions for selling or disposing of newspapers, magazines, periodicals, books and publications or who makes appointments for the exhibition or demonstration of merchandise of any kind or solicits orders for the sale of the same or takes orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and other personal property of any nature for present or future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed at the present time or in the future whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided, that this definition shall not include persons who call upon retail and wholesale businesses doing business within the city; provided further, that such definition shall not include any person or individual who calls upon prospective customers in the place of business or office in which the customer conducts his business or profession; provided further, that this definition shall not include any student under the age of eighteen (18) years enrolled in a public school in the city; provided further, that this definition shall not include any veteran described in Section 16001 and 16001.5 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 499 § 1, 1995) 
5.32.020 - License required. 
A.	It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in any of the businesses or activities described in Section 5.32.010 for the purpose of procuring subscriptions for or taking orders for or making appointments for the exhibition or demonstration of products or selling any newspapers, magazines, periodicals, books, publications or selling or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and other personal property of any kind whatsoever for future or present delivery or for services to be presently furnished or furnished or performed in the future within the city limits without first having obtained a license therefore in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.	The license required by this chapter is in addition to the business license required by Ordinance 393 of the city. 
(Ord. 499 § 2, 1995) 
5.32.030 - Application for license— Contents, photographs and fingerprinting. 
Applicants for a peddler's, canvasser's or solicitor's license under this chapter must file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form furnished by the city clerk which shall contain the following information: 
A.	Name and description of the applicant;
B.	Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant;
C.	A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;
D.	If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship; 
E.	The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
F.	The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time such application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery; 
G.	A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
H.	The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two reliable property owners of the county who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business respectability, or, in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant that will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility; 
I.	A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefore; 
J.	A description and license number of any vehicle to be used by the licensee in his activities in the city. 
(Ord. 499 § 3, 1995) 
5.32.040 - Application fee. 
At the time of filing the application, a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or such other fee as may be fixed by resolution from time to time by the city council, shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of processing the application, taking the required fingerprints and investigation of the facts therein stated. 
(Ord. 499 § 4, 1995) 
5.32.050 - Investigation of application by chief of police. 
A.	Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. 
B.	The chief of police shall have a period of thirty (30) days within which to make his investigation and report. 
(Ord. 499 § 5, 1995) 
5.32.060 - Denial. 
If as a result of the investigation required in Section 5.32.050, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return such application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. 
(Ord. 499 § 6, 1995) 
5.32.070 - Issuance—Contents—Records—Duration. 
If as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval, execute a license addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for and return such license, along with the application to the city clerk who shall countersign the license and who shall deliver to the applicant his license. Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and show the name, address and photograph of such solicitor, canvasser or peddler and the kind of goods to be offered thereunder, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operating, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such peddling, soliciting, canvassing. The clerk shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. No license shall be issued for a longer period of time than one year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. 499 § 7, 1995) 
5.32.080 - Exhibition upon request. 
All licensees must exhibit their license upon demand of any prospective customer or any occupant of a dwelling house in the city. 
Peddlers, canvassers and solicitors may exercise the rights under a license provided for in this chapter only during the hours of nine a.m. and four p.m. local time. 
(Ord. 499 § 8, 1995) 
5.32.090 - Revocation—Notice and hearing. 
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city clerk or chief of police after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
A.	Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license;
B.	Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as peddler, solicitor or as canvasser; 
C.	Any violation of this chapter or any violation of Section 17500.3 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California; 
D.	Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
E.	Conducting the business of peddling, soliciting or of canvassing, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. 499 § 9, 1995) 
5.32.100 - Appeal from denial or revocation. 
Any person aggrieved by action by the chief of police or the city clerk in the denial of a license as provided in Section 5.32.060 or a revocation of any license issued, shall have the right of appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the council within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time and place for hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given by mailing notice of the time and place for hearing the appeal postage prepaid to the applicant or permittee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for hearing. The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 499 § 10, 1995) 
5.32.110 - Enforcement of provisions. 
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require any person seen soliciting, canvassing or peddling, and who is not known by such officer to possess a valid unrevoked license, to produce his solicitor's, canvasser's or peddler's license and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same. 
The chief of police shall report to the city clerk all convictions for violation of this chapter and the city clerk shall maintain a record of the reports of violation therein. 
(Ord. 499 § 11, 1995) 
5.32.120 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter shall be an infraction. Upon conviction, the court shall impose a fine of not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each infraction. 
(Ord. 499 § 12, 1995) 
Chapter 5.33 - MOBILE VENDING 
Sections: 
 
5.33.010 - Purpose. 
The general purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the citizens, businesses and visitors of the city by requiring that mobile vendors provide the community and customers with a minimum level of cleanliness, quality, safety and security. It is the purpose and intent of the city council in enacting this chapter, to provide mobile vendors with clear and concise regulations to prevent safety, traffic and health hazards, as well as to preserve the peace, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
5.33.020 - Definitions. 
A.	"Mobile vending unit" shall mean any vehicle, trailer, pushcart, motorized food wagon, stand, tent; or structure; not affixed to a permanent foundation, with or without wheels, which may be moved from one place to another under its own power or by other means. 
B.	"Mobile vendor" shall mean any person engaged in the business of selling prepared, pre-packaged or unprepared, unpackaged food or foodstuffs of any kind, goods, wares, merchandise, or any other thing of value from a mobile vending unit on private or public property. 
C.	"Persons" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or business entity, and includes, but is not limited to, owners, operators, drivers, lessors and lessees of a mobile vending unit. 
D.	"Vend" or "Vending" shall mean the sale of prepared, pre-packaged or unprepared, unpackaged food or foodstuffs of any kind, goods, wares, merchandise, or any other thing of value from a mobile vending unit on private or public property. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
5.33.030 - Permit required. 
No person may vend in the city without first obtaining and having in his or her possession a vendor permit issued by the city in accordance with this chapter. No permit granted herein shall confer any vested right to any person or business for more than the permit period. All mobile vendors subject to this chapter shall comply with the provisions of this chapter as they may be amended hereafter. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
5.33.040 - Permit period. 
All vendor permits issued by the city to operate a mobile vending unit shall be limited to a permit period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
5.33.050 - Application for permit to operate. 
A.	A person desiring to engage in a mobile vendor operation shall submit a written application for a permit to operate in a form acceptable to and with all supporting information required by the city planning department. Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable, nontransferable application fee in an amount as established by resolution of the city council. Any such permit shall be required to be renewed annually and a separate nonrefundable, nontransferable application fee shall be paid yearly for such renewal application. Mobile vendors must have the permit in their possession when vending. Permits to operate are nontransferable. 
B.	Every mobile vendor shall obtain a city business license.
C.	As part of the permit to operate application, the mobile vendor shall provide the following: 
1.	Mailing address for notification purposes. If during the term of the permit, the permit holder has any change in the mailing address submitted on the original or renewal application; the permit holder shall notify the planning department of such change in writing within ten business days thereafter. Failure to provide updated contact information shall be grounds for permit suspension. 
2.	Legal names of the mobile vendor and all persons operating or vending out of the mobile vending unit. 
3.	Proof of current vehicle registration (for mobile vending unit if applicable).
4.	Designation of period of operation (limited to one year).
5.	Four photographs (showing different exterior views) of each mobile vending unit.
6.	Dimensioned sample or rendering of proposed signage.
7.	A copy of a current Tulare County Environmental Health permit, if operating a mobile food facility as defined in California Health and Safety Code section 113831. 
8.	Proof of automobile insurance as required by the Vehicle Code (for mobile vending unit if applicable). 
9.	No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on the business of a mobile vendor unless there is on file with the city, in full force and effect at all times, documents issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of California evidencing that the operator is insured under a liability insurance policy providing minimum coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injury or death arising out of the operation of the mobile vending unit. 
10.	A signed indemnification agreement in favor of the city.
D.	The following may constitute grounds for denial of a permit to operate or renewal application: 
1.	The proposed mobile vending activity does not comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, housing, fire, safety and health regulations; 
2.	The applicant is unable to obtain a business license;
3.	The applicant has, within three years immediately preceding the application filing date, had a permit to operate, vending license or similar permit suspended or revoked in another California jurisdiction; 
4.	The applicant has made a material misstatement in the application for a permit to operate; 
5.	Failure to obtain clearance from Tulare County Environmental Health.;
6.	Failure to maintain or provide the city with evidence of the insurance required by this chapter; 
7.	Failure to provide the city with a signed indemnification agreement in favor of the city; and 
8.	Failure to fully comply with any provision of this chapter or any applicable laws and permit conditions. 
E.	The planning commission shall be the decision making authority for any initial application of a permit to operate. The city administrator or designee shall be the decision making authority for any renewal application of a permit to operate. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
5.33.060 - Rules and Regulations. 
A.	Location. Mobile vendors may only operate in city approved mobile vending locations. These vending areas will be selected and approved by the city planning commission but may be timely appealed to the city council. 
B.	Within the approved mobile vending locations, the mobile vendor will be subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Permitted hours of operation are from eight p.m. to twelve a.m.
2.	Vendors shall not interfere with access, driveways, aisles, circulation or fire lanes and hydrants. 
3.	The mobile vendor shall display, in plain view and at all times, current permits and licenses. 
4.	While vending, drive wheels of the mobile vending unit shall be chocked in such a manner as to prevent movement. 
5.	The mobile vending unit shall be entirely self-sufficient in regards to gas, water and telecommunications. Should any utility hook-ups or connections to on-site utilities be used or required, the mobile vendor shall be required to apply for appropriate permits or receive approval by the appropriate city department to ensure building and public safety and consistency with applicable building and zoning regulations. 
6.	The mobile vendor shall not discharge items onto the sidewalk, gutter, storm drainage inlets or streets. 
C.	Appearance of site.
1.	The site shall be maintained in a safe and clean manner at all times.
2.	No tables, chairs, fences, shade structures or other site furniture, (permanent or otherwise) or any free standing signs shall be permitted in conjunction with the mobile vendor. 
3.	Any site improvements required for mobile vendor operations shall require application for the appropriate permits to ensure building and public safety and consistency with applicable building and zoning regulations. 
4.	Exterior storage of refuse, equipment or materials associated with a mobile food facility is prohibited. 
D.	Sanitation.
1.	All mobile vendors operating a mobile food facility as defined by the Health and Safety Code shall operate out of a commissary pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 114295. 
2.	All mobile units shall be equipped with refuse containers large enough to contain all refuse generated by the operation of such a unit, and the vendor of the mobile unit shall pick up all refuse generated by such operation within a twenty-five (25) foot radius of the vehicle before such unit is moved. No mobile vendor shall dispose of any trash or refuse in any such public or private trash receptacle other than a trash receptacle owned, operated or otherwise provided by and under the control of such vendor. 
3.	All mobile vendors operating a mobile food facility as defined by the Health and Safety Code shall comply with Health and Safety Code Section 114315 regarding the availability of adequate toilet and handwashing facilities for use by food service personnel. 
E.	Safety and security.
1.	No vending shall be permitted except after the mobile vending unit has been brought to a complete stop and parked in a lawful manner. 
2.	The mobile vendor shall install signage in a visible location on the mobile vending unit indicating that loitering is not permitted. 
3.	The mobile food vendor shall enforce the no loitering rule.
4.	On-Street Operation. Pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22455, a mobile vendor may stop to conduct business from a mobile food facility at a location within the right-of-way of a public street within the city only when all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.	The mobile food facility shall not constitute an encroachment on the highway.
b.	The mobile food facility must be safely parked:
(i)	At least one hundred (100) feet from any intersection, including intersections with public alleys; 
(ii)	Where the applicable speed limit is thirty-five (35) mph or slower;
(iii)	In such a manner that travel upon the street, vehicular access to any driveway, the view of drivers, or lawful movement of any vehicle on the public right-of-way is not impeded or obstructed; 
(iv)	In such a manner that patrons are not permitted to do business with the mobile vendor from their vehicles; 
(v)	In such a manner that patrons of the mobile food facility may safely park on the same side of the road as the mobile food facility and walk to and from the mobile food facility using a sidewalk or other area away from the vehicular right-of-way; and 
(vi)	In such a manner that the window for patrons is on the side of the mobile food facility away from traffic. 
5.	Off-Street Operation. A mobile food facility may be parked for conducting business at a location off the public street only when all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.	The mobile food facility must be safely parked at least twenty (20) feet from the paved edge of the nearest public vehicular right-of-way and; 
b.	The mobile food facility as parked must not to impede or obstruct the view of drivers on any public road; 
c.	Patrons of the mobile food facility must not be permitted to transact business with the mobile vendor from their vehicles; 
d.	Patrons of the mobile food facility must be able to safely park on the same side of the road where the mobile food facility is parked and walk to and from the mobile food facility using a sidewalk or other area which is not part of the public vehicular right-of-way; and 
e.	The window or other service area for patron transactions must be located on the side of the mobile food facility which faces away from vehicular traffic on the nearest public vehicular right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
5.33.070 - Exemptions. 
A.	Any person engaged in vending where such person has been authorized by the city to engage in such activity by a special event permit or other entitlements issued by the city. 
B.	Any person delivering any goods by vehicle where such goods have been ordered in advance for such delivery from any business located at a permanent location and which goods are being delivered from such location to the customer by vehicle, regardless of the point of sale. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
5.33.080 - Violations. 
Any violation of this chapter by a mobile vendor shall constitute a public nuisance subject to abatement though any lawful means including, but not limited to, the procedures in Chapter 8.28. Additionally, any mobile vendor who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the administrative fines and penalty provisions of Chapter 1.12. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
Chapter 5.36 - PUBLIC DANCES* 
Sections: 
 
5.36.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate public cafe dances and public dances, so that the event does not have an adverse impact on the public's health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. 541 § 1 (part), 2001) 
5.36.020 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
"Live music" means music that is generated on premises by persons playing instruments or by persons singing. 
"Person" means and includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. 
"Public cafe dance" means any dance conducted upon premises where live or amplified recorded music is provided. Said dance is operated on premises that are connected with a regular eating or drinking establishments and where meals or alcoholic beverages are regularly sold and served and to which the public is entitled to attend. 
"Public dance" means any dance other than a public cafe dance to which the public may gain admission or is entitled to attend, and includes any dance that is held or conducted at a meeting place which is available for rent or use by the general public except when located on a public or private school ground, the Woodlake Memorial Building, or the Lions Community Center. 
(Ord. 541 § 1 (part), 2001) 
5.36.030 - Restrictions. 
It is unlawful for any person to conduct a public dance or a public cafe dance, where live music is provided, or allow such a dance to be conducted upon premises under his control without first having obtained a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Any such dance being conducted without a permit may be closed down summarily by the city. 
Any person desiring a permit pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the city clerk ten days prior to the date of the dance. 
(Ord. 541 § 1 (part), 2001) 
5.36.040 - Permit—Application. 
Any person wishing to conduct dances referred to in this chapter shall make an application to the city clerk, accompanied by an application fee. The application shall be reviewed and approved by the chief of police. Said application shall contain the following: 
A.	Name of person/organization applying for permit;
B.	Address;
C.	Telephone;
D.	Date, location and hours of dance;
E.	Type of dance:
1.	Public,
2.	Charitable,
3.	Other;
F.	Attendance:
1.	Open to the public,
2.	Invitation only,
3.	Number of patrons;
G.	Security:
1.	Security agency assigned (shall be licensed through the city of Woodlake),
2.	Number of security guards;
H.	Occupancy of building, if applicable.
(Ord. 541 § 1 (part), 2001) 
5.36.050 - Permit—Issuance. 
Upon review of the application by the chief of police, city clerk and other departments, the chief shall be authorized to issue said permit. 
A.	Said permit shall only be issued to one permittee per weekend.
B.	Said permit shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the premises where the dance is occurring and during the hours when the dance is being conducted. 
(Ord. 541 § 1 (part), 2001) 
5.36.060 - Permit—Requirements. 
All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter for a public dance or public cafe dance shall be conditioned on the following requirements: 
A.	The permittee shall be required to have an attendance on the premises where the dance is being conducted, during the entire time the dance is being conducted, security guards, licensed by the state of California. The number of security guards shall be determined by the chief of police; 
B.	The building premises wherein a dance is being conducted shall not have an attendance that exceeds the occupancy of the building as determined by the Woodlake fire district; 
C.	The building premises wherein a dance is being conducted shall be limited to three dances per calendar year and no more than one dance per month; 
D.	Said dance permit shall be good for twenty-four (24) hours;
E.	The live music associated with a public dance or public cafe dance shall cease at twelve midnight; 
F.	Events that are located in a residential zone district shall cease at ten p.m.
(Ord. 541 § 1 (part), 2001) 
5.36.070 - Permit—Denial. 
A.	If there are in the official records of the police department showing two or more disturbances at public dances operated by the permittee during the proceeding year, the chief of police may deny said permit or require additional security guards. 
B.	If the chief of police finds that the person, persons or organization applying for a dance permit have violated other city ordinances or pertinent state laws, the chief of police may deny said permit. 
(Ord. 541 § 1 (part), 2001) 
5.36.080 - Permit—Revocation. 
The city is empowered to revoke said dance permit and close down any dance that is in violation of Sections 5.36.060(B), (E) and (F) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 541 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 5.40 - WASTE TIRE HAULERS 
Sections: 
 
5.40.010 - Findings. 
The city council finds that the illegal disposal of waste tires has created many problems that foreseeably jeopardize the public health and safety of persons in the city. The county of Tulare has adopted an ordinance to license waste tire haulers and require waste tire haulers to file reports about all collections and dispositions of waste tires. For the foregoing reasons, the city council finds and determines that it is appropriate and necessary to adopt and to enforce the county's waste tire haulers licensing ordinance relating to the licensing, collection and transportation of waste tires in the city by adopting its own ordinance with enforcement provisions. 
(Ord. 460 § 1, 1991) 
5.40.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them. 
"Association" means every club, syndicate, joint venture and every other group of individuals who are united together for some common purpose but are not organized as a partnership or corporation. 
"Business" means the operation or carrying on of any activity, whether for profit or gratuitously, for which a license is required by this chapter. 
"Business premises" means the office, building, location or place in which or from which a business is conducted or carried on. 
"Disposition" means the removal of waste tires from the business premises or other location used by the dealer in its business. 
"Tax collector" means the tax collector for the county of Tulare. 
"Tire" means a pneumatic tire or solid tire manufactured for use on any type of motor vehicle. 
"Tire dealer" means any person who engages in the business of selling, trading or dealing in tires for profit. 
"Waste tire" means a tire that has been removed from the wheel of a motor vehicle and is no longer suitable for its originally intended purpose due to wear, damage or defect. 
"Waste tire hauler" means any person who engages in the collection and/or transportation of waste tires for compensation. 
"Waste tire hauler business license" means a license to engage in the collection and/or transportation of waste tires for compensation as required by Section 6172 of the Ordinance Code of Tulare County found at Article 2.6 of Chapter 2, Part VI of said Code. 
(Ord. 460 § 2, 1991) 
5.40.030 - Waste tire hauler's business license required. 
All persons, firms or corporations not exempt from the licensing requirement contained in Section 6173 of the Ordinance Code of the county of Tulare, and any vehicle used in the business of a nonexempt waste tire hauler within the city shall have a valid waste tire hauler business license issued by the county of Tulare to engage in or be used in such business. 
(Ord. 467 § 1, 1992: Ord. 460 § 3, 1991) 
5.40.040 - Exceptions to waste tire hauler's business license requirement. 
The following persons shall be exempt from the requirement to be licensed: 
A.	Refuse collectors licensed by the county of Tulare or the city of Woodlake;
B.	The county of Tulare and any incorporated city located within the county;
C.	Any tire dealer transporting only its own waste tires;
D.	Any common carrier which transports freight of various kinds and for which the transportation of waste tires is only incidental. 
(Ord. 467 § 2, 1992: Ord. 460 § 4, 1991) 
5.40.050 - Display of waste tire hauler's business license. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the following requirements concerning business license: 
A.	Any vehicle used to collect and/or transport waste tires within the city must bear on both sides the name of the licensee and the words "Waste Tire Hauler License No. " with the applicable license number in contrasting lettering not less than two inches in height. 
B.	The waste tire hauler's business license shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place near the main entrance of the business premises. 
C.	A waste tire hauler's business license issued for the use of a vehicle shall be carried at all times in the vehicle for which the license was issued. 
D.	If a waste tire hauler's business license has been issued authorizing the licensee to conduct a business independent of a fixed location, the licensee shall carry the license upon his person at all times when he is conducting such business. 
E.	No person shall post, display or carry any revoked, suspended, expired or otherwise invalid waste tire hauler's business license. 
F.	A waste tire hauler's business license shall be displayed to the tax collector, any investigating officer or any peace officer on demand. 
G.	Any waste tire hauler's business license that has been revoked or suspended shall be surrendered to the tax collector, any investigating officer or to any peace officer immediately after a demand for such surrender has been made. 
(Ord. 460 § 5, 1991) 
5.40.060 - Use of licensed waste tire hauler required. 
It is unlawful for any tire dealer in the city to contract with, or otherwise permit, any person to collect and/or transport its waste tires unless that person holds a valid waste tire hauler license or is a person excepted from the provisions of this chapter by Section 5.40.040. 
(Ord. 460 § 6, 1991) 
5.40.070 - Report of disposition by tire dealers. 
All tire dealers located or operating within the city limits are required to file with the public works director of the county of Tulare, a monthly report on the form prescribed by the director of public works of the county of Tulare, each and every disposition of its waste tires, and such form shall contain the following information as to each such disposition: 
A.	The date and time of each such disposition;
B.	The approximate quantity of waste tires disposed of in each disposition;
C.	The manner of transportation used to dispose of the waste tires, including the name of the waste tire hauler and the license number of any vehicle used by the waste tire hauler if applicable. In all cases where a common carrier was used, copies of bills of lading or other documentation verifying such use shall be attached to the report; 
D.	The location of the site to which the waste tires were transported, if known.
(Ord. 467 § 3, 1992: Ord. 460 § 7, 1991) 
5.40.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter which are declared to be unlawful, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to a penalty of imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months, or by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, or both. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall be punished by: (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. 
(Ord. 460 § 8, 1991) 
Chapter 5.44 - YARD SALES 
Sections: 
 
5.44.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Display for sale" means the placing of signs or other marks on items offered or displayed for sale indicating that they are available for sale and the arrangement of items on tables, racks, benches or upon the ground in such a manner to make them available for inspection by prospective purchasers. 
"Immediate family" means mother, father, spouse, brother, sister, child or grandchild living in a single residential unit which is also the site of a yard sale. 
"Personal property" means all items of tangible personal property other than bicycles; tricycles; motorcycles; motor bikes; motor vehicles registered as such with the Department of Motor Vehicles of the state of California; electric carts; row, sail or motor boats; trailers; mobilehomes; provided, however, component parts of the items specifically set forth in this definition sold separately shall be considered as personal property. 
"Residential zone" means those areas within the city presently or hereafter zoned for single or multifamily use by ordinances of the city. 
"Yard sale" means to offer for sale, to display for sale, or the sale of personal property in a residential zone of the city. 
(Ord. 334 § 2, 1979) 
5.44.020 - Permit required. 
No person, firm, corporation, association or cooperative shall conduct a yard sale without first obtaining a permit to conduct such sale from the city administrator as prescribed in Section 5.44.040. 
(Ord. 334 § 3, 1979) 
5.44.030 - Compliance with provisions. 
All persons, firms, corporations, associations or cooperatives issued a permit to conduct a yard sale in the city shall comply with all of the terms and provisions of this chapter and shall comply with all rules and regulations pertaining to yard sales hereinafter adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 334 § 4, 1979) 
5.44.040 - Permit application. 
The city administrator shall issue a permit to conduct a yard sale to an applicant upon filing of an application in the form prescribed by the city and upon the payment of a permit fee of one dollar ($1.00). The application shall be made under the penalty of perjury and, in addition to all other information requested by the application, shall contain the following: 
A.	The name and address of the applicant;
B.	The name and address of the person, firm, corporation, association or cooperative to whom the permit is to be issued; 
C.	The street address of the premises upon which the yard sale is to be conducted;
D.	The date or dates upon which the yard sale is to be conducted which shall not exceed three consecutive dates; 
E.	Declaration to the effect that:
1.	All items to be displayed for sale, offered for sale or sold, are owned by the person, firm, corporation, association or cooperative holding the permit and in the case of an individual, that the items are owned by the permittee or his or her immediate family, 
2.	That no more than three permits for a yard sale have been issued to the applicant in the twelve (12) month period previous to the proposed sale date, 
3.	That no more than three permits for a yard sale have been issued for the proposed premises in the twelve (12) month period previous to the proposed sale date. 
(Ord. 334 § 5, 1979) 
5.44.050 - Operation of sale. 
All yard sales conducted pursuant to permit issued under this chapter shall be conducted in compliance with the following provisions: 
A.	The permit shall be displayed in a prominent location upon the premises where the yard sale is being conducted; 
B.	The permit shall be exhibited upon demand to any employee or official of the city;
C.	Only personal property owned by the permittee or in the case of an individual, his or her immediate family, shall be offered for sale, displayed for sale or sold; 
D.	No personal property shall be offered for sale, displayed for sale or sold which is held by the permittee on consignment or was acquired by the permittee or in the case of an individual, his or her immediate family, for the purpose of resale; 
E.	The sale shall continue for not more than three consecutive days between the hours of sunrise and sunset; 
F.	All items offered or displayed for sale shall be removed from the public view from any street or sidewalk within four hours after the termination of the permit period; 
G.	Signs advertising the yard sale shall be posted on privately owned property only and will be removed within two hours after the termination of the yard sale permit period; 
H.	Any permit issued to hold a yard sale may be surrendered during the period of time covered by the permit in the event the permittee becomes ill or in the event weather makes the yard sale impractical. Such surrendered permit may be reissued without further charge to the permittee within fifteen (15) days after the surrender for the period of time set forth in the original permit between the date of surrender and the date of termination of the original permit. 
(Ord. 334 § 6, 1979) 
5.44.060 - Issuance of permit prohibited when. 
No permit shall be issued to conduct a yard sale to a person, firm, corporation, association or cooperative if within the previous twelve (12) calendar months the permittee has obtained three permits for a yard sale within the city or if the premises proposed for the yard sale has been used for a yard sale on more than three occasions within the twelve (12) month period. 
(Ord. 334 § 7, 1979) 
5.44.070 - Display of sale items. 
No persons, firm, corporations association or cooperative shall display for sale or sell any of the items specifically referred to in Section 5.44.010 in a residential zone of the city except upon the condition and in the manner prescribed in this section: 
A.	The item offered for sale must be owned or leased by the occupant of the premises or his immediate family whereupon the item is displayed or offered for sale. 
B.	The item must not be displayed or offered for sale upon a public right-of-way in the city. 
(Ord. 334 § 8, 1979) 
5.44.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or cooperative who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon the conviction thereof shall be punished for each violation by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). Each separate day or portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. 334 § 9, 1979) 
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.04 - COUNTY DOG CONTROL REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - County regulation adopted. 
All of the provisions of Chapter 4 of Part IV of the Ordinance Code of Tulare County, as last amended by Tulare County Ordinance No. 2784 are referred to and incorporated as a city ordinance by this reference, and made a part of this code to the same effect as if fully set forth herein, and all of the provisions thereof shall be applicable within the boundaries of the city, except as herein below otherwise specified. 
(Ord. 431 Exh. A (part), 1988) 
6.04.020 - Enforcement. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 30501 of the Food and Agriculture Code of the state of California, the city council does designate the police department of the city, or any other municipality or nonprofit corporation which is authorized and empowered by law to do so, as the city council may, from time to time, designate upon the execution of appropriate written agreements, to apply and enforce the provisions of Chapter 4 of Part IV of the Ordinance Code of Tulare County, last amended by Tulare County Ordinance No. 2784, except as otherwise provided, herein, within the city. 
(Ord. 537 (part), 2000: Ord. 431 Exh. A (part), 1988) 
6.04.030 - Definitions. 
Whenever any of the following terms are used in the county ordinance, such terms shall have the following meanings: 
"Board of supervisors" means the city council of the city of Woodlake. 
"Director of health services department" means the chief of police of the Woodlake police department. 
(Ord. 431 Exh. A (part), 1988) 
6.04.040 - Deletions from the county ordinance. 
Sections 4450(b), 4450(c) and 4490 of the Ordinance Code of Tulare County are deleted from the incorporation into this chapter of Chapter 4 of Part IV of the Ordinance Code of Tulare County. 
(Ord. 431 Exh. A (part), 1988) 
6.04.050 - Authority of humane officers. 
In accordance with Section 607g of the Civil Code of the state of California, those employees of the police department of the city, or any other municipality or nonprofit corporation which is authorized and empowered by law to engage in animal control activities, who have qualified as humane officers pursuant to Section 607f of the Civil Code of the state of California shall have authority to issue notices to appear in court pursuant to Chapter 5C (commencing with Section 853.5) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Penal Code of the state of California. Such notices appear may be issued for violations of state law, for violations for Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 4400) of Part IV of the Tulare County Ordinance Code and for violations of this chapter. Such humane officer are not authorized to take any person into custody even though the person to whom the notice is delivered does not give his written promise to appear in court. 
The authority of such humane officers is limited to the issuance within the boundaries of the city of such notices to appear. This authorization shall continue in effect only so long as a contract is in effect between the city and said other municipality or nonprofit corporation under which such entity provides services to the city as poundmaster pursuant to Chapter 4 of Part IV of the Ordinance Code of Tulare County. 
(Ord. 537 (part), 2000: Ord. 431 Exh. A (part), 1988) 
6.04.060 - Violations—Penalty. 
A.	Any person violating any of the provisions of Sections 4451, 4452 and 4475 of Chapter 4 of Part IV of the Tulare County Ordinance Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.	Any person violating any of the provisions of Section 4430 of Chapter 4 of Part IV of the Tulare County Ordinance Code shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished upon a first conviction by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) and for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for a third or any subsequent conviction within one year by a fine not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
C.	Any person violating any of the provisions of Section 4450 of Chapter 4 of Part IV of the Tulare Ordinance Code shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished upon a first conviction by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and for a second conviction within a period of one year by fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), and for a third or any subsequent conviction within one year by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
D.	In any case wherein an animal attacks a human being or another animal, then such act shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and violations, and shall be punishable as follows: 
1.	Any person whose animal attacks a human being without causing bodily injury, or attacks another animal, shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished upon a first conviction by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), and for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00), and or a third or any subsequent conviction within one year, by a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
2.	Any person whose animal attacks a human being causing bodily injury shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
E.	Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or of Chapter 4 of Part IV of the Tulare County Ordinance Code, other than as specified hereinabove shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished upon a first conviction by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), and for a second conviction of the same provision within a period of one year by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), and for a third or any subsequent conviction of the same provisions within a period of one year by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. 431 Exh. A (part), 1988) 
Chapter 6.08 - ANIMALS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
6.08.010 - Animals requiring one acre and minimum distance from other dwellings. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep or maintain, or permit to be kept or maintained any of the following animals on lots less than one acre: horses, cows, sheep, goats, hogs, roosters, mules, donkeys; provided further, that no such animals be kept or maintained in this city within one hundred (100) feet of the dwelling house of another. 
(Ord. 298 § 1, 1975) 
6.08.020 - Animals requiring twenty-five feet minimum distance from other dwellings. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep or maintain, or permit to be kept or maintained, in this city any of the following animals within twenty-five (25) feet of the dwelling house of another: chicken, ducks, geese, turkeys, rabbits, pigeons or other fowls; provided further, that not more than twenty-four (24) such animals or other similar fowls on any combination shall be kept or maintained on any occupied lot or premises in this city. 
(Ord. 298 § 2, 1975) 
6.08.030 - Cleanliness of premises. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or maintaining any of the above animals or fowls to fail to keep the premises wherein the same are kept in a clean and sanitary manner, as determined by the enforcement officer or the county health officer, so that no offensive odors shall emit therefrom and the refuse matter shall be picked up every forty-eight (48) hours and kept in flytight containers, and such refuse shall be moved from the premises thereof at least once every thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. 298 § 3, 1975) 
6.08.040 - Running at large. 
It is unlawful to permit or suffer any of the animals or fowls to run at large upon any public property, in this city or to be tethered, kept or maintained upon any vacant lot or premises in this city. 
(Ord. 298 § 4, 1975) 
6.08.050 - Animals upon sidewalks. 
It is unlawful for any person to ride, drive, run or lead, any horse, cow or animal of burden upon any sidewalk or curbing or to permit the same to stand thereupon, except when necessary to cross a sidewalk or curbing in going to or coming form private property. 
(Ord. 298 § 5, 1975) 
6.08.060 - Animals not permitted in city. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain or cause to be kept or maintained, within the city any of the following animals: 
A.	Bees. No person shall keep, within the city, any hive or swarm of honey bees.
B.	Wild Animals. Wild animals are not permitted in city. It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain or cause to be kept or maintained, within the city any wild animal except those enumerated under Section 6.08.070. 
Wild Animal—Definition. "Wild animal" means and includes any animal, reptile, fowl or fish which is not tame or gentle as found in nature but is of a wild nature or disposition, or which is known to be vicious, or which must be kept in confinement to be brought within the immediate power of the owner. 
(Ord. 298 § 6, 1975) 
6.08.070 - Wild animals—Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not prohibit the keeping of any bird life except as otherwise provided by law, any hamster, guinea pig, white rats and/or mice, any turtle, any nonpoisonous toads, lizards, chameleons, kangaroo rats, any fish except piranha and walking catfish. 
(Ord. 298 § 7, 1975) 
6.08.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months in the city jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 298 § 8, 1975) 
Chapter 6.12 - SUPPLEMENTAL DOG CONTROL REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
6.12.010 - Purpose. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted for the purposes of controlling dogs and shall be in addition to those regulations enforced by the county of Tulare in the city of Woodlake. 
(Ord. 429 § 1, 1988) 
6.12.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meaning below described. 
"Leash" means any leash, rope, cord, chain or other physical connection or restraint not in excess of eight feet in length. 
"Private property" means all other property not described in the paragraph below. 
"Public place" means any park, public building, playground, street, road, alleyway or any other place open to the general public. 
(Ord. 429 § 2, 1988) 
6.12.030 - Owner responsibility. 
It is unlawful for any person, intentionally or otherwise, to permit any dog owned by, boarded, harbored or in his custody or control to go upon, run at large upon, or stray upon any public place within the city unless the dog is securely and continuously under the control of some reasonable person capable of controlling the dog by a leash or unless the dog is confined within a vehicle. 
(Ord. 429 § 3, 1988) 
6.12.040 - Private property control. 
It is unlawful for any person, intentionally or otherwise, to permit any dog owned by, boarded, harbored or in his custody or control to go upon, run at large upon or stray upon private property within the city without the permission of the person owning, occupying or controlling the private property. 
(Ord. 429 § 4, 1988) 
6.12.050 - Noise. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep upon any property within the city under his ownership. occupation or control, other than in a lawful animal hospital, kennel or pet store any dog or other animal, which by barking, whining or other noise, disturbs the peace, comfort or quiet of any other person within the city. 
(Ord. 429 § 5, 1988) 
6.12.060 - Complaints. 
Any individual making a complaint shall furnish their name, address, telephone number, indicate a willingness to sign a complaint and provide such testimony in the appropriate court as may be required. 
(Ord. 429 § 6, 1988) 
6.12.070 - Seeing eye dogs. 
There is excepted from this chapter any dog trained and utilized as a guide dog for the aid and assistance of the blind. 
(Ord. 429 § 7, 1988) 
6.12.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person in violation of any provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the following fine: 
A.	One hundred dollars ($100.00) upon the first conviction;
B.	Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) upon the second conviction; and
C.	Five hundred dollars ($500.00) upon the third or each subsequent conviction.
(Ord. 531 § 1, 1999: Ord. 429 § 8, 1988) 
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
  
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.04 - HEALTH ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
8.04.010 - County health officer. 
Consent is given that the county health officer of the county of Tulare shall enforce and observe in the city of Woodlake, all orders, quarantine regulations and rules prescribed by the State Department of Public Health, all statutes of the state of California and all ordinances of the county of Tulare, relating to the public health, all of which orders, regulations, rules, statutes and ordinances are declared to be effective within the city of Woodlake. 
(Ord. 63 § 1, 1947) 
Chapter 8.08 - ABANDONED GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS 
Sections: 
 
8.08.010 - Findings. 
A.	The city council finds and determines that there exist closed, vacant and inoperative automobile service stations, constituting non-user, as the word "non-user" is defined in this chapter, and that there is now a need for further control over the lack of utilization, condition and appearance of such facilities. 
B.	It is further found and determined as follows:
1.	The ordinances of the city, in pursuance of protection of the health and safety of the community, require that after underground storage tanks used for flammable or combustible liquids are taken out of service for a period of one year, such tanks shall be properly disposed of by removal or by being permanently filled. When the required action is completed the service station is rendered unusable. 
2.	Closed, vacant and inoperative automobile service stations constituting non-user cannot be reasonably expected to be utilized for the purposes originally established, inasmuch as the cost of restoring permanently filled underground fuel storage tanks or replacing fuel storage tanks underground for ones which have been removed as excessive. 
3.	Automobile service stations cannot be readily adapted for use as other commercial facilities without excessive cost due to their unique location on the property with respect to property lines, their unique architectural design, and their unique functional layout on the property. 
4.	Because of cost and design considerations, closed, vacant and inoperative automobile service stations constituting non-user cannot be reasonably expected to be utilized for the purposes originally established or adapted for other permitted uses, or moved for use elsewhere, and the existence of such conditions contravene the purposes of the zoning ordinances and the general plan of the city in that planning for a compatible blend of land uses will be disrupted because the lands affected cannot be reasonably put to other uses until the existing conditions are abated by restoration or removal of the buildings, and also in that planning for other uses will be prevented unless such abatement is accomplished. 
5.	The existence of closed, vacant and inoperative automobile service station sites constituting non-user is injurious and inimical to the public health, safety, comfort and welfare of the community in that such conditions invite unsightliness, blight, fire hazards, infestation, decreasing values to surrounding properties and vandalism, and the existence of conditions which invite such ills constitute such abuses of property as to entitle this city to exercise its police powers in order to protect the health, safety, comfort and welfare of the community and of its residents. 
6.	The provisions of this chapter are categorically exempt under this city's adopted environmental guidelines and procedures. 
C.	It is further found and determined that this city has the responsibility for strict enforcement of zoning and building regulations and that in the interest of safeguarding the public health, safety, comfort and welfare of the community, abatement is now required of closed, vacant and inoperative automobile service stations which constitute non-user. 
D.	It is further found and determined that the exercise of the city's police powers for the abatement of such conditions is reasonably encompassed within the authorizations granted by Section 731 of the California Code of Civil Procedure; by Sections 65800, et seq., Section 38600 and Sections 38771, 38773 and 38773.5 of the California Government Code; by Article 11, Section 6 and Article 11, Section 7 of the California Constitution; and that the existence of the conditions heretofore described are also encompassed within the meaning of a nuisance as stated in Section 3479 and Section 3480 of the California Civil Code. 
E.	It is further found and determined that unless corrective measures are undertaken to alleviate such present conditions, and particularly, to avoid future problems in this regard, a serious threat to the public health, safety, comfort and welfare of the residents and a serious threat to the values of surrounding properties in this city will continue to exist; that the need of the city of death with conditions under the procedures herein established outweighs the utility of the conditions as they exist; and that the procedures established hereby for the abatement, demolition and removal and/or enjoinment of the conditions declared by this chapter to constitute public nuisances are declared to be necessary and reasonable, and that they afford a maximum of due process. 
(Ord. 302 §§ 1—5, 1976) 
8.08.020 - Purpose. 
The regulations contained in this chapter are intended to provide for the orderly abatement and disposition of closed, vacant and inoperative automobile service stations constituting non-user, and which are determined by the application of the provisions contained herein, to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 302 § 6.01, 1976) 
8.08.030 - Declared public nuisance. 
Any closed, vacant and inoperative automobile service station constituting non-user as defined in this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 302 § 6.02, 1976) 
8.08.040 - Authorization for abatement. 
Upon discovery of facts that there exist conditions constituting a public nuisance as defined herein, the duly constituted authorities of the city are authorized to immediately commence the proceedings authorized by this chapter to cause the abatement, removal and/or enjoinment of such public nuisance in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Ord. 302 § 6.03, 1976) 
8.08.050 - Notification to future applicants. 
All permits relating to the use, occupancy, construction or repair on or in any real property of any automobile service station and any permits relating to any activities to be pursued thereon or therein, and all zone variances to be granted after March 15, 1976, for the real property in which an automobile service station is located shall contain in bold-face type the following statement 
THIS ____________ IS GRANTED SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE NO. ____________ OF THE CITY OF WOODLAKE, CALIFORNIA. A VIOLATION OF THESE PROVISIONS MAY RESULT IN ENFORCEMENT BY PROCEEDINGS FOR BRINGING ABOUT REMOVAL OF ALL BUILDINGS, INCLUDING ALL UNDERGROUND EQUIPMENT AND FOUNDATIONS. SUCH A VIOLATION MAY ALSO RESULT IN ENFORCEMENT BY PROSECUTION FOR MISDEMEANOR. NOTHING CONTAINED IN ORDINANCE NO. ____________ SHALL PREVENT APPLICATION OF OTHER PROVISIONS OF THE ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF WOODLAKE. 
The superintendent of public works and the planning commission shall cause the above-quoted language to be incorporated into permits which fall within their jurisdiction to grant in connection with automobile service station uses. 
(Ord. 302 § 6.04, 1976) 
8.08.060 - Definitions. 
Abatement. Abatement may be accomplished in either of the following ways: 
1.	Re-occupation by the owners, or any tenant, lessee or other party entitled to possession and re-institution of the previously permitted automobile service station uses, after having obtained an inspection and all permits required by this chapter including, but not limited to, building permits. 
2.	Demolition and removal of all buildings on and in the premises and filling of all excavations, after having obtained the applicable permits required for such work, including but not limited to building permits and grading permits. 
Prior to any re-occupation or re-use of any buildings on or in the premises, the party intending to occupy the buildings must first apply to the department of public works for inspection. The inspection shall be conducted for the purpose of determining the suitability of the buildings for occupancy from the standpoint of health and safety. The inspection shall be conducted according to such of the standards expressed in the adopted Uniform Building Code of the city relating to requirements for occupancy as were applicable to the buildings as they existed prior to the state of non-use. Applicants must remit applicable fees for such inspection. 
Any re-occupation, re-use, of any buildings on or in the premises must also comply with all applicable zoning regulations of the city. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, any determination made by any city officials, agent or employee under this chapter may be appealed to the city council. 
"Automobile service station" means any site where the buildings are designed and built for dispensing and selling fuels or internal combustion engines of any automotive vehicles. 
"Building" means any physical improvement or structural finished or unfinished, on or in real property, which is designed, built or adapted for use as or in connection with an automotive vehicle service station, regardless of its size, shape, height, location, age or state of repair. Included in this definition are all main buildings, pumps, pump islands, all underground storage tanks, pumps, mechanical equipment, wells, cesspools, septic tanks, foundations, all paving and any other materials originally placed in connection therewith on or at any depth beneath the surface of the real property. 
Discontinuance of Nonconforming Use. Pursuant to this chapter after a voluntary discontinuance of an automobile service station as a nonconforming use, the city council may find that such discontinuance constitutes non-user and a public nuisance. 
"Duly constituted authorities" means the officers, agents or employees of the city to whom the authority is delegated by this chapter to carry out its provision. 
Non-user—Conditions. When all of the subsurface tanks which are used for storage of flammable substances at any automobile service station site have been permanently filled or removed, the city council may, upon making a finding that the site can no longer be reasonably used for an automobile service station, declare the site and all buildings thereon and therein to be closed, vacant and inoperative and the conditions constitute non-user. 
(Ord. 508 § 1 (part), 1995; Ord. 302 § 6.05, 1976) 
8.08.070 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons or entities who claim or hold an interest in the building or in the real property, except as may be prohibited by law. 
(Ord. 302 § 6.06, 1976) 
8.08.080 - Procedures for enforcement. 
Upon discovery of conditions constituting a public nuisance as defined in this chapter, the duly constituted authorities of the city as hereinafter designated are delegated the authority to initiate the proceedings authorized by this chapter to cause the abatement, removal and/or enjoinment of such public nuisance. The superintendent of public works shall cause notification to be personally served or sent by certified mail to all persons, firms, corporations and other entities which the records of the recorder of the county of Tulare disclose claim an interest in the real property. The notification shall be in the following form: 
NOTICE OF VIOLATION 
DECLARATION OF VIOLATION OF ORDINANCE NO. ____________ OF THE CITY OF WOODLAKE, RELATING TO THE STATE OF NON-USE OF CLOSED, VACANT OR INOPERATIVE SERVICE STATIONS. 
_____
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that as of the ____________ day of ____________ , 19____________ , the Superintendent of Public Works of the City of Woodlake, California, has found and determined that conditions exist on the real property described as Tulare County Assessor's Parcel No. ____________ , commonly known as ____________ , Woodlake, California, which constitute a public nuisance and a violation of the provisions of Ordinance No. ____________ , of the City of Woodlake, in that the _____
_____
on said real property is in a state of non-use; 
 That notwithstanding any other provisions of the Ordinances of the City of Woodlake, failure to abate the nuisance by re-occupation and re-institution of use of the premises or by demolition or by demolition and removal of all structures, according to the provisions of this Ordinance within sixty (60) days from the date of delivery of this Notice, enforcement proceedings for the abatement, removal and/or enjoinment of said public nuisance shall be commenced pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
 That if any demolition, dismantling, moving, removal, additions to, or restoration or repair of any buildings, or re-occupancy of the premises is to be accomplished, or if any excavation of earth is to be performed by persons or entities affected by this Notice, other than City officials, agents or employees, appropriate permits will be required to be obtained prior to the commencement of any such work. 
 Notice of any further proceedings to be pursued by the City to abate the aforesaid conditions shall be given in the manner prescribed in this Ordinance. 
DATED:  ____________.
_____
Superintendent of Public Works
City of Woodlake, California.
350 North Valencia Boulevard
Woodlake, California 93286 
(Ord. 302 § 6.07, 1976) 
8.08.090 - Effect of voluntary abatement. 
If the public nuisance is abated by the party or parties to whom the city looks for compliance within the sixty (60) day period allowed in the notice of violation, the superintendent of public works shall cease further abatement proceedings. 
A.	Before re-occupancy or re-use will be permitted, the party or parties seeking to re-occupy or reuse the buildings must first request an inspection and adhere to the procedures prescribed in this chapter. 
B.	If the building is found by the inspector to be in satisfactory condition, or any deficiencies discovered are corrected, and any required zone clearance has been issued or compliance with zoning regulations, the superintendent of public works shall then either issue a certificate of occupancy, if required, and/or notify the party or parties in writing by personal service or by certified mail that re-occupancy may be permitted for re-institution of the automobile service station uses. 
(Ord. 302 § 6.08, 1976) 
8.08.100 - Further proceedings. 
Further abatement proceedings shall be pursued as provided herein, when the notice of violation as provided in Section 8.08.080 has been served and abatement of the public nuisance has not been accomplished within the sixty (60) day period as prescribed herein. However, if abatement of the public nuisance has been commenced within the sixty (60) day period, the superintendent of public works is delegated the authority to grant a single extension of time for thirty (30) days for good cause shown, such as delays beyond the control of the affected party or parties. 
(Ord. 302 § 6.09, 1976) 
8.08.110 - Failure to abate—Notification. 
A.	In the event the party or parties to whom the city looks for abatement fail to abate the public nuisance within the time allowed in Section 8.08.100, the superintendent of public works shall cause notification to be personally served or sent by certified mail to the person, firm, corporation and other entities which the records of the recorder of the county of Tulare disclose claim an interest in the real property. The notification shall be in the following form: 
N  O  T  I  C  E 
HEARING ON ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC
NUISANCE 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on the ____________ day of ____________, 19____________, at the hour of ____________, of said day, the City Council of the City of Woodlake, California, will hold a public hearing in the Council Chambers of the Woodlake City Hall, located at 350 North Valencia Boulevard, Woodlake, California, to ascertain whether closed, vacant or inoperative facilities on certain premises in the City of Woodlake described as Tulare County Assessor's Parcel No. ____________, commonly known as ____________, Woodlake, California, constitute non-use and a public nuisance as defined in Ordinance No. of the City of Woodlake and require abatement as prescribed in said ordinance. 
 The conditions which shall be the subject of the public hearing are as follows: 
_____
_____
 That if the state of non-use is found to constitute a public nuisance as defined in said ordinance, and the public nuisance has not been abated by the parties responsible therefor, such public nuisance may be ordered by the City Council to be abated by the persons claiming an interest in the real property, or may be ordered to be abated by the duly constituted authorities of this City and the cost thereof charged to the parties responsible or placed as a lien against the real property; 
 That all persons having any objection to or interest in said matters are hereby notified to attend the meeting stated in this Notice, when their testimony and evidence will be heard and given due consideration; that all proceedings hereunder are categorically exempt under this City's adopted Environmental Guidelines and Procedures. 
DATED:  ____________.
_____
Superintendent of Public Works
City of Woodlake, California
350 North Valencia Boulevard
Woodlake, California 93286 
B.	The superintendent of public works shall also cause a copy of the notice of hearing to be posted conspicuously on each of the premises and buildings affected. 
C.	The superintendent of public works shall cause a copy of the notice of hearing to be served personally or by certified mail and to be posted at least fifteen (15) days before the time fixed for the hearing. Proof of service and posting of such notice shall be made by written declaration under penalty of perjury and be filed with the city council. 
D.	Notice of the hearing shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with Section 65854 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 302 §§ 6.10—6.13, 1976) 
8.08.120 - Hearing procedures. 
The city council may prescribe rules governing the procedure of hearings conducted by it. A quorum for a hearing shall consist of at least three members. Any act or decision requires the concurrence of a majority of members of the city council. 
A.	At the hearing, after the city, through the superintendent of public works, and other officials as the city council shall require, shall have stated its case and presented its evidence, any interested person, firm, corporation or other entity may state their evidence, objections, protests and give testimony relative to the alleged public nuisance or to the proposed abatement. 
B.	After all such testimony, if the city council finds and determines that the alleged state of non-use on the real property exists and that it constitutes a public nuisance as defined in this chapter, and that the public nuisance requires abatement by means of re-institution of previously permitted automobile service station uses within a stated period of time, including rehabilitation and repair, or order demolition and removal of all closed, vacant and inoperative buildings and by filling of all excavations as prescribed in this chapter within a stated period of time. Demolition or removal may include removal of all subsurface items. The city council's order may also include the revocation of any permits or variances previously granted, notwithstanding any other provisions of the ordinances of the city. 
C.	The city council's order may also provide that if abatement is not commenced within the period of time the city council has found and determined to be reasonable under the circumstances (but in no event less than thirty (30) days from the date of the order) that further city-initiated proceedings shall be implemented according to law, including demolition and removal by the city or through contract. The order may also include as an alternative an instruction to the city attorney that if abatement is not commenced and accomplished as prescribed, to institute appropriate court proceedings for the demolition, removal and/or enjoinment of the public nuisance. 
D.	Any costs incurred by the city in bringing about the required demolition, and removal of buildings and filling of excavations may be ordered by the city council to be charged to the persons claiming by virtue of the records of the recorder of the county of Tulare to be the owners of the real property, or to be charged as a lien against the real property itself. The procedure to be followed in determining the costs shall be those set forth in Chapters 8 and 9 of the Uniform Building Code for Repair, Vacation or Demolition of Dangerous Buildings, 1991 Edition, heretofore adopted by the city. 
E.	The procedures provided in this chapter shall be in addition to any other remedies otherwise provided by law. 
F.	Limitation of Action. Any party aggrieved with the proceedings, decision or action taken by the city council under this chapter in ordering the abatement of a public nuisance or other order, must bring an action to contest such proceeding, decision, action or order within thirty (30) days after the date of the decision, action or order of the city council. 
G.	Service of Resolution. Any action taken or order made by the city council under this chapter shall be by resolution. A copy of the resolution shall be served personally or by certified mail to all parties who were entitled to notice under Section 8.08.110 (A) not later than fourteen (14) calendar days following the decision of the city council. 
(Ord. 508 § 1 (part), 1995; Ord. 302 § 6.14, 1976) 
Chapter 8.12 - FIREWORKS 
Sections: 
 
8.12.010 - Permits—Issuance limitations. 
The police chief of the city may, upon due application, issue to properly qualified persons and organizations a permit for the retail sale of safe and sane fireworks. Applicants must be nonprofit associations or corporations organized primarily for veteran, patriotic, welfare, religious, youth or eleemosynary purposes. Each such organization must have its principal and permanent meeting place within the boundaries of the city. 
A.	The city council finds and determines that for public health, welfare and safety purposes, the total number of permits to be issued shall be limited to two. 
B.	There shall be no more than one retail stand for each permittee.
(Ord. 384 § 2, 1983) 
8.12.020 - Permit applications—Filing and fees. 
All applications for permits to sell at retail safe and sane fireworks shall comply with and be governed by the provisions set forth in Title 19, California Administrative Code, Sub-Chapter 6, Article 5, and in addition shall be governed by the following: 
A.	Applications shall be filed with the chief of police between February 15th and March 1st of each year on forms provided by the city. Only completed applications filed on or before March 1st will be eligible for consideration for a permit. 
B.	Each applicant shall agree to provide adequate liability insurance, and evidence of this must accompany the application and be filed with the city on or prior to March 1st. 
C.	A yearly fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) must be deposited with the city with each application. Fifty dollars ($50.00) of the fee shall be applied to the costs of the business license and enforcing this chapter. Upon approval of the permit the balance of the fee will become a clean-up surety, to be retained by the city until such time as the temporary sales stand is removed and the immediate area cleaned up within forty-eight (48) hours of close of business, to the satisfaction of the chief of police, at which time one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the fee will be returned to the permit holder. The entire one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) fee shall be refunded to unsuccessful applicants. 
D.	No later than March 6th of each year, the chief of police shall conduct a drawing to determine by lot which two of the eligible applicants will be issued permits. 
(Ord. 384 § 2, 1983) 
8.12.030 - Location of site. 
Each application shall contain a description of the site desired. Permission of the owner must be obtained by applicant. 
A.	No stand shall be within one hundred (100) feet of any gasoline service station, fuel storage area or placed closer than ten feet to a public way unless permission to the contrary is first obtained. 
B.	Both Valencia and Naranjo are state highways and in addition to the city permit will require a permit from the state. 
(Ord. 384 § 4, 1983) 
8.12.040 - Fireworks stands. 
Fireworks stands need not comply with provisions of the building code of the city; provided, however, that all stands shall be erected under the supervision of the local building inspector who shall require that stands be constructed in a manner which will reasonably insure the safety of attendants and patrons. 
A.	All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and the sale from any other building or structures is prohibited. 
B.	Each stand shall have two exit doors.
C.	The front of all fireworks stands shall be completely enclosed from the counter to the roof with hardware wire cloth, the opening of which shall not exceed one-fourth inch in size, except for the openings to permit delivery of merchandise to prospective customers, which openings shall not be larger than twelve (12) inches by eighteen (18) inches. 
D.	All electrical wiring, including that from the power source, shall be installed to the satisfaction of the building inspector. Electrical connections shall be at least twelve (12) feet above ground when subject to foot traffic and sixteen (16) feet when subject to automobile traffic. 
(Ord. 384 § 5, 1983) 
8.12.050 - Operation of stand. 
No person other than a member of the licensee organization will be permitted to sell or otherwise participate in the operation of a stand. 
A.	No permit issued or authorized shall be transferable.
B.	Each stand must have an adult (eighteen (18) or over) in attendance and in charge thereof when the stand is being used for the sale or dispensing or storage of fireworks. 
C.	All persons engaged in the selling of fireworks shall be over the age of sixteen (16) years. 
D.	Hours of operation shall be limited from nine a.m. to eleven p.m. daily, commencing with operations on July 1st through July 4th inclusive. 
E.	Fireworks may be sold at the stand only.
(Ord. 384 § 6, 1983) 
8.12.060 - Fire safety. 
Each stand shall be provided with two fire extinguishers approved for such use by the fire department in good working order and easily accessible for use in case of fire. 
A.	No smoking shall be allowed in any stand.
B.	"No smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed in a number prescribed by the city.
C.	All weeds and combustible material shall be cleared from the location of the stand, including a distance of at least twenty (20) feet surrounding the stand. 
D.	No persons shall light or cause to be lighted any firecracker, fireworks or other combustible article within any stand or within two hundred (200) feet thereof. 
E.	If, in the judgment of the police chief or building inspector, the construction of the stands or the conduct of the operations therein do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, such officers, or either of them, may order the stand immediately closed. 
(Ord. 384 § 7, 1983) 
8.12.070 - Public display of fireworks. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any discharge or display of fireworks at any public gathering, provided that a permit to do so has first been obtained from the city council. 
No such permits shall be granted by the city council for any such public display unless for a location where the falling of any lighted fireworks or objects would not endanger building structures, vehicles, forest, brush or grass-covered land, or unless the discharge of fireworks is under the direct supervision of a capable experienced person, or provision is made for fire extinguishment appliances satisfactory to the city council. All persons or organizations obtaining a permit for a public pyrotechnic display shall comply with and be governed by the provisions set forth in Title 19, California Administrative Code, Sub-Chapter 6, Article 6. 
(Ord. 384 § 8, 1983) 
8.12.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 384 § 9, 1983) 
Chapter 8.16 - GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
Sections: 
 
8.16.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter: 
"Garbage" means animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or serving of food. 
"Refuse" means all types of solid waste, including crockery, bottles, tin cans, cardboard boxes, rags, paper, straw, ashes and other waste matter ordinarily collecting on any occupied premises, except automobile and truck bodies, tires, frames and tops, and waste materials from building construction and repair all of which excepted materials must be properly removed by the owner or occupant of the premises where accumulated, or by his agent. 
(Ord. 532 § 1 (part), 1999) 
8.16.020 - Refuse and garbage to be enclosed in receptacles. 
No person shall deposit, keep or accumulate, cause or permit or suffer to be deposited, kept or accumulated any refuse or garbage in or upon any lot or parcel of land or any public or private premises in the city, unless such refuse or garbage is enclosed in receptacles conforming to the specifications provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 532 § 1 (part), 1999) 
8.16.030 - Refuse and garbage in public places—Burning and burying. 
No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city, any garbage or refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, or other public place or into any occupied premises within the city. No person shall burn or bury any garbage in the city limits of the city, and other burnings shall be conducted as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. 532 § 1 (part), 1999) 
8.16.040 - Removal of excess building materials and refuse—Contractor responsibility. 
Every contractor or person engaged in the erection, demolition or repair of a building shall be responsible for removal of excess building materials and other refuse produced by the employees or workmen working on the project. 
(Ord. 532 § 1 (part), 1999) 
8.16.050 - Containers for disposal. 
A.	Unless otherwise provided by the city each occupied premises shall utilize the containers provided by the disposal service. Refuse not in the furnished container will not be accepted for disposal (except for specific times established by the city when the disposal service will pick-up tree trimmings and other yard wastes that are not in the provided containers). 
B.	Containers (excluding bins) shall be placed adjacent to the curb or alley by six a.m. on the scheduled collection day. The container shall be removed from the curbside no later than six-thirty p.m. of the same collection day and placed in such a location so as not to be visible from the public right-of-way. 
C.	The containers provided shall be kept in sanitary condition by their users.
(Ord. 532 § 1 (part), 1999) 
8.16.051 - Mandatory commercial recycling. 
A business that generates more than four cubic yards of commercial solid waste per week or is a multifamily residential dwelling of five units or more shall arrange for recycling services. 
A commercial waste generator shall source separate recyclable materials from solid waste and choose from one or more of the following options: subscribe to a basic level of recycling service that includes collection, self-haul, or arrange for the pickup of the recyclable materials and/or subscribe to a recycling service that includes mixed waste processing that yields diversion results comparable to source separation. 
A property owner of a commercial business or multifamily residential dwelling may require tenants to source separate their recyclable materials to aid in compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 582, 3-12-2012)  
8.16.060 - Separation of refuse and recyclables. 
A.	It is unlawful for any person to place or allow to be placed in any garbage or refuse containers designated for municipal pickup any dead animal, fowl, etc. wearing apparel or bedding or other refuse from a place where infectious or contagious disease has prevailed, explosive substances, radioactive materials, drugs or poisons, used oil, automotive batteries, paint, insecticide or herbicide containers or other unsafe dangerous, unsanitary or offensive materials. Refuse and garbage shall be placed in containers as free as possible of liquids which shall be drained off before placement of wet refuse and garbage into containers. 
B.	It is unlawful for a residential customer to put out refuse for collection and fail to have sorted each of the following listed components from each of the other listed components: green waste, garbage and recyclables. 
C.	It is unlawful for any person to take or pilfer, for his own use or benefit, the recyclables of any other person after the recyclables have been put out for collection without the written consent of the owner thereof. The customer owns all garbage, green waste and recyclables until possession thereof is taken by the hauler, at which time the ownership thereof shall shift to the hauler. 
D.	Failure to properly separate the refuse into the proper container will result in additional charges, the amount to be fixed by resolution of the city council, except as provided in subsection E of this section. 
E.	During certain times of the year as specified by the city, tree prunings and brush will be picked up separately from the furnished containers if tied in bundles not over eighteen (18) inches in diameter and forty-eight (48) inches long. 
(Ord. 553 § 1, 2004: Ord. 532 § 1 (part), 1999) 
8.16.070 - Collection charges. 
A.	A charge established by the city council shall be collected from all occupied premises within the corporate limits of the city for the collection, removal and disposal of garbage and waste matter resulting from the normal use of occupied premises, and for the inspection of premises by the superintendent of public works. Said charge shall not be construed as preventing the city from imposing reasonable extra charges for special inspection work or for the removal of excessive amounts of garbage and waste materials. In cases of dispute the city council shall determine and order the number of times garbage and waste matter shall be removed from occupied premises. Said charges shall be paid at the same time and in the same manner as water service charge are paid and all rules and regulations governing the collection of water bills shall apply in every particular in the collection of garbage and waste matter bills. 
B.	The superintendent of public works is the official responsible for classifying service users as to a charge, determining the location and number of bulk containers required for commercial users; inspecting the premises and making what reasonable additional rules and schedules as required to carry out the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. 532 § 1 (part), 1999) 
8.16.080 - Solid waste and refuse fees. 
The city council held a public meeting on September 10, 2001 and public hearing on November 12, 2001 on a proposed rate request, accepted testimony and after considering all the evidence presented and in compliance with Article XIII-D of the Constitution of the state of California. The rates imposed for garbage collection are as follows: 
A.	Each single-family residence, apartments, mobilehome, businesses or multiple dwelling on the same property one pickup per week of refuse, recyclables and green waste. 
Residential Rates 
(1) Green waste can	
(1) Refuse can	
(1) Recyclable can	$17.50 per month
(1) Extra green waste can	$10.00 per month
(1) Extra refuse can	$10.00 per month
Senior lifeline program	$ 9.75 per month
 
Holiday schedule - containers will be emptied the next working day. 
Containers will be furnished and maintained by the disposal service contractor unless it is damaged or destroyed willfully by the user. 
Commercial and Industrial Bin Rates 
	1 cubic yard bin per month 	2 cubic yard bin per month 	3 cubic yard bin per month 
One pickup/week	$36.03	$ 53.67	$ 75.44
Two pickup/week	n/a	91.79	129.10
Three pickup/week	n/a	129.89	182.76
Four pickup/week	n/a	168.15	236.43
Five pickup/week	n/a	206.13	289.41
 
B.	For the amounts of refuse in excess of those normally collected or too large or bulky to be handled in regular container or requiring times other than on regular pickup schedules or cleanup of construction sites a charge for labor and equipment will be made. Amount of charge and method of payment will be determined by the disposal service contractor on an individual job basis. 
C.	Effective January 1, 2004, the residential base rate will increase by a cost of living adjustment calculated by the most recent twelve (12) months of the Consumer Price Index data available for the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, all urban consumers — San Francisco, Oakland, and San Jose, California. This amount will be rounded off to the nearest twenty-five cents ($0.25). 
D.	Effective January 1, 2004, the commercial and industrial bin rates will increase by a cost of living adjustment calculated by the most recent twelve (12) months of the Consumer Price Index data available for the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, all urban consumers — San Francisco, Oakland, and San Jose, California. 
This chapter shall be published once in the Kaweah Commonwealth, a newspaper of general circulation of the city of Woodlake, and shall be in full force and effect thirty (30) days after such adoption. 
(Ord. 544 § 1, 2001: Ord. 532 § 1 (part), 1999) 
8.16.090 - Subscription to collection service required. 
The occupant, tenant, or lessee of any house, dwelling, flat, apartment building, hotel, restaurant or other place of business or residence within the city and any contractor or person engaged in the erection, demolition or repair of a building where excess building materials, garbage and/or rubbish is produced or accumulated shall subscribe to the refuse/recycling and the green waste collection service provided through the city and use the containers provided by the disposal company providing refuse service for Woodlake. However, the owner or person in possession of real property, either as owner, lessee, tenant or occupant may, in addition thereto, remove all garbage, waste matter and rubbish naturally accumulating thereon. 
(Ord. 532 § 1 (part), 1999) 
8.16.100 - Senior lifeline program. 
The senior lifeline program is intended to provide discounted refuse services for seniors that meet certain income and household limits. In order to qualify, the principal resident of the household whose income pays the bills, must be sixty (60) years or older. In the case of couples, either person may qualify as the principal resident. The combined household income must be below fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). The city maintains the right to verify income by reviewing items such as tax returns, pay stubs or copies of government records. Annual renewal of income verification is required. Lifeline services may be denied if proof of income is not made available by the customer. 
(Ord. 532 § 1 (part), 1999) 
8.16.110 - Violation—Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 532 § 1 (part), 1999) 
8.16.120 - Disposal of home-generated sharps. 
A.	Purpose. The city finds and declares all of the following purposes for this chapter.
1.	To achieve the mandates imposed by the Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (AB 939) on a regional basis; 
2.	To enact a comprehensive and innovative system for the proper and legal management of home-generated sharps waste, as defined in subsection B.6 of this chapter, in the city in accordance with Section 118286 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
3.	To enact a law that establishes a program that is convenient for consumers and the public to return and ensure the safe and environmentally sound disposal of home-generated sharps waste, and to provide a "no-cost" system for consumers for the return of home-generated sharps waste; 
4.	To assure that the costs associated with the handling and disposal of home-generated sharps waste are the responsibility of the producers and retailers of home-generated sharps waste, and not local governments or their service providers, state or local government, or taxpayers; 
5.	To reduce the likelihood of the illegal disposal of home-generated sharps waste;
6.	To ensure that all costs associated with the proper management of home-generated sharps waste are internalized by the producers and retailers of home-generated sharps waste at or before the point of purchase, and not at the point of discard; 
7.	To assure that manufacturers and retailers of sharps, while working to achieve the goals and objectives of this section, shall have the flexibility to partner with each other, with governmental programs, and with private and nonprofit business enterprises that provide collection and processing services, to develop and promote a safe and effective home-generated sharps waste management system; and 
8.	To provide for the safe and convenient collection and disposal of one hundred (100) percent of the home-generated sharps waste discarded in the city at no cost to the consumer and to comply with the requirements pursuant to State Health and Safety Code prohibiting the disposal of home-generated sharps waste in trash, recycling, yard waste, or landfills as of July 1, 2014. 
B.	Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this chapter.
1.	"Consumer" means an individual who has purchased sharps for personal use for humans or animals. 
2.	"Home-generated" means all sharps as defined in subsection 6. below derived from a household, including a multifamily residence, or a single-family residence. 
3.	"Woodlake area" means the geographic area that includes the boundaries of the city of Woodlake, California. 
4.	"Retailer" means any entity, including but not limited to, a person or business, of whatever form of organization, which sells to the general public sharps in the Woodlake area to a consumer, including a manufacturer of sharps who sells sharps directly to a consumer. 
5.	"Distributor" means a person who sells sharps to a retailer.
6.	"Sharps" means hypodermic needles, pen needles, intravenous needles, lancets, and other devices that are used to penetrate the skin for the delivery of medications to humans or animals. 
7.	"Receptacle" means a rigid puncture-resistant container with a sealable lid approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the purpose of transporting sharps for disposal. 
8.	"Proper disposal" of home-generated sharps waste means disposal in compliance with the applicable provisions of the California Health and Safety Code by means of an approved/certified medical waste disposal company. 
C.	Sharps Management.
1.	By July 1, 2014, every retailer of sharps sold in the city shall establish within the retail outlet a system for the acceptance and collection of home-generated sharps waste for proper disposal. 
2.	Each system established by a retailer for the acceptance and collection of home-generated sharps waste during the retailer's normal hours of operation, for proper disposal shall, at a minimum, include all of the following elements: 
a.	A convenient location within the retail establishment for the "take-back" from the consumer of home-generated sharps waste at no cost to that consumer. 
b.	Appropriate signage, prominently displayed within five feet of any entrance to the retail establishment and easily visible to the consumer, indicating that the retail establishment accepts and collects home-generated sharps waste from consumers. 
c.	An appropriate receptacle or receptacles for the collection of home-generated sharps waste within the retail establishment. The retailer shall assure that all home-generated sharps waste is placed in the receptacle(s). 
d.	Assurance that the collected home-generated sharps wastes are disposed within the time period established by applicable state law, as determined, from time to time by the county environmental health service department, acting as the local enforcement agency. 
e.	Comply with all applicable provisions of the California Medical Waste Management Act, Health and Safety Code Sections 117600 et seq. 
3.	A retailer who is required to accept home-generated sharps waste shall at a minimum provide the following take back services: 
a.	The take-back from the consumer of home-generated sharps waste that the retailer sold or previously sold to the consumer, at no cost to that consumer. In that event, the retailer may require proof of purchase of the prior sales. The retailer shall only be required to accept home-generated sharps waste in an amount not to exceed the amount previously sold to the consumer. 
b.	The take-back of home-generated sharps waste from a consumer purchasing sharps from the retailer, at no cost to the consumer. In that event, the retailer shall only be required to accept home-generated sharps waste in an amount not to exceed the amount being purchased. 
c.	The take-back from the consumer of home-generated sharps waste that the retailer did not sell or previously sell to the consumer, at no cost to that consumer. The retailer shall only be required to accept home-generated sharps waste in an amount not to exceed the equivalent of one 2 quart-size sharps container per week per consumer from any consumer who resides in the Woodlake area. 
D.	Enforcement.
1.	The city may enforce the provisions of this section through a civil action for civil penalties in the amounts established herein, and any other civil remedy, including prohibitory and mandatory injunctive relief, filed in the Superior Court for the county of Tulare to compel and enforce the provisions herein against any retailer within the city who sells sharps in violation of this section. In addition to any relief available to enforce this section, the city shall also be entitled to recover its reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred in enforcing this section. 
2.	For any violation of this section, the city may sue to recover civil penalties in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for every day on which a violation exists. For purposes of calculating the civil penalties to be established hereunder, each day on which the retailer fails to comply with the requirements of this section, after having received a written notice of violation issued by the city, shall constitute a separate offense. 
3.	In addition to the civil relief available to the city set forth above, any violation of this section shall also constitute a criminal offense punishable under the laws of the state of California. The district attorney, the county counsel, or any city attorney shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this section within their respective jurisdictions and shall have the authority to determine whether to prosecute the matter as a misdemeanor, or to elect for good cause to reduce the charge to an infraction. In the event of such criminal enforcement, the following criminal penalties apply to violations of this section: 
a.	Penalty for an Infraction. Any retailer found to be in violation of any provision of this section, or who fails to comply with any of its requirements, shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of first violation seventy-five dollars ($75.00), second violation one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), third and subsequent violations three hundred dollars ($300.00). Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
4.	In addition to the enforcement provided in this subsection, this section shall be enforceable under the administrative code enforcement provisions of this Code, including but not limited to Chapter 1.12. If enforced pursuant to the administrative code enforcement provisions of this Code, the penalties established by Subparagraph 3. of this section is hereby established as an alternative administrative penalty which shall be assessed pursuant to Section 1.12.020 or violations of the provisions of this Chapter 8.16. 
(Ord. No. 589, § 1, 6-23-2014)  
Chapter 8.17 - RECYCLING AND DIVERSION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS 
Sections: 
 
8.17.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to increase the recycling and reuse of construction and demolition debris, consistent with the goals of the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989. 
(Ord. 558 (part), 2005) 
8.17.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings unless the context otherwise requires: 
"Accessory structure" means a structure containing no kitchen or bathroom and located upon the same lot or parcel as the principal use or structure to which it is an accessory. The structure is customary, incidental and subordinate to the use of the principal building or the principal use of the land. All accessory structures shall be constructed with, or subsequent to, the construction of the principal structure or activation of the principal use. 
"Applicant" means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government city, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the city for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition or renovation project within the city boundaries, as defined in this section, and who is, therefore, responsible for meeting the requirements of this section. 
"Building official" or "director" means the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this section, or the city's duly authorized representative. 
"Construction" means all building, landscaping, remodeling, including the addition, removal or destruction of buildings and landscaping. 
"Construction and demolition debris" means and includes: 
1.	Used or commonly discarded materials generally considered to be not water soluble and nonhazardous in nature, including, but are not limited to, steel, copper, aluminum, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt material, pipe, gypsum, wallboard and lumber from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction or demolition project or from the renovation of a structure and/or landscaping, including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other vegetative matter that normally results from land clearing, landscaping and development operations for a construction project; or 
2.	Remnants of new materials, including, but are not limited to, cardboard, paper, plastic, wood and metal scraps from any construction, demolition and/or landscape project. 
"Contractor" means any person or entity holding, or required to hold, a contractor's license of any type under the laws of the state of California, or who performs (whether as contractor, subcontractor, owner-builder, or otherwise) any construction, demolition, remodeling, renovation or landscaping service relating to buildings or accessory structures in the city's jurisdictional boundaries. 
"Covered project" means and includes any project which consists of one or more of the following: 
1.	Demolition projects that are five hundred (500) square feet or greater;
2.	Any project involving renovation of a kitchen and/or bath facility irrespective of total square footage or value; 
3.	The renovation, remodel or addition to an existing residential structure that is equal to or greater than five hundred (500) square feet and/or projects that exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00); 
4.	The renovation, remodel or addition to an existing commercial or multifamily residential structure that is equal to or greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet and/or projects that exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00); 
5.	Residential development and any new residential structure that is equal to or greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet and/or projects that exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00); 
6.	Commercial or multifamily residential development, and any new structure that is equal to or greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet and/or projects that exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00); 
7.	All city sponsored construction, demolition and renovation projects that are equal to or greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet; 
8.	All city public works and construction projects which are awarded pursuant to the competitive bid procedures. 
"Deconstruction" means a process to dismantle or remove useable materials from structures, in a manner which maximizes the recovery of building materials for reuse and recycling and minimizes the amount of waste transported for disposal in landfills and transformation facilities. 
"Demolition" means the deconstructing, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any structure, wall, fence or paving, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior. Demolition needs to be done by a contractor or owner-builder. 
"Designated recyclable and reusable materials" means and includes: 
1.	Inert solids, asphalt and masonry building materials generally used in construction including, but are not limited to, concrete, rock, stone and brick; 
2.	Wood materials including any and all dimensional lumber, fencing or construction wood that is not chemically treated, creosoted, CCA pressure treated, contaminated or painted; 
3.	Vegetative materials including trees, tree parts, shrubs, stumps, logs, brush or any other type of plants that are cleared from a site for construction or other use. The following materials are excluded as the materials are not recyclable and should be landfilled: bamboo, palm fronds and yucca; 
4.	Metals including all metal scrap such as, but are not limited to, pipes, siding, window frames, door frames and fences; 
5.	Roofing materials including wood shingles and shakes as well as asphalt, stone and slate-based roofing material; 
6.	Salvageable materials and structures including, but are not limited to, doors, windows, fixtures, hardwood flooring, sinks, bathtubs and appliances; 
7.	Any other materials that the building official or director determines can be diverted due to the identification of a recycling facility, reuse facility or market accessible from the county. 
"Director" means the city's director of the public works department or his/her authorized representative. 
"Divert" and "diversion" mean to use material for any lawful purpose other than disposal in a landfill, transformation facility or alternative daily cover. Methods to divert materials from landfills include reuse, salvage and recycling. Diversion does not include illegal dumping. 
"Emergency demolition" means an emergency demolition can be performed only when a facility is determined to be structurally unsound and in danger of imminent collapse and a state or local government city has issued an immediate demolition order. The order for emergency demolition only applies to the part of the building that is unsound; attached buildings may not be demolished under this order and must be treated as a regular demolition. 
"Facilities" means recycling, salvage and reuse establishments and landfills. 
"Inert solids" means and includes asphalt, concrete, rock, stone, brick, sand, soil and fines. 
"Noncovered projects" means construction, demolition and renovation projects within the city that do not meet the established thresholds for covered projects. 
Owner-Builder. See "Contractor." 
"Permit" means an official document or certificate issued by the building official authorizing performance of a specified activity. 
"Project" means any activity involving construction, demolition or renovation, and which requires issuance of a permit from the city. 
"Recyclables" means materials which would otherwise become solid waste but which are capable of or suitable for recycling. 
"Recycling" means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and reconstituting or converting construction and demolition debris that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials for new, reused or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace or in the form of useable energy. Recycling does not include transformation. 
"Recycling and reuse plan" means a form provided by the city for the purpose of compliance with this chapter that must be submitted by the applicant for any covered project. 
"Renovation" means any change, addition or modification to an existing structure. 
"Reuse" means further or repeated use of construction and demolition debris. 
"Salvage" means the controlled removal of materials from a covered project for the purpose of recycling, reuse or storage for later reuse. 
"Source separated" means recyclables that have been segregated from solid waste by or for the generator thereof on the premises at which they were generated for handling different from that of solid waste. 
"Structure" means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
(Ord. 558 (part), 2005) 
8.17.030 - Deconstruction and salvage and recovery. 
Recovered and salvaged designated recyclable and reusable materials from the deconstruction phase shall be counted towards the diversion requirements of this section. 
(Ord. 558 (part), 2005) 
8.17.040 - Diversion requirements. 
A.	One hundred (100) percent of inert solids and at least fifty (50) percent by weight of the remaining construction and demolition debris resulting from the project shall be diverted to an approved facility or by salvage. 
B.	For each covered project, the diversion requirements of this section shall be met by submitting and following a C&D debris recycling and reuse plan that includes the following: 
1.	Deconstructing and salvaging all or part of the structure as practicable;
2.	Directing one hundred (100) percent of inert solids to reuse or recycling facilities approved by the county; and 
3.	Source separating non-inert materials, such as cardboard and paper, wood, metals, green waste, new gypsum wallboard, tile, porcelain fixtures, and other easily recycled materials, and directing them to recycling facilities approved by the city and taking the remainder (but no more than fifty (50) percent by weight) to a facility for disposal. 
C.	The applicant for any covered project shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all construction and demolition waste diverted or landfilled are measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all construction and demolition debris shall be weighed by measurement on scales that are in compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. 
D.	Although it may not be an explicit condition of the building permit, contractors working on noncovered projects are encouraged to divert material from construction and demolition projects to the maximum extent practicable in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 558 (part), 2005) 
8.17.050 - Projects exempt from this chapter. 
A.	Emergency demolition required to protect the public health, safety or welfare.
B.	City-sponsored demolition of a substandard structure or construction required to protect public health or safety in an emergency. 
C.	Projects in any single-family residential district, which consist solely of a swimming pool. 
D.	Projects for which only a plumbing permit, electrical permit or mechanical permit is required. 
E.	A project for which a valid building permit has been lawfully issued by the city prior to the effective date of this section. 
F.	A project of city public construction for which the notice inviting bids has been published prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. 558 (part), 2005) 
8.17.060 - Submission and required contents of C&D debris recycling and reuse plan. 
A.	Prior to issuance of permit, every applicant for building or demolition permits involving any covered project shall complete and submit a properly completed C&D debris recycling and reuse plan to the building official, unless a C&D debris recycling and reuse plan for the project is already on file with the city, and within thirty (30) days following project completion. 
B.	A C&D debris recycling and reuse plan must contain all of the following information:
1.	The name and address of the person applying for the permit;
2.	Unless waived by the building official or designee, evidence that the owner or owners of the subject property acknowledge that the are aware of and understand that a violation of any provision of this section may result in the imposition of penalties and that any unpaid penalties imposed may be declared a lien on the subject property; 
3.	A description of the project, including location, scope, required permit(s) and estimated timeline for completion of the project; 
4.	The intended salvage, reuse and recycling facilities, chosen from a list of facilities approved by the city, to use, collect or receive all construction and/or demolition debris from the project; 
5.	The names and addresses of all vendors and facilities proposed to be used to collect, receive, dispose, recycle, reuse or salvage the project C&D debris; 
6.	The recycling or reuse percentage rate, as applicable, of each vendor and facility proposed to be used to recycle or reuse the project C&D debris. 
(Ord. 558 (part), 2005) 
8.17.070 - Evidence of compliance with C&D debris recycling and reuse plan. 
A.	A C&D debris recycling and reuse plan shall be approved or denied no later than thirty (30) days after a complete application is made. 
B.	Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no permit shall be issued for any covered project unless and until the C&D debris recycling and reuse plan has been approved. 
1.	All of the information has been remitted on the C&D debris recycling and reuse plan.
2.	The C&D debris recycling and reuse plan establishes a mechanism such that the diversion requirement shall be met. 
C.	If the director determines that the C&D debris recycling and reuse plan application is incomplete or fails to indicate that one hundred (100) percent of inert solids and at least fifty (50) percent by weight of all construction and demolition debris generated by the project will be reused or recycled, he or she shall either: 
1.	Return the C&D debris recycling and reuse plan application to the building official marked "denied," including a statement of reasons, which shall then immediately stop processing the building or demolition permit application; or 
2.	Return the C&D debris recycling and reuse plan to the building official marked "further explanation required." 
D.	Within thirty (30) days following project completion, a final compliance report containing the following information and documentation must be submitted to the building official, listing every vendor or facility that collected, transported or received any C&D debris. 
1.	Copies of receipts from every vendor or facility that collected, transported or received any project C&D debris. Each receipt must specify the weight of any project C&D debris handled by the vendor or facility and must clearly demonstrate that all such C&D debris originated from the project site. 
2.	A calculation of the actual percentage, determined by weight, of project C&D debris that was recycled or reused for each vendor or facility that collected, transported or received material. 
3.	A description of the manner in which the project C&D debris was recycled or reused and the name and address of all vendors and facilities employed in the recycling or reuse of project C&D debris, including the recycling or reuse rate of each vendor or facility, as applicable. 
E.	Failure to accurately account for and submit the required documentation for all project C&D debris in the final compliance report constitutes a violation of this section. 
(Ord. 558 (part), 2005) 
8.17.080 - Diversion requirement exemption. 
A.	Application. If an applicant for a covered project experiences circumstances that the applicant believes make it infeasible to comply with established diversion requirements, the applicant may request, in writing, an exemption from one or all of the waste diversion requirements during the building permit process. 
B.	Meeting with Director. The director, or designee, shall review all exemption request information supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to assess alternative ways of meeting waste diversion requirements. Based on the information supplied by the applicant, the director, or designee, shall determine whether it is possible for the applicant to meet any or all of the diversion requirements of the project. 
C.	Granting of Exemption. If it is determined that it is infeasible for the applicant to meet all of the diversion requirements specified herein, the director, or designee, shall determine alternate permit conditions and the building official will inform the applicant, in writing, of any such alternative requirements. 
(Ord. 558 (part), 2005) 
8.17.090 - On-site practices. 
During the term of the covered project, the applicant shall according to the applicant's C&D debris recycling and reuse plan recycle, reuse or divert the required percentages of waste, and keep records of the tonnage. To the maximum extent feasible, project waste shall be source separated on-site to increase diversion. 
(Ord. 558 (part), 2005) 
8.17.100 - Reporting. 
A.	Progress reports during construction may be required.
B.	All documentation is subject to verification by the city.
C.	It is unlawful for any person to submit documentation to the city under this section which that person knows to contain any false statements, including but not limited to, false statements regarding tonnage of materials recycled or diverted. 
(Ord. 558 (part), 2005) 
8.17.110 - Enforcement. 
The director or his designee shall administer this chapter and shall enforce the requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to, the authority to order that work be stopped where any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 558 (part), 2005) 
8.17.120 - Violations and penalties. 
In addition to any other remedy authorized by this chapter or applicable law, any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to an administrative penalty, enforcement, and collection proceedings, as set forth in this chapter and authorized by Section 53069.4 of the California Government Code. Each day of a continuing violation constitutes a separate violation. 
(Ord. 558 (part), 2005) 
8.17.130 - Appeal. 
A.	Except as provided in this chapter, all appeals of decisions made by the building official or the director, or designee, on matters set forth in this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of city municipal code. 
B.	Within ten calendar days after the date on which written notice of the decision is mailed or delivered to the owner, applicant or other interested party, the owner, applicant, other interested party or his authorized agent may appeal to the city council for review of the decision. The decision shall be final unless such an appeal is filed within ten calendar days of the mailing or delivery of notices to the applicant. 
C.	At the time of filing the appeal, the appellant shall pay a fee in an amount adequate to cover the cost of processing and hearing the appeal as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 558 (part), 2005) 
Chapter 8.20 - HAZARDOUS WEEDS AND RUBBISH 
Sections: 
 
8.20.010 - Title for citation. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Sections 39501 and 39502 of the Government Code of the state of California, the city council does enact the ordinance codified in this chapter which shall be known and may be cited as the fire hazardous weeds and rubbish ordinance. 
(Ord. 451 § 1, 1990) 
8.20.020 - Policy. 
A.	It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the lands, fields, lots, buildings and homes within this city from the danger of fire which may spread from one property to another. It shall be construed liberally to that end. 
B.	It is the further policy of the city council to minimize the burden placed upon property owners. Accordingly, those methods of abatement are to be favored which are least costly, which are directly related to protecting neighboring property, and which entail the least destruction of valuable economic or ornamental plants and valuable materials. 
(Ord. 451 § 2, 1990) 
8.20.030 - Provisions not exclusive. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of fire hazardous weeds and rubbish. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulating statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 451 § 3, 1990) 
8.20.040 - Enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided, this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police or his designee, or by the county fire warden, his deputies and employees, under agreement with the county of Tulare. 
(Ord. 451 § 4, 1990) 
8.20.050 - Declaration of nuisance. 
Weeds, grass, rank growths and combustible rubbish growing or accumulating upon private property which do, or will when dry, create a fire hazard and which by virtue thereof constitute a danger to neighboring property or the health or welfare of residents of the vicinity are hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 451 § 5, 1990) 
8.20.060 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter: 
"Cost of administration" means the cost to the city of doing the acts required under this chapter, except the actual cost of abatement. The city council determines the cost of administration to be forty dollars ($40.00) per parcel for a nuisance abated by the department of public works or by the county fire warden without a hearing. When a hearing is held by the city council to review the determination of the department of public works or the county fire warden that a nuisance exists, the council shall determine the actual cost of administration attributable to that parcel. For the purpose of determining the actual cost of administration all contiguous land owned by the same person or persons shall be deemed to be a single parcel, even though the contiguous property may be designated with more than one assessor's parcel number. 
"Grass" means any herbaceous plant which is cultivated and which attains, when mature, if uncontrolled, such a height as to be a medium for the rapid spread of fire. 
"Rank growth" means a cover of vegetation of any type, cultivated or not, including trees, which has attained or will, if allowed to mature, attain such a height and density as to be a medium for the rapid spread of fire. 
"Rubbish" means material of whatever value laced or allowed to accumulate so as to be a medium for the rapid spread of fire. 
"Weed" means any plant, whether herbaceous or woody and of whatever height, except a tree, which grows wild. 
(Ord. 451 § 6, 1990) 
8.20.070 - Owner's duty. 
It is the duty of every owner of private property within the city to prevent a nuisance described in Section 8.20.050 from arising on, or existing upon, his property. 
(Ord. 451 § 7, 1990) 
8.20.080 - Notice required when. 
Whenever the department of public works or the county fire warden determines that a nuisance described in Section 8.20.050 exists upon any private property within the city he shall notify the owner of the existence of the nuisance. 
(Ord. 451 § 8, 1990) 
8.20.090 - Notice—Contents. 
The notice required by Section 8.20.080 shall: 
A.	Identify the owner of the private property upon which the nuisance exists, as the name appears on the records of the county assessor; 
B.	Describe the location of such private property by its commonly used street address giving the name or number of the street, road or highway and the number, if any, of the property; 
C.	Identify such property by reference to the assessor's parcel number;
D.	Contain a statement that a fire hazardous condition exists and that it has been determined by the department of public works, or the county fire warden, to be a public nuisance described in Section 8.20.050; 
E.	Contain a statement that the owner may within seven business days after mailing or personal delivery of the notice make a request in writing to the city clerk for a hearing to appeal the determination that the conditions existing create a public nuisance or to show that for some other reason those conditions should not be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
F.	Contain a statement that, unless the owner corrects the fire hazardous condition or requests a hearing before the city council to appeal the determination of the department of public works or the county fire warden will abate the nuisance, not less than fifteen (15) business days after the date the notice was mailed or personally delivered. It shall also state that the cost of such abatement, together with a charge for the cost of administration of the abatement program attributable to the abatement, will be a special assessment roll and will become a lien on the real property. 
(Ord. 451 § 9, 1990) 
8.20.100 - Notice—Mailing—Personal delivery. 
The notice required by Section 8.20.080 shall be served by delivering it personally to the owner, or by mailing it by regular mail to the owner as his address appears on the last equalized assessment roll, except that, if the records of the county assessor show that the ownership has changed since the last equalized assessment roll was compiled, notice shall be mailed to the new owner. 
(Ord. 451 § 10, 1990) 
8.20.110 - Notice—Posting. 
If the address of the new owner is not in the county assessor's records and is not otherwise discovered, notice may be given by posting copies along the subject property not more than one thousand (1000) feet apart. In no event shall fewer than two signs be posted when giving notice pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 451 § 11, 1990) 
8.20.120 - Hearing—Request. 
The owner of property upon which the department of public works or the county fire warden has determined that a nuisance described in Section 8.20.050 exists may request a hearing before the city council on or before the seventh business day following the day of mailing of the notice or the date on which the notice was personally delivered by filing a written request therefore with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 451 § 12, 1990) 
8.20.130 - Hearing—Notice. 
If a hearing has been requested in accordance with Section 8.20.120, the city clerk shall set a date and time for such a hearing and send a notice thereof by regular mail at least seven business days before such date to the owner at the address set forth on his request and shall notify the department of public works or the county fire warden of such hearing. 
(Ord. 451 § 13, 1990) 
8.20.140 - Hearing—Conduct. 
At the date and time set, a hearing shall be held by the city council. The hearing shall be open to the public. The owner may be represented by counsel. The city council shall hear all pertinent evidence offered by all interested persons. The technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, except that the council's decision may not be based wholly on hearsay evidence. All persons giving evidence shall be sworn before testifying. The owner may employ a shorthand reporter to report the hearing. 
(Ord. 451 § 14, 1990) 
8.20.150 - Hearing—Decision. 
At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may determine: 
A.	That no public nuisance exists;
B.	That a public nuisance exists which should be abated in accordance with Section 8.20.170. The city council shall thereupon order the nuisance abated no sooner than the fifth business day following the mailing of notice of the council's decision; 
C.	That a public nuisance exists which may be removed by some procedure proposed by the owner other than destruction of the fire hazardous plants or materials. If the council determines that another procedure proposed by the owners may be employed to remove the public nuisance, it shall set a reasonable time within which the owner must complete that procedure. If the owner fails to complete the procedure proposed within the time limit set by the city council. The department of public works or county fire warden may, upon five business days notice, sent by him to the owner by regular mail, commence abatement in accordance with Section 8.20.170. 
At any hearing in which it is determined that a public nuisance exists, whether abatement or implementation of an alternate procedure proposed by the owner is ordered, the council shall also determine the administrative costs incurred. The owner shall be entitled to be heard on the question of such administrative costs. The decision of the city council shall be final as to all matters determined. 
(Ord. 451 § 15, 1990) 
8.20.160 - Abatement by owner. 
Any owner may remove or cause to be removed a nuisance described in Section 8.20.050 at any time prior to commencement of abatement by, or at the direction of, the department of public works or the county fire warden. 
(Ord. 451 § 16, 1990) 
8.20.170 - Abatement—Entering private property. 
If the owner has not earlier removed the nuisance and if no request for hearing provided by Section 8.20.120 is received by the city clerk on or before the seventh business day following the mailing or personal delivery of the notice required by Section 8.20.080, the department of public works or the county fire warden shall cause the nuisance to be abated. The department of public works or the county fire warden shall not commence the abatement until at least fifteen (15) business days after the notice was mailed or personally delivered to the owner. The department of public works employees or the county fire warden, his deputies, the employees of his department and independent contractors hired by him may enter upon private property on which a nuisance described in Section 8.20.050 exists for the purpose of abating that nuisance. 
(Ord. 451 § 17, 1990) 
8.20.180 - Accounting. 
The department of public works or the county fire warden shall keep an account of the cost of every abatement carried out and shall render a report in writing, itemized by parcel, to the city council showing the cost of abatement and the cost of administration as declared in Section 8.20.060 or as determined by the city council pursuant to Section 8.20.150, for each parcel. 
(Ord. 451 § 18, 1990) 
8.20.190 - Hearing on accounting—Notice—Waiver by payment. 
Upon receipt of the account of the department of public works or the county fire warden, the city clerk shall deposit a copy of the account pertaining to the property of each owner in the mail addressed to the owner and include therewith a notice informing the owner that, at a date and time not less than five business days after the date of mailing of the notice, the city council will meet to review the account and that the owner may appear at said time and be heard. The owner may waive the hearing on the accounting by paying the cost of abatement and the cost of administration to the city clerk prior to the time set for the hearing by the city council. Unless otherwise expressly stated by the owner, payment of the cost of abatement and the cost of administration prior to the hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right thereto and an admission that the accounting is accurate and reasonable. 
(Ord. 451 § 19, 1990) 
8.20.200 - Hearing on accounting—Proceedings. 
A.	At the time fixed, the city council shall meet to review the account. An owner may appear at time and be heard on the questions whether the accounting, so far as it pertains to the cost of abating a nuisance upon the land of the owner is accurate and the amounts reported reasonable. The cost of administration shall also be reviewed. 
B.	The report and account shall be admitted into evidence. The owner shall bear the burden of proving that the accounting is not accurate and reasonable. 
C.	The hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in Section 8.20.140. 
(Ord. 451 § 20, 1990) 
8.20.210 - Modifications. 
The city council shall make such modifications in the accounting as it deems necessary and thereafter shall confirm the report by resolution. 
(Ord. 451 § 21, 1990) 
8.20.220 - Special assessment and lien. 
The city council may order that the cost of abating nuisances pursuant to this chapter and the administrative costs as confirmed by the council be placed upon the county tax roll by the county auditor as special assessments against the respective parcels of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code of the state of California; provided, however, that the cost of abatement and the cost of administration as finally determined shall not be placed on the tax roll if paid in full prior to entry of the costs on the tax roll. 
(Ord. 451 § 22, 1990) 
8.20.230 - Violation—Penalty. 
The maintenance on private property of a public nuisance as described in Section 8.20.050 shall constitute an infraction, punishable under Government Code Section 36900 if any of the following conditions are not met: 
A.	Such public nuisance is not corrected within fifteen (15) days after the chief of police has notified the property owner of the existence of the public nuisance and there has been no timely request made to the city council for a hearing on the determination of the existence of such public nuisance; or 
B.	If after a hearing held by the city council, the council determines that such a public nuisance exists and such public nuisance is not corrected within five business days following mailing of the notice of the council's decision to the property owners; or 
C.	If, after a hearing and determination by the council that such a public nuisance exists and that such a public nuisance exists and that such public nuisance may be removed by some procedure proposed by the owner other than destruction of the fire hazardous plants or materials, and the council has set a specific time within which the owner must complete the procedure, and such public nuisance was not corrected within the period of time as set by the council. 
(Ord. 451 § 23, 1990) 
8.20.240 - City's cost of abatement. 
The cost to the city of doing the acts required under the fire hazardous weeds and rubbish abatement program is forty dollars ($40.00) per parcel for a nuisance abated by the director of public works or the county fire warden without a hearing. Prior to this amendment, the cost was set at twenty dollars ($20.00), which is insufficient to continue the abatement program. The current drought conditions in the city creates an immediate and acute fire danger from dry weeds and rubbish, and in order for the fire hazardous weeds and rubbish abatement program to continue uninterrupted, it is necessary for the ordinance codified in this chapter to go into effect immediately. 
(Ord. 451 § 24, 1990) 
Chapter 8.24 - NOISE 
Sections: 
 
8.24.010 - General noise regulations. 
Every person, firm or corporation who shall wilfully make or continue or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, unusual penetrating or boisterous noise, disturbance or commotion, which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes a discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 241 § 1, 1971) 
8.24.020 - Special restrictions—Residential areas. 
Between the hours of ten p.m. of one day and seven a.m. of the following day, it is unlawful for any person within a residential zone, or within a radius of five hundred (500) feet therefrom, to create, cause to be created or maintain sources of noise which shall cause annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness in the neighborhood. Such sources shall include but not be limited to the following: 
A.	Excessively loud noises caused by the use or operation of radios, musical instruments and drums, phonographs, television sets, or other machines or devices for the production, reproduction or amplification of sound; 
B.	Operation of equipment or performance of any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures or projects or operation of construction type device; 
C.	Excessively loud sounds, cries or behavioral noise caused by the keeping or maintenance of animals or fowls; 
D.	Excessively loud noise caused by the operation of any machinery, equipment, device, pump, fan compressor, air conditioning apparatus, or similar mechanical device; 
E.	Operation of chimes, bells or other device for the purpose of advertising or inviting the patronage of any person or persons to any business enterprise; 
F.	Repairing, rebuilding or testing of motor vehicles or operating of any motor driven vehicle off public streets or highways. 
(Ord. 241 § 2, 1971) 
8.24.030 - Schools, hospitals and churches. 
It is unlawful for any person to create any noise on any street, sidewalk or public place adjacent to any school, institution of learning or church while the same is in use or adjacent to any hospital, which noise unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, providing conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets, sidewalk or any public place indicating the presence of a school, church or hospital. 
(Ord. 241 § 3, 1971) 
8.24.040 - Amplified sound. 
It is unlawful for any person other than personnel of law enforcement or governmental agencies, to install, use or operate within the city, and outside a building, a loud speaker or amplifying device in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any vehicle for the purpose of giving instructions, directions, talks, address, lectures, transmitting music to any persons or assembly of persons in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property without first obtaining approval of the city council. 
The city council, when considering the application, shall recognize and consider the constitutional rights of free speech of all persons including the applicant, but shall also consider the correlative constitutional rights of the citizens of the city to privacy and freedom from public nuisance of loud and unnecessary noise. The council if granting permission, shall reserve the right to enforce whatever rules, conditions or restrictions that it deems necessary to insure that the sound shall be so controlled that it will not be unreasonably loud, raucous, varying, disturbing or a nuisance to persons of normal sensitiveness with the area of audibility. 
Applicant shall submit in writing, at least two weeks prior to a regularly scheduled council meeting, a statement outlining: 
A.	Name and address of both the user and owner of the sound amplifying equipment;
B.	The maximum sound producing power of the equipment including wattage used; volume in decibels, and approximate distance from which sound will be audible; 
C.	Whether the sound equipment will be used for commercial or noncommercial purposes.
(Ord. 241 § 4, 1971) 
8.24.050 - Hawkers and peddlers. 
It is unlawful for any person within the city to sell, advertise or invite patronage for anything by public outcry or by use of any type of noise making or sound amplifying device. 
However, the city council may grant an exception to this section, if after application and review, it finds that circumstances are such that an exception is warranted. The circumstances must be such that the same exception would be appropriate for any other hawker or peddler in the same situation. 
In granting an exception, the city council may specify any special requirements, routes, time schedules or other standards which they deem necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter and protect the public welfare. 
(Ord. 241 § 5, 1971) 
8.24.060 - Standards of enforcement. 
In enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the enforcing officer shall utilize, but shall not be limited to, the following general standards: 
A.	The volume, intensity and duration of the noise;
B.	Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
C.	Nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;
D.	The time of the day or night the noise occurs; and
E.	Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.
(Ord. 241 § 6, 1971) 
8.24.070 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall have no application to the sounding of a siren or the making of other usual signal or signals by any police or other peace officers in the performance of their duties, nor to the sounding of any siren upon any ambulance or fire fighting equipment in the usual and customary manner. 
(Ord. 241 § 7, 1971) 
8.24.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months in the county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 241 § 8, 1971) 
Chapter 8.28 - NUISANCES 
Sections: 
 
8.28.010 - Detrimental condition of property unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to maintain property including structures, in a condition detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, or in any condition of deterioration or disrepair which could cause damage to proximal properties or improvements. 
(Ord. 481 § 2, 1993) 
8.28.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms below shall mean the following: 
"Abate" means to repair, replace, remove, demolish or otherwise remedy the condition in question by such means and in such manner and to such an extent as the administrator or his/her designee in his/her judgment shall determine is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community. 
"Abatement standards" shall be those minimum requirements set forth by the city administrator by which a public nuisance shall be abated and the premises maintained in order to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
"Premises" means all property, lots, parcels or real estate, portion of any land, adjacent sidewalks, parking strips, the abutting half of any street or alley between lot lines, buildings, structures, landscaping, plantings, trees, bushes, fences and the exterior storage of personal property, equipment, supplies and vehicles. 
"Public nuisance" means any of the following conditions: 
1.	To maintain premises in a condition detrimental to public health, safety or general welfare; or 
2.	To maintain premises as to permit the same to become unsightly or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that could cause damage to proximal properties or improvements; or 
3.	The existence of any buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or which constitute a fire hazard or which are otherwise a danger to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire or disaster damage, rodent infestation, or abandonment; or 
4.	The existence of any debris or structure which has been rendered useless or unmerchantable by reason of fire; or 
5.	The existence of any buildings which are abandoned or boarded up or partially destroyed; or broken down or discarded furniture or discarded furniture of conglomerations of toys in front yards; or overgrown green vegetation visible to the public; or garbage cans strewn over the yards and visible from the street; or unfinished buildings, not under active construction; or dead trees, weeds and debris; or packing boxes stored in yards and visible to the public; or deliberate neglect of premises to spite neighbors or influence zone changes; or 
6.	Any other condition or use of property which is in fact a fire hazard or which results or can result in the impairment of the ability to respond to and suppress fires; 
7.	The existence of any accumulation of waste paper, hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter, debris or combustible trash upon any roof or in any building, entrance way, court, yard, vacant lot or open space, or of any weeds, grass, vines or other growth when the same endangers property or is liable to become a fire hazard; 
8.	The existence of any vines or climbing plants growing into or over the street, tree or any public hydrant, pole or electrolier; or the existence of any shrub, plant or vine growing on, around or in front of any hydrant, alarm box, standpipe, sprinkler system connection or any other appliance or facility provided for fire protection purposes, in such a way as to obscure the view thereof or impair the access thereto by the fire department; 
9.	Any other condition or use of property which is in fact a fire hazard or which results, or can result in the impairment of the ability to respond to and suppress fires. 
10.	Medical marijuana: A violation of any medical marijuana prohibition or requirement within the City Code. 
"Responsible person or party" means the owner, occupant or tenant, or in the absence of the occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee or proprietor or any other person who created, causes, commits or maintains a nuisance on any property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 603 § 7, 2-8-2016; Ord. 509 § 1 (part), 1995; Ord. 481 § 5, 1993)  
8.28.030 - Duty to abate by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal. 
All premises, buildings or structures declared to be such public nuisances and ordered to be abated shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition, removal or repair pursuant to the procedures set forth in this code with the concurrence of the city administrator. 
Any building declared a public nuisance under this chapter either shall be repaired or rehabilitated in accordance with current codes as adopted by the city, or other applicable laws, or shall be demolished if the building has not been repaired or rehabilitated in compliance with the procedures set forth herein. If the structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to life, limb, property or safety of its occupants or the public, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
Where the city administrator determines that any conditions constituting a public nuisance as defined in Section 8.28.020 exist upon any premises within the city, the city administrator may require, or provide for, the abatement thereof pursuant to this chapter and may make the cost of such abatement a lien on the real property or premises in question and a personal obligation of the property owner. 
(Ord. 481 § 6, 1993) 
8.28.040 - Notice of public nuisance. 
The city administrator is authorized and directed to declare that the existence of any of the conditions set forth in Section 8.28.020 constitute a public nuisance and direct the responsible person to abate any conditions set forth in Section 8.28.020 which may exist on the person's property. The responsible person may appear before the city administrator for a hearing at an arranged time and place to show cause why such conditions should not be abated by the city at such person's expense. 
Hearings must occur prior to the expiration of the time period set forth in the notices as provided by this section. The notice shall be mailed to the responsible persons of real property which is, or may be in violation of Section 8.28.010. 
The notice required pursuant to this section shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE 
APN NO.: _____ 
TO THE PROPERTY OWNER: 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN, that on the ____________ day of ____________, 19____________, pursuant to Section 7 of Ordinance No. 481 of the City of Woodlake as amended, the City of Woodlake declares that one or more of the conditions set forth in Section 5: (D) of said Ordinance exist(s) on your property and thereby constitute(s) a public nuisance and said nuisance must be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal of said condition(s). 
Repair or removal of said conditions must be completed and maintained by the ____________ day of ____________, 19____________, in accordance with the standards of the current codes as adopted by the City of Woodlake or other standards required by law. 
Failure to abate said conditions by the date specified above shall result in the City acquiring jurisdiction to abate the conditions at the responsible person's expense pursuant to section 11. 
Any person who wishes to object to the proposed abatement of the conditions cited in this notice is hereby notified that they have the right to attend a hearing at an arranged time and date with the City Administrator to be held at 350 North Valencia Blvd., Woodlake, California. A hearing may be requested and must be scheduled prior to the date specified above. Sufficient cause must be shown why said conditions should not be abated. 
THE FAILURE OF ANY OWNER OR OTHER PERSON TO RECEIVE THIS NOTICE SHALL NOT AFFECT THE ENFORCEMENT OF THIS ORDINANCE. 
A copy of this notice shall be sent to the owner of the premises and may also be sent to any other of said persons sought to be charged with the responsibility of abatement as determined by the City Administrator of his/her designee. The notice shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to the owner as such person's name and address appear on the last equalized assessment roll of the County of Tulare or as known to the City Administrator of his/her designee or other person authorized to give such notice. 
The notice to any other person to be charged with the responsibility of abatement shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid and addressed to such person as his/her name and address are shown to the City Administrator or the person authorized to give notice. 
(Ord. 509 § 1 (part), 1995: Ord. 481 § 7, 1993) 
8.28.050 - Charges. 
Responsible persons who, through their inaction have caused the city to have their nuisance abated are deemed to have committed a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 8.28.180 and are subject to a fine or fines and/or imprisonment. 
In addition to the fines and/or imprisonment, any costs incurred for such abatement will constitute a special assessment on the property and a personal obligation of the responsible person. The cost of abating such nuisance shall include a per parcel charge to cover the cost of administering this chapter. 
Any property owner, or other responsible person, who after notification by the city administrator fails to abate a condition as set forth in Section 8.28.020 shall become liable for the expenses of fire suppression, including injury to firefighters which is determined to have been caused by or attributed to said conditions. Such expenses shall become a lien on the property and a personal obligation of the property owner or other responsible person. 
(Ord. 481 § 8, 1993) 
8.28.060 - Notice to vacate. 
Any structure determined to be a public nuisance by the city administrator under this chapter and found to be in such a condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants shall be ordered to be vacated. A notice to vacate in addition to being served a notice in accordance with Section 8.28.040, shall be posted or affixed upon each exit of the structure and shall be in substantially the following form: 
DANGER THIS BUILDING IS DEEMED UNSAFE FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY 
IT IS UNLAWFUL FOR ANY PERSON TO OCCUPY OR RESIDE IN THIS BUILDING 
CITY OF WOODLAKE 
No person shall remain in or enter any structure which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such structure under a permit. 
(Ord. 481 § 9, 1993) 
8.28.070 - Hearing and appeal. 
A.	If any party requests a hearing prior to the date provided in the notice of public nuisance as provided in Section 8.28.040, such requests shall be granted and a hearing shall be set by the city administrator who shall hear and consider any and all objections to the proposed abatement of such conditions, and may continue the hearing as necessary. The city administrator shall have the opportunity to respond to any such objections. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city administrator shall rule on all such objections. Unless an appeal is sought as provided hereinafter, in cases where the city administrator overrules any objections, the city shall be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to proceed and perform the work necessary to abate conditions causing such nuisance if such property owner or other responsible person fails to abate the nuisance on or before the date set forth in the notice. Any property owner or other responsible person who fails to appear at the hearing and present objections shall be deemed to have waived the right to present any such objections and the city shall thereafter have jurisdiction to proceed and perform any work necessary to abate the conditions causing such nuisance upon the expiration of the time allowed in the notice to the property owner. Hearing must be scheduled prior to the date specified in the notice. 
B.	Within five days following the date of the decision by the city administrator as provided for in subsection A of this section, the decision may be appealed to the city council by the responsible party. An appeal may be made on a form prescribed by the city administrator and shall be filed with the city clerk. The appeal shall state specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or a breach of discretion by the city administrator or wherein the decision is not supported by the evidence and the record. Within five days of filing of an appeal, the city administrator shall transmit to the city clerk any information which the city administrator has used in making a decision in the hearing provided for in subsection A of this section. The clerk shall then give notice to the responsible party and may give notice to any other interested party of the time and when the appeal will be considered by the city council. 
C.	The city council may affirm, reverse or modify a decision of the city administrator on the proposed abatement. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. In cases where the city council overrules objections to the proposed abatement, the city shall be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to proceed and perform the work necessary to abate the conditions causing such nuisance. 
(Ord. 481 § 10, 1993) 
8.28.080 - Abatement by the city. 
Upon the expiration of the time period set forth in the notice pursuant to Section 8.28.040, the city shall acquire jurisdiction to abate any such condition constituting a nuisance pursuant to Section 8.28.020, which has not been abated by the responsible person in question or which has been deemed to constitute a nuisance in the course of the hearing process set forth above. Whenever the city has acquired jurisdiction to abate such a nuisance, the city administrator is expressly authorized to enter upon private property for purposes of abating such conditions and the costs thereof shall be charged as provided for in Section 8.28.050. 
(Ord. 481 § 11, 1993) 
8.28.090 - Account and record of cost. 
The city administrator shall keep an account of the cost of abating such nuisance and shall embody such account in the report and assessment list which shall be filed with the city clerk and presented to the city council. The allowable cost of abating such nuisance shall include a charge sufficient to cover the costs of administering this chapter. The report and assessment list shall refer to each separate lot or parcel of land by description sufficient to identify such lot or parcel, together with the charge proposed to be assessed against each such separate lot or parcel. 
(Ord. 481 § 12, 1993) 
8.28.100 - Notice of report. 
The city clerk shall post a copy of such report and assessment list at City Hall, together with the notice of filing thereof and of the time and place when and where it will be submitted to the city council for hearing and confirmation. The notice shall advise property owners that they may appear at the time and place of hearing and object to any matter related thereto. A like notice shall also be mailed to each and every property owner and/or other responsible person who owns or has control of any lot or parcel listed on the report. The notice shall be sent by first class mail to the property owner at the address appearing on the last equalized assessment roll of the county of Tulare or to the last known address of the enforcement officer. Notice shall be sent by first class mail to any other such responsible person at such person's last address known to the city administrator or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 481 § 13, 1993) 
8.28.110 - Collection on tax roll. 
After confirmation of the report and assessment list by the city council, a copy shall be provided to the city finance department and payments may be received by him/her for the amount due until such time as the matter is referred to the county auditor for placement on the tax rolls. On or before the tenth day of August of each year, a certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the Tulare County auditor for the amounts of the respective assessments against the respective parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment roll. The assessments may be collected on the tax roll at the same time and in the same manner as county property taxes. They shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for property taxes. All laws and ordinances applicable to the levy collection and enforcement of county property taxes are made applicable to such special assessments. 
(Ord. 481 § 14, 1993) 
8.28.120 - Procedure not exclusive. 
The procedure provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any other procedure or procedures provided in ordinances of this city or by state law for the abatement of any of the conditions described herein, and abatement hereunder shall not prejudice or affect any other action, civil or criminal, for the maintenance of any such condition. 
(Ord. 481 § 15, 1993) 
8.28.130 - Franchise. 
When the city administrator has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or person shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of weeds, rubbish, litter and/or unsafe buildings declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 481 § 16, 1993) 
8.28.140 - Immediate danger—Summary abatement. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city administrator may provide for the summary abatement of any nuisance at the expense of the responsible person who creates, causes, commits or maintains said nuisance and may recover the charges therefore in accordance with Section 8.28.050. 
(Ord. 481 § 17, 1993) 
8.28.150 - Charge for fire suppression services. 
Any property owner, or other responsible person, who after written notification by the city administrator fails to abate a condition constituting a public nuisance as set forth in Section 8.28.020 shall become liable for the expenses of fighting a fire which is determined by the fire fighting agency responding to the fire to have been caused by or attributed to, in whole or part, such condition constituting such a public nuisance. Such expenses shall be charged to the property owner and/or other responsible person and shall become a lien upon the property and be collected as provided in Sections 8.28.090 through 8.28.110 inclusive. 
(Ord. 481 § 18, 1993) 
8.28.160 - Second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment—Abatement of nuisance—Treble damages. 
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with this chapter, except for conditions abated pursuant to Section 17980 of the California Health and Safety Code, the city may seek treble the cost of the abatement. 
NOTICE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE 
APN NO.: _____ 
TO THE PROPERTY OWNER: 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN, that on the ____________ day of ____________, 19____________, pursuant to Section 7 of Ordinance No. 481 of the City of Woodlake, as amended, the City of Woodlake declares that one or more of the conditions set forth in Section 5: (D) of said Ordinance exist(s) on your property and thereby constitute(s) a public nuisance and said nuisance must be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal of said condition(s). 
(Ord. 509 § 1 (part), 1995: Ord. 481 § 19, 1993) 
8.28.170 - Enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city administrator or his/her designee. In the enforcement of this chapter the administrator or his/her designee may enter upon private or public property to examine such properties and to abate or cause the abatement of properties or premises declared to be a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 481 § 4, 1993) 
8.28.180 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to maintain property or premises conducive to creating a public nuisance in violation of this chapter or to refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so by the city administrator or his/her designee in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such is applicable. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction. 
A.	Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or six months imprisonment in the county jail. 
B.	Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall be punished by: (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. 
C.	Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.
(Ord. 481 § 3, 1993) 
Chapter 8.32 - OIL AND GAS WELLS 
Sections: 
 
8.32.010 - Territory affected. 
In the manner and upon the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth in this chapter, it shall be lawful for any person, partnership, association of persons or any corporation to drill a well or wells for oil and gas or either thereof within the city. 
(Ord. 140 § 1, 1960) 
8.32.020 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct or commence to construct, maintain or use, within the boundaries of the city, any derrick or any other structure, appliance, apparatus or machinery proposed or intended to be used, or used for or in connection with the drilling for, or for or in connection with the production of oil, gas and/or other hydrocarbon substances without first obtaining a written permit therefor to be issued by the city clerk in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. 140 § 2, 1960) 
8.32.030 - Permit application. 
Each application for permit required by Section 8.32.020 shall be made in writing and signed by the applicant or his or its duly authorized representative and filed with the city clerk. 
The city clerk shall not receive for filing any application hereunder unless the application is accompanied by applicant's certified check payable to the city in the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) in payment of investigating and permit filing fee. In the event, and at such time any application for such permit be denied by the council, the fee, less the necessary costs and expenses incurred by the city in making investigation of such application, shall be refunded to the applicant, his or its heirs, executors, successors or assigns; provided, however, that the minimum amount of such costs and expense of investigation is fixed in the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and the minimum amount shall, in any event, be retained by the city and shall not be subject to refund. 
Whenever any permit is granted pursuant to this chapter, the permittee, in addition to the investigation and permit fee as above provided to be paid, shall thereafter, in connection with each such permit, and as a condition of continuing such permit in force and effect, pay to the city an annual permit renewal and inspection fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) and the annual permit renewal and inspection fee shall be due and payable on the first day of January following the issuance of the permit and on the first day of January in each year thereafter. 
Each such application shall contain and be accompanied by the following: 
A.	The name and addresses, both business and residence of applicant; if more than one applicant joins in the application the names and addresses, both business and residence of each such person must be stated; if the application is made in the name of a partnership, the name and addresses, both business and residence, of each partner must be stated; if applicant is a corporation, a statement must be made including and showing the laws under which it is incorporated, the place and address of its principal place of business in the state of California, together with the names and respective titles of its officers who will be in charge of its operations under the permit applied for, and of its general manager; 
B.	A statement of the type of construction, dimensions and location of such derrick, together with the purpose or purposes for which permit is desired; 
C.	A detailed description of the real property proposed or intended to be used, or used, for any of the purposes aforesaid, together with a statement of the acreage, or number of square feet, contained with the boundaries of the description; 
D.	A map or plat of the real property which is required to be described in detail in the application, drawn to scale, which map or plat shall have been prepared and verified by a licensed land surveyor, or a registered civil engineer so licensed or registered in the state of California, and on which map or plat shall be shown and indicated: 
1.	The location of the center of well-hole proposed to be drilled, operated and/or maintained thereon, 
2.	All existing buildings, improvements and other structures on the real property within a radius of three hundred (300) feet from the center of the proposed well-hole; 
E.	Any and all other information that the city council may, in its discretion, deem pertinent in connection with the permitted operations, and shall from time to time require. 
F.	A written agreement duly executed by applicant that, in the event a permit is issued to him by the city council pursuant to such application, he will, as a condition to any of his operations within the city, faithfully comply with and abide by each and all of the provisions, requirements and conditions of the permit issued to him, as permittee, and of this chapter and with all ordinances of the city, laws of the state of California, laws of the United States of America, and with all lawful orders of the city clerk in any manner pertaining or applying to any of the operations or proposed operations of applicant. 
(Ord. 140 § 3, 1960) 
8.32.040 - Rejection. 
The city council shall have the power and reserves the authority, after a hearing to be held only upon ten days' notice to applicant, to refuse any application for a permit where, by reason of the location of the proposed well and the character and value of the permanent improvements already erected on the property upon which it is proposed to drill such well, and the use to which such property is adapted for civic purposes, or for sanitary reasons, or for fire protection or for the protection of the common convenience, prosperity and welfare of the inhabitants of the city as a whole, the drilling of such well will be of serious disadvantage to the city and its inhabitants as a whole. The decision of the city council upon such hearing shall be final. 
(Ord. 140 § 4, 1960) 
8.32.050 - Issuance of permit. 
Upon an application being approved by the city council, the city clerk shall then issue a permit for the erection and maintenance of the derrick and the permit shall specify the location of the derrick authorized to be constructed. It is unlawful for the applicant to deviate from the terms of the permit as issued or drill elsewhere under such permit at places other than as specified in the permit. 
A.	Duration of Permit. When a permit shall have been issued it shall terminate and become inoperative without any action on the part of the city; 
1.	Unless within sixty (60) days from the date of issue of the permit, actual drilling of the well shall have been commenced; or 
2.	If drilling or other work upon the well shall cease for a period of ninety (90) days, in which event it shall be presumed that the holder of such permit has abandoned the drilling of such well, unless such drilling or production operations shall have been temporarily suspended by the State Division of Oil and Gas, and unless such period shall be extended by the city council upon petition therefor and good cause being shown to the satisfaction of the city council. 
Any resumption of operations for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive six-hour days, exclusive of holidays, shall not be considered a resumption of operations; 
3.	Unless revoked as hereinafter provided for.
(Ord. 140 § 5, 1960) 
8.32.060 - Revocation of permits. 
In the event that any person, firm or corporation to whom a permit has been issued to erect, construct, maintain or use any such derrick, and appurtenances, within the city, shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or any other city ordinance, or state or federal law appertaining to the erection, construction, maintenance or use of any of the above, the city council may revoke the permit issued to any such person, firm or corporation; provided, however, that no permit shall be revoked until after a public hearing as hereinafter provided has been had by the city council in the matter of the revocation of the permit. Notice of the hearing shall be given in writing and served upon the holder of such permit, or for whom such permit is issued in the name of one or more persons, or his or their agent or manager, which notice shall state the ground of complaint against the holder or holders, and shall state the time and place where and when such hearing shall be had. 
Such notices shall be deposited in the United States Post Office in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the permittee at the last known address of such person, firm or corporation on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Such notice shall be mailed as hereinbefore provided at least ten days prior to such hearing. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to maintain his proper address on file with the city clerk and no failure on the part of the permittee to receive the notice shall operate as a bar to any proceeding or affect its validity. 
(Ord. 140 § 6, 1960) 
8.32.070 - Location of well. 
No person shall construct, locate, maintain or operate any petroleum well derrick in the territory described in Section 8.32.010 in such a manner that the center of the well hole is: 
A.	Within two hundred (200) feet of any public street, sidewalk or highway, in public use prior to the commencement of drilling of such well, except any alley intersecting or lying within any block or other subdivision unit; unless otherwise permitted by the city council where the limits of the property will not permit such spacing but in no event less than one hundred (100) feet from such public street, sidewalk or highway; 
B.	Within one hundred (100) feet of the outer boundary of the parcel of land on which such well is situated or, where several contiguous parcels of land uninterrupted by any street or sidewalk are operated as a single unit, the outer boundary of all parcels of land included within such unit; unless otherwise permitted by the city council where the limits of the property will not permit such spacing, but in no event less than twenty-five (25) feet of such outer boundary; 
C.	Within three hundred (300) feet of any steam boiler, building or source of ignition; unless otherwise approved by the city council upon a property the limits of which will not permit such spacing, but in no event within less than one hundred fifty (150) feet of such boiler, building or source of ignition. 
(Ord. 140 § 7, 1960) 
8.32.080 - Oil derricks. 
Specifications for all oil well derricks to be erected shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be subject to his approval. Such derricks shall be constructed of steel, except that the derrick floors, pump house floors, pipe racks, sills, postings, walkways, mud ditches, bull wheels, calf wheels and band wheels may be of wooden construction. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause or permit petroleum refuse or petroleum waste matter to be or remain on the surface of the ground under, around or near any derrick, sumps or boilers, around or near any tank, around or near any oil sump, or around or near any combustible structure, and except within a sump or tank. All lands within a radius of twenty-five (25) feet from any derrick, tank or other buildings, machinery or equipment used in the development, production or storage of petroleum, gas, gasoline or other petroleum products, shall be at all times kept free and clear from dry weeds, rubbish or other flammable waste material. 
(Ord. 140 § 8, 1960) 
8.32.090 - Discharging of gas. 
Permittee shall not discharge or cause, or suffer to be discharged into the air, any amount of natural gas, either before or after the removal of the gasoline therefrom, and any such discharge may be temporarily excused solely by an act of God or causes beyond the reasonable control of permittee while in the exercise of utmost care and diligence. 
(Ord. 140 § 9, 1960) 
8.32.100 - Violation—Penalty. 
Every person, as principal, agent or otherwise, violating or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than three months, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and each such person, as principal, agent or otherwise shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which the violation of, or failure, neglect or refusal to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person. 
(Ord. 140 § 11, 1960) 
Chapter 8.36 - OPEN BURNING 
Sections: 
 
8.36.010 - Restricted. 
No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or shall knowingly furnish the materials for any such fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained, or shall burn or incinerate any material, refuse or rubbish of any kind, on or in any street, alley, road, lane or public grounds, or upon any private lot, unless the fire is kindled and maintained in an incinerator, covered and protected by a metal screen mesh with openings not more than one-quarter inch in diameter. 
(Ord. 190 § 1, 1964) 
Chapter 8.40 - VIEW-OBSTRUCTING TREES AND STRUCTURES 
Sections: 
 
8.40.010 - Corner lots. 
It is unlawful for any person, association or corporation owning or occupying private property at or near a street corner formed by intersecting streets to install, set out or maintain, or to allow the installation, setting out or maintenance of any sign, fence, wall, hedge, shrubbery, natural growth or other obstruction to the view, higher than three feet above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection, within that triangular area between the property lines and diagonal lines joining points on the property lines twenty (20) feet from the point of their intersection, or in the case of rounded corners the triangular area between the tangents to the curve and a diagonal line joining points on said tangent twenty (20) feet from the point of their intersection. The tangents referred to are those at the beginning and at the end of the curve at the corner. 
(Ord. 322 § 1, 1977) 
8.40.020 - Exceptions. 
The foregoing section shall not apply to: 
A.	Buildings and other structures for which a permit is required under the building code of the city, public utility poles, fire hydrants, trees trimmed to the trunk to a line at least eight feet above the level of the intersection, saplings, plant species of open growth habits and not planted in the form of a hedge, which are so planted and trimmed as to leave at all seasons a clear and unobstructed cross-view; 
B.	Official warning signs or signals at places where the contour of the ground is such that there can be no cross-visibility at the intersections; 
C.	Signs mounted ten feet or more above the ground and whose supports do not constitute an obstruction. 
(Ord. 322 § 2, 1977) 
8.40.030 - Nuisance declared. 
Any obstruction maintained in violation of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance, and if the owner or occupant of the property involved fails to abate the nuisance within ten days after the posting of notice upon the property to abate the nuisance, Woodlake city officials may enter upon the premises and remove or trim the growth. In such event, the cost to the city of the abatement of the nuisance shall be deemed a personal obligation of the owner and the occupant of the premises, which can be recovered in a civil action or which may be added to the city's tax on the property. 
(Ord. 322 § 3, 1977) 
8.40.040 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
Every person, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided. 
(Ord. 322 § 4, 1977) 
Chapter 8.44 - WATER WELLS 
Sections: 
 
8.44.010 - County provisions adopted. 
A.	There is added to this code, the Tulare County Well Ordinance as set forth in Exhibit A set out at the end of this chapter. 
B.	The city also designates the Tulare County department of health services as enforcement agency for the above ordinance. 
(Ord. 445 §§ 1, 2, 1990)
Exhibit A 
Chapter 7. WELLS 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.) 
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.) 
SECTION 4700. LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY: This Chapter is enacted pursuant to authority granted by sections 13800 to 13806 of the Water Code of the State of California. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74. However, subsequently the Regional Water Quality Control Board held a hearing on this Chapter pursuant to section 13804 of the Water Code of the State of California. On 10-11-74, the County Clerk received official notice of the decision of said Regional Board that this Chapter was not sufficiently restrictive to protect the quality of the affected waters on several points, in accordance with said section 13804. Thereafter, Ordinance No. 1792 was enacted, which amended portions of this Chapter and set an effective date of 2-8-75 for both Ordinance No. 1758 and 1792. This Chapter, as amended, was subsequently reviewed and approved by said Regional Board and went into effect on 2-8-75.) 
SECTION 4701. POLICY: It is the purpose of this Chapter to assure that water produced by wells in Tulare County will be of high quality and to protect and preserve the quality of underground waters by regulating the entry of substances from the surface into well shafts and regulating the interchange through well shafts of water between underground strata. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4701.5. APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE: 
(a)  The provisions of this Chapter are applicable to all individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, corporations, estates and trusts. 
(b)  The provisions of this Chapter are also applicable to the United States, the State of California, cities and all political subdivisions of the State of California, and to all officers, employees and departments of the United States, the State of California, cities and other political subdivisions when they drill a well, or perform any of the other acts covered by this Chapter, within the unincorporated territory of Tulare County. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1922, effective 6-5-76.)
SECTION 4702. ADMINISTRATIVE VARIANCE: The Health Officer may permit construction, deepening, reconstruction and destruction of wells without strict compliance with the standards established by this Chapter when he determines that strict compliance would impose an unreasonable burden on the permittee and that the variance will not endanger the health or safety of the water user or the public generally. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4703. RETROACTIVITY: Except as specifically provided in sections 4752, 4754 and 4755 of this Chapter, this Chapter shall apply only to construction, reconstruction, deepening or destruction of a well when such construction, reconstruction, deepening or destruction is commenced after the effective date of this Chapter. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704. DEFINITIONS: Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in the following sections shall apply throughout this Chapter. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.1. "AGRICULTURAL WELL": "Agricultural well" means a well used exclusively to supply water for irrigation, livestock operation or other agricultural purposes. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.2. "AIR CONDITIONING WELL": "Air conditioning well" means a disposal well used exclusively to return to the ground, in a closed system, well water which has been used as a coolant in air conditioning processes. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.3. "ANNULAR SPACE": "Annular space" means the area between the bore and the well casing. If a conductor casing is used, "annular space" includes the area between the bore and the conductor casing and between the conductor casing and the well casing. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.4. "ANNULAR SEAL": "Annular seal" means the impervious material placed in the annular space to prevent the flow of water across or along the annular space. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.5 "CATHODIC PROTECTION WELL": "Cathodic protection well" means any artificial excavation in excess of fifty (50) feet deep constructed by any means for the purpose of installing equipment or facilities for the protection electrically of metallic equipment in contact with the ground. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.6. "CONSTRUCTION": "Construction" means the fashioning of the shaft of a well and includes, but it is not limited to, excavation, installation of casing, placing gravel, perforation of casing in place, installation of annular seals and sealing off strata. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.7. "CONTAMINATION": "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the waters to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or the spread of disease. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.8. "DESTRUCTION OF WELL": "Destruction of well" means: 
(a)  The complete filling of the wellshaft in such a manner as to protect persons and animals from the danger of physical harm and prevent surface waters, waste, debris and contaminants from entering the well; and 
(b)  The sealing of the well shaft and annular space in such a manner as to prevent pollution of any water bearing stratum by the introduction through the well shaft of water, or any other substance, the presence of which would result in a significant deterioration in the quality of water in that stratum. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.9 "DISPOSAL WELL": "Disposal well" means a well into which liquid or solid substances are deposited. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.10. "DOMESTIC WATER": "Domestic water" means water which is so used that, if contaminated, it would act as a vehicle for the exposure of humans to dangerous substances or disease causing organisms, including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, food preparation, dish washing, bathing and swimming. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.11. "HARDROCK WELL": "Hardrock well" means a well in which the water bearing strata occur in crystalline rock. "Crystalline rock" as used in this definition refers to rocks of both igneous and metamorphic origin including, but not limited to, granite, diorite, gabbro, schist and gneiss. Limestone and dolomite which commonly develop solution openings are also included. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.12. "HEALTH OFFICER": "Health Officer" means the Health Officer of the County of Tulare or his duly authorized representative. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.13. "INDIVIDUAL DOMESTIC WATER WELL": "Individual domestic water well" means a well, the water from which is used to supply the domestic needs of no more than one (1) individual residence or one (1) duplex. However, if the property on which the well is constructed is two and one-half (2 ½) acres or more in area, an "individual domestic water well" means a well the water from which is used to supply the domestic needs of not more than four (4) individual residences or duplexes occupied by the owner or lessee of the land, his relatives or employees hired to perform services on the parcel. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.14. "INDUSTRIAL WELL": "Industrial well" means a well used exclusively to supply water for industrial purposes. If any water from such a well is used for domestic purposes, the well shall be deemed to be a public domestic well. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.15. "INJECTION WELL": "Injection well" means a well used to introduce water into the underground as a means of replenishing ground water basins. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.16. "PERMITTEE": "Permittee" means the person who makes a permit application or a person on whose behalf such an application is made. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.17. "POINT DRIVEN WELL": "Point driven well" means a well constructed by driving into the ground a pipe fitted with a well point. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.18. "POLLUTION": "Pollution" means an alteration of the quality of water by waste to a degree which unreasonably and adversely affects such water for beneficial uses, or facilities which serve such beneficial uses. The term "pollution" includes "contamination." 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.19. "PUBLIC DOMESTIC WATER WELL": "Public domestic water well" means any well the water from which is used to supply domestic water which is not an individual domestic water well as defined in section 4704.13 of this Article. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.20 "RECONSTRUCTION": "Reconstruction" means alteration, repair or restoration of a well shaft. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.21. "RIVER WELL": "River well" means a dug well located in or near a watercourse which draws water from that watercourse. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.22. "TEST HOLE": "Test hole" means an artificial excavation constructed for the purpose of gathering information regarding subterranean conditions prepatory to commencement of a well construction project. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.23. "WATER QUALITY": "Water quality" means the chemical, physical, biological, bacteriological, radiological and other properties and characteristics of water affecting its use. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.24. "WELL": "Well" means any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting water from, or injecting water or any other substance into, the underground or for the purpose of cathodic protection, except that this definition shall not include: 
(a)  Oil and gas wells, or geothermal wells constructed under the jurisdiction of the Department of Conservation of the State of California, except those wells converted to use as water wells. 
(b)  Wells used for the purpose of dewatering excavations during construction or stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.25. "WELL CONTRACTOR": "Well contractor" means any person licensed pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California to engage in well drilling. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.26. "WELL DEVELOPMENT": "Well development" means the use of one or more of a variety of techniques, including, but not limited to, overpumping, surging, introduction of chemicals and explosions, which are intended to, and usually have the effect of, increasing the flow of water from underground sources into the well shaft through perforations or through the bottom of the shaft by acting upon fine particles impeding the flow of such water. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4704.27. "WELL REDEVELOPMENT": "Well redevelopment" means the development of a previously existing well. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
ARTICLE 2. PERMITS FOR WELL 
CONSTRUCTION, DEEPENING,
RECONSTRUCTION AND
DESTRUCTION 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.) 
SECTION 4710. PERMIT: WHEN REQUIRED: CONDITIONS: EXPIRATION: Exception as otherwise provided in sections 4711 and 4712 of this Article and except as otherwise provided in Article 3 of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, deepen, reconstruct or destroy any well, or cause any of those acts to be done, unless a permit has first been issued to him or to the person on whose behalf the work is undertaken. Every permit shall be deemed to be conditioned upon compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. The Health Officer may prescribe additional conditions if he determines that they are required to prevent contamination or pollution of underground waters. Permit conditions are appealable pursuant to section 4716 of this Article. The permit shall expire on the one hundred and eightieth (180) calendar day after date of issuance if the work has not been started and reasonable progress toward completion has not been maintained, except that the Health Officer may extend the expiration date of the permit if he determines that the delay has been warranted. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4711. EMERGENCY WORK: Should persons or property be threatened by a sudden, unforeseen impairment in the quantity or quality of water available, so that it becomes necessary to obtain a new water supply or increase the existing supply and a permit cannot be obtained because County offices are not open, a well may be constructed, deepened or reconstructed without a permit. All work done under such emergency conditions shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter. In all such cases, the person who caused the work to be done shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after such work is begun, excluding weekends and holidays, file a statement with the Health Officer indicating the reason for the emergency work. The Health Officer shall inspect the well and order the person who caused the emergency work to be done to perform such other and further work, if any, as shall be necessary to bring the well into conformity with the requirements of this Chapter. The terms of such an order shall be deemed permit conditions within the meaning of section 4716 of this Article. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4712. PERMIT NOT REQUIRED: 
(a)  No permit is required to install, replace or repair a pump on an existing well or to redevelop an existing well. However, whenever such work requires that the sanitary seal be broken, the person doing the work shall make a record of the project, retain it for at least one (1) year and make it available to the Health Officer on request. 
(b)  No permit is required by this Chapter for the construction of a seepage pit constructed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 7425) of Chapter 4 of Part VII of this Code. The foregoing provision shall not be construed to allow disposition of sewage, contaminants, toxic materials or other substances in such a seepage pit in a manner forbidden by section 4763 of this Chapter. 
(c)  Except as provided in section 4760 of this Chapter, no permit is required to construct, reconstruct, deepen or destroy a river well. 
(d)  No permit shall be required to install a surface seal required by section 4751 of this Chapter or a surface seal and annular seal required by section 4752 of this Chapter. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4713. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT: 
(a)  Application for a permit required by Section 4710 of this Article shall be made to the Health Officer. Such application shall be on forms furnished by the Health Officer and shall provide all information pertaining to the project required by the Health Officer. Every application shall be signed by the owner or lessee of the land on which the well is, or will be, located, or the owner of an easement which allows the construction of a well, or the authorized agent of any such person. 
(b)  The following information shall be furnished: 
(1)  Owner's name and address. 
(2)  Intended use of well, whether domestic, agricultural, industrial, or other use. 
(3)  Location of well by reference to street address, nearest streets or crossroads or other significant features and, when requested by the Health Officer, by reference to township, range and section. 
(4)  Dimensioned plot plan indicating north direction, distances and locations of existing and proposed structures, sewers or sewage disposal systems, other wells and any other potential source of contamination or pollution on the property or adjacent property within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the well or proposed well. 
(5)  Well drilling contractor's name, address and contractor's license number. 
(6)  Nature of the work to be done, whether construction, deepening or other work, and the method to be used, whether cable tool, rotary or other method. 
(7)  Estimated depth of well when completed. 
(8)  Size, gauge and type of casing. 
(9)  Significant features of well (e.g. conductor casing or gravel pack). 
(c)  In addition to the foregoing, the Health Officer may require such other and further information relevant to the project as he may deem necessary to determine whether the public health and safety require the denial of the permit or the imposition of further conditions. 
(d)  A permit may be denied for failure to supply any information required by or pursuant to this section which is known to, or by the exercise of reasonable diligence can be acquired by, the applicant. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4714. APPLICATION: FEE: Each application for a permit to construct, reconstruct, deepen, or abandon a water well shall be accompanied by a fee established by Resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the County of Tulare. There shall be no fee for permits issued to the governmental entities and officers specified in Subsection (b) of Section 4701.5 of this Chapter. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74, but see footnote to section 4700; amended by Ord. No. 1922, effective 6-5-76; amended by Ord. No. 2804, effective 11-5-87.) 
SECTION 4715. DENIAL OF PERMIT: 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section and in section 4713, no permit shall be denied unless it appears that the project for which the permit is requested poses a substantial threat of pollution to the underground waters. 
(b)  No permit shall issue for the construction, deepening or reconstruction of an individual domestic water well or a public domestic water well in a location in which sources of pollution or contamination are known to exist which may cause a well complying with the provisions of Article 6 of this Chapter to become polluted or contaminated; provided, however, that if no other source of potable water is available and if the Health Officer determines that such water may be rendered potable by appropriate treatment, a permit conditioned on the provision of facilities for such treatment may be issued. 
(c)  No permit shall issue for the construction of a point driven public domestic water well; provided, however, that where no water is available at a depth of greater than fifty (50) feet a permit may be issued for construction of a point driven well less than fifty (50) feet deep. Any permit for the construction of a point driven public domestic water well shall be conditioned upon provision of purification facilities adequate to insure that water produced will be and will remain potable. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4716. APPEAL OF DENIAL OR CONDITIONS: If the Health Officer denies an application for a permit, or issues a permit subject to conditions which the applicant believes to be unreasonable, the applicant may appeal to the Board of Supervisors from the decision of the Health Officer. The Board of Supervisors shall, within twenty (20) days after receipt of a written appeal, hold a hearing to determine whether the permit shall be issued to the applicant and, if a permit is to be issued, the terms and conditions under which it shall be issued. Such a hearing shall be conducted in accordance with section 4734 of this Chapter and may be continued from time to time by the Board. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be rendered within seven (7) days after the conclusion of the hearing and the decision shall be final as to all matters determined. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4716.2. JUDICIAL REVIEW OF DECISION: Judicial review of a decision of the Board of Supervisors made after a hearing pursuant to this Article, if the decision denies the permit, shall be made pursuant to section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of California. The method of judicial review, the time limits for judicial review, and all of the other provisions of said section 1094.6 shall govern such judicial review. When giving written notice to the applicant that the permit has been denied, the Board of Supervisors shall provide notice to the applicant that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by said section 1094.6. 
(Added by Ord. No. 2020, effective 7-9-77.)
ARTICLE 3. NOTICE OF INTENT 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 
10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.) 
SECTION 4717. NOTICE OF INTENT: 
(a)  Instead of complying with the permit procedure set forth in Article 2 of this Chapter, the owner may mail to the Health Officer a notice of intent to construct, deepen, reconstruct or destroy such well; provided, however, that such notice of intent procedure is not applicable to a public domestic well, cathodic protection well, injection well, disposal well or air conditioning well. The notice of intent shall contain the same information required under subsection (b) of section 4713 of this Chapter. Upon mailing such notice of intent to the Health Officer, properly filled out and accompanied by full payment of any fee required by section 4717.5 of this Chapter, construction, deepening, reconstruction or destruction of the well may be commenced, except when additional notice to the Health Department is required under subsection (b) hereinbelow. 
(b)  If the work of constructing, deepening, reconstruction or destroying the well is to be commenced within three (3) days after the date which the notice of intent is mailed to the Health Officer, the owner or the well driller shall contact the Health Department, by telephone or in person, and advise the Department of the nature and location of the proposed work and the name of the owner and well driller prior to commencing work. Also, if the third day after the date on which the notice of intent is mailed falls on a Saturday, Sunday or County holiday, the owner or well driller shall contact the Health Department and furnish the aforesaid information before commencing work if he desires to commence work prior to the next day on which the Health Department is open for business. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to commence construction, deepening, reconstruction or destruction of a well without mailing such notice of intent pursuant to the provisions of subsection (a) hereinabove and giving the additional notice under subsection (b) hereinabove when required, or securing a permit pursuant to the provisions of Article 2 of this Chapter except in those cases in which a permit is not required under Article 2. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700. Amended by Ord. No. 1792, effective 2-8-75; amended by Ord. No. 2678, effective 11-22-85.) 
SECTION 4717.5. FEES: The fee for filing a notice of intent pursuant to this Article shall be established by Resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the County of Tulare. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700. Amended by Ord. No. 2678, effective 11-22-85; amended by Ord. No. 2804, effective 11-5-87.) 
SECTION 4718. CONDITIONS: NUISANCE: Since work is commenced without benefit of a permit pursuant to this notice of intent procedure, the Health Officer will not be able to impose conditions as he does under the permit procedure. However, the procedures set forth in Article 5 of this Chapter with regard to abatement as a nuisance of any well when work is not being done in accordance with the requirement of this Chapter shall be fully applicable to such wells. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700; amended by Ord. No. 2804, effective 11-5-87.) 
SECTION 4718.5. WELL STANDARDS: MISDEMEANOR: The applicable well standards set forth in Articles 6, 7 and 8 of this Chapter are applicable to wells constructed, deepened, reconstructed or destroyed pursuant to the procedure set forth in this Article. It shall be unlawful to construct, deepen, reconstruct or destroy such a well without complying with all of the applicable standards in said Articles 6, 7 and 8. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4719. REPORTS: A person giving a notice of intent pursuant to this Article shall make the reports required by sections 4723-4726 of this Chapter. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4719.5. INSPECTIONS: The site of the work may be inspected by the Health Officer at such times as he deems advisable. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700; amended by Ord. No. 2804, effective 11-5-87.) 
ARTICLE 4. INSPECTIONS, REPORTS AND ENFORCEMENT 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.) 
SECTION 4720. INSPECTIONS: Every project for which a permit is required by this Chapter may be inspected by the Health Officer at such times as he deems advisable. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4721. MANDATORY INSPECTIONS ON CERTAIN PROJECTS: The Health Officer may prescribe mandatory inspections of public domestic water well projects, and of projects on which he deems it likely that strata seals will be required pursuant to section 4749 of this Chapter. The stage at which each such inspection is required shall be set forth in the permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to continue work on a project past the stage at which an inspection has been prescribed pursuant to this section until such inspection by the Health Officer has been completed, except that, a permittee, or one acting on his behalf, may make an appointment with the Health Officer, by telephone or otherwise, to have the inspection carried out at or following a time agreed upon at which it is contemplated the inspection stage will have been reached, but not less than twenty-four (24) hours following the time the appointment is made, and, if the Health Officer does not appear to make the inspection within one (1) hour following the time specified, work on the project may lawfully proceed. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4722. INSPECTION: PUBLIC DOMESTIC WELL: MISDEMEANOR: It shall be unlawful to use a public domestic water well constructed, reconstructed or deepened after the effective date of this Chapter until the Health Officer has inspected it and determined that the water produced meets the standard prescribed by section 4760 of this Chapter. An adverse determination shall be subject to review pursuant to section 4716 of this Chapter. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4723. WELL DRILLER'S REPORT: Any person who has constructed, deepened or reconstructed a well shall, within thirty (30) days after completion of the work, furnish the Health Officer with a log of the well containing the following information: 
(a)  A description of the strata encountered. 
(b)  The depth of the well. 
(c)  Depth of the first water encountered, when known. 
(d)  Depth of the casing or casings including type and location of perforations or well screen. 
(e)  Depth of annular seal and type and amount of grout material used when an annular seal is required. 
(f)  Depths of strata sealed. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4724. WELL DEVELOPER'S REPORT: Any person who installs pumping equipment and develops a well for public domestic supply shall, within thirty (30) days after completion, file a written report with the Health Officer containing the following information: 
(a)  Depth of water after developing the well. 
(b)  The yield in gallons per minute with number of feet of drawdown after five (5) or more continuous hours of pumping. The pumping time may be reduced if the Health Officer determines that a problem exists for the disposal of water. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4725. CONFIDENTIALITY OF REPORTS: Information reported pursuant to section 4723 or section 4724 of this Article shall not be divulged except on written request of the person reporting such information or the permittee of the project. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4726. FAILURE TO REPORT: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to file the reports required by sections 4723 or 4724 of this Article. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700; amended by Ord. No. 1923, effective 6-5-76.) 
SECTION 4727. ENFORCEMENT: STOP ORDER: MISDEMEANOR: Whenever any well construction, destruction, pump installation or repair work is being done contrary to the requirements of this Chapter, the permit or the notice of intent, the Health Officer may order the work stopped by posting a notice to stop at the well site. It shall be unlawful to do further work after such notice has been posted. A stop order shall be subject to review pursuant to section 4716. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4728. ENFORCEMENT: PERMIT CONDITIONS: MISDEMEANOR: It shall be unlawful to perform any work for which a permit has been granted pursuant to this Chapter without complying with the conditions of such permit. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
ARTICLE 5. NUISANCE 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.) 
SECTION 4730. DECLARATION OF NUISANCE: Wells constructed, reconstructed, deepened or destroyed after the effective date of this Chapter which are not constructed, reconstructed, deepened or destroyed in accordance with the terms of this Chapter, including permit conditions added by the Health Officer pursuant to authority granted by this Chapter, and wells and test holes which are defective within the meaning of section 4770 of this Chapter are hereby declared public nuisances which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this Article. The owner may abate the nuisance described hereinabove at any time prior to commencement of actual abatement by, or at the direction of, the Health Officer. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4731. NUISANCE: NOTICE: CONTENTS: Whenever the Health Officer determines that a nuisance described in section 4730 of this Article exists, he shall deliver to the owner of the land upon which the nuisance has been determined by him to exist a written notice informing the owner of the determination that such nuisance exists. The notice shall state that unless the owner abates the nuisance within a time, following completion of service of the notice, therein stated, determined by the Health Officer to be a reasonable time to accomplish such abatement, but not less than two (2) weeks, or within such time files a notice of appeal with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors, the Health Officer will abate the nuisance. It shall also state that the cost of such abatement may be added to the County assessment roll as a lien on the real property or placed on the unsecured tax roll. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4732. NOTICE: PERSONAL DELIVERY: MAILING: POSTING: The notice required by section 4731 of this Article shall be served by delivering it personally to the owner, or if he cannot, after diligent effort, be personally served, by placing it in the mail, with postage paid for certified mail, addressed to the owner as his address appears on the records of the County Assessor. If service cannot with diligent effort be accomplished by personal delivery or by mail, notice may be given by posting a copy at the well site or by posting copies not more than one thousand (1,000) feet apart along the subject property. Notice by posting shall be deemed complete one (1) week after posting. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4733. HEARING: REQUEST: SETTING: NOTICE: The owner of property upon which the Health Officer has determined that a nuisance described in section 4730 of this Article exists may request a hearing before the Board of Supervisors for review of such determination within the time specified in section 4731 of this Article by filing a written request therefor with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors. The request shall describe the property on which the nuisance has been determined to exist by street name and number and give the name of the owner and his address. The Clerk shall set a date and time for hearing and send a notice thereof by regular mail at least ten (10) days before such date to the owner at the address set forth on his request and shall notify the Health Officer of such hearing. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4734. HEARING: CONDUCT: At the date and time set, a hearing shall be held by the Board of Supervisors. The hearing shall be open to the public. The owner may be represented by counsel. The Board of Supervisors shall hear all pertinent evidence offered by all interested persons. The technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing. All persons giving evidence shall be sworn before testifying. The owner may employ a shorthand reporter to report the hearing. The Board may continue said hearing from time to time. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4735. HEARING: DECISION: At the conclusion of the hearing if the Board of Supervisors determines that a public nuisance exists, it shall thereupon order the nuisance abated no sooner than thirty (30) days following service of notice of the Board's decision. The decision shall include a determination by the Board whether the nuisance is to be abated by correction or destruction. Notice shall be served by the Clerk of the Board on the owner in the manner set forth in section 4732 of this Article. The order of the Board shall be deemed final on the date made. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4735.5 JUDICIAL REVIEW OF DECISION: Judicial review of a decision of the Board of Supervisors made after a hearing pursuant to section 4735 of this Article shall be made pursuant to sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of California. When giving written notice to the owner of the order of the Board of Supervisors to abate the nuisance, the Clerk of the Board shall include a statement that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by said section 1094.6. 
(Added by Ord. No. 2804, effective 11-5-87.)
SECTION 4736. ABATEMENT: ENTERING PRIVATE PROPERTY: If a nuisance is not corrected or a hearing sought within the time specified pursuant to section 4731 of this Article or if, after hearing, a nuisance is not abated pursuant to, and in the time required by, section 4735 of this Article, the Health Officer shall cause the nuisance to be abated and for that purpose he, and others at his direction, may enter the property where the nuisance exists. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4737. ACCOUNTING: NOTICE: HEARING: The Health Officer shall keep an account of the cost of abatement and render a report in writing to the Board of Supervisors showing such cost. Upon receipt of the account of the Health Officer, the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall deposit a copy of the account in the mail addressed to the owner and include therewith a notice informing the owner that, at a date and time selected by the Clerk, but not less than ten (10) days after the date of mailing of the notice, the Board of Supervisors will review the account and that the owner may appear at said time and be heard. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4738. HEARING ON ACCOUNTING: At the time fixed, the Board of Supervisors shall meet to review the report of the Health Officer. The owner may appear at said time and be heard on the questions whether the accounting is accurate and the amounts reported reasonable. The report of the Health Officer shall be admitted into evidence. The owner shall bear the burden of proving that the accounting is not accurate and reasonable. The hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in section 4734 of this Article. The Board of Supervisors shall make such modifications in the accounting as it deems necessary and thereafter shall confirm the report by resolution. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4739. SPECIAL ASSESSMENT AND LIEN: The Board of Supervisors may order that the cost of abating nuisances pursuant to this Chapter be placed upon the County tax roll by the County Auditor as special assessments against the land, or placed on the unsecured roll, in accordance with the provisions of section 25845 of the Government Code of the State of California. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
ARTICLE 6. WELL STANDARDS 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.) 
SECTION 4740. LOCATION OF WELLS: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, no well hereafter constructed shall be located closer than the indicated horizontal distances from the following: 
Front property line	25 feet
Other property line	5 feet
Septic tank	50 feet
Leach line or disposal field	100 feet
Metallic sewer line	25 feet
Non-metallic sewer line	50 feet
Seepage pit	150 feet
 
(b)  No well hereafter constructed shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of an area in which animals or fowl, fed by means other than grazing, are confined or restrained, except when a physical barrier prevents drainage or percolation from the confinement into the well. 
(c)  No domestic well hereafter constructed shall be located within fifty (50) feet of another well, except that an individual domestic well hereafter constructed may be located within fifty (50) feet of another individual domestic well. 
(d)  When the Health Officer determines that an extraordinary danger of pollution or contamination exists, the Health Officer may increase the setback requirements specified in this section. 
(e)  The setback restrictions contained in this section are not violated when the location of a septic tank, leach or disposal field, solid sewer line, or seepage pit on property of another is not known to the permittee and could not by the exercise of reasonable diligence have been discovered. 
(f)  Cathodic protection wells are not subject to the setback from property line provisions of this section. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74, but see footnote to section 4700; amended by Ord. No. 1922, effective 6-5-76.) 
SECTION 4741. CASING: The well casing shall extend not less than one-half (½) inch above the top of the concrete base required by this Chapter. At the time of completion of the well, the top of the casing shall be sealed with a weatherproof plate or cap, securely fastened in place. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4742. CASING: MATERIALS: Subsections (a) and (b) of subsection 2 of subsection A of section 12 of Part II of Chapter II of State of California Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74 are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this Chapter with the same effect as if fully set forth herein. Any casing manufactured in accordance with the standards therein established may be used in the construction or reconstruction of wells. Casing made of high carbon steel for which no specifications are hereby established and casing made of material other than steel may be used upon a showing by the permittee that such material will withstand pressures reasonably to be anticipated. In no case may wood or downspout be used for casing. No damaged, defective or factory reject casing shall be used. All casing shall be water tight, except for perforations. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4743. CASING: THICKNESS: Where steel casing is used it shall be not less than the thickness set forth in the following table: 
Diameter;  	Gauge;  	Thickness in inches;  
6 inch 	12 	0.1046
8 inch 	12 	0.1046
10 inch 	12 	0.1046
12 inch 	12 	0.1046
14 inch 	10 	0.1345
more than 14 inch 	8 	0.1644
 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4744. CASING PERFORATIONS: The casing of domestic water wells shall not be perforated within fifty (50) feet of the ground surface if the depth of the well is greater than fifty (50) feet. When possible, the uppermost perforations shall be below an impervious stratum in an aquifer of good quality water. If a domestic water well with perforations fifty (50) feet or less from the ground surface is deepened, the perforations fifty (50) feet or less in depth shall be sealed off to prevent commingling of water from that level with deeper water. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4745. CASING PERFORATIONS: SHALLOW WELLS: Where an individual domestic well has a depth of sixty-five (65) feet or less, only the bottom one-fourth (¼) of the casing shall be perforated, provided that the Health Officer, after submission to him of sufficient evidence that the well will not be thereby polluted or contaminated, may permit perforations above the bottom one-fourth (¼) of the casing. Wherever possible, the perforations shall be kept below an impervious stratum. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4746. ANNULAR SEAL: PUBLIC DOMESTIC WELLS: Public domestic wells shall have an annular seal. On a public domestic well the space between the wall of the bore and the well casing or the conductor casing, if the conductor casing is left in place, shall be grouted to a depth of not less than fifty (50) feet from the ground surface except as follows: 
(a)  In the event the space between the wall of the bore and the conductor casing cannot be grouted to a depth of fifty (50) feet, that space shall be grouted to the greatest depth possible and the space between the well casing and the conductor casing shall be grouted to a depth of not less than fifty (50) feet from the ground surface in such a manner that the grout will be forced out into the space between the wall of the bore and the conductor casing at the fifty (50) foot level. The grout shall form an effective seal which will preclude the vertical movement of water along the outside of the conductor casing between those aquifers lying above and below the fifty (50) foot level from the ground surface. In such cases, a gravel fill pipe may be installed through the annular seal on gravel packed wells. 
(b)  Public domestic wells extending into hard rock shall be grouted no less than one (1) foot into the first hard rock encountered. 
(c)  Public domestic wells less than sixty-five (65) feet deep shall conform to requirements set by the Health Officer at the time the permit is issued. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4747. ANNULAR SEAL: INDIVIDUAL DOMESTIC WELLS: Individual domestic wells shall have an annular seal. On an individual domestic well the space between the wall of the bore and the well casing or the conductor casing, if the conductor casing is left in place, shall be grouted to a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet on wells drilled by the rotary method and not less than three (3) feet on wells constructed by other methods. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700. Amended by Ord. No. 1792, effective 2-8-75.) 
SECTION 4748. ANNULAR SEAL: OTHER WELLS: Agricultural and industrial wells located within one hundred (100) feet of a domestic well or source of contamination and all air conditioning wells shall meet the annular seal requirements set forth in section 4746 of this Article. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4749. SEALING OFF STRATA: 
(a)  Whenever a well penetrates one or more aquifers containing water the quality of which is such that the quality of water produced by the well, or the quality of water in other aquifers, will be significantly reduced if the waters are allowed to intermingle, the aquifer containing the low quality water shall be sealed so as to prevent such intermingling. Whenever an aquifer is required to be sealed, a ten (10) foot annular seal shall be formed in the confining formations, except that where the well shaft ends in the aquifer to be sealed, the seal need not be extended into the lower confining formation so long as the bottom of the shaft is sealed. There shall be no casing perforations in the aquifer to be sealed. 
(b)  When drilling a well, if the driller drills through a layer of clay which is twenty (20) feet or more in thickness, the casing shall not be perforated both above and below the clay if both of the following conditions occur: 
(1)  The difference in water quality above and below the clay is more than five hundred (500) micromhos as specific electrical conductance or more than three hundred (300) milligrams per liter as total dissolved solids; and 
(2)  The well is located in an area which is designated by the Health Officer as a salinity problem area on a current map of the known salinity problem areas in the County prepared by, and on file in the office of, the Health Officer. Said map shall be revised by the Health Officer from time to time to show the areas in the County where salinity problems are known to exist after consultation with well-drillers generally and other interested groups and individuals. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700. Amended by Ord. No. 1792, effective 2-8-75.) 
SECTION 4750. GROUTING MATERIAL AND INSTALLATION: All annular seals shall be of neat cement, cement grout, quick setting cement or bentonite the composition of which shall conform to requirements of subsection D of section 9 of Part II of Chapter II of State of California Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74 which is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this Chapter with the same effect as if fully set forth herein. The Health Officer may accept other materials when they have been demonstrated to form acceptable seals which preclude the vertical movement of water along the outside of the well casing. All annular seals shall be poured in one continuous process unless otherwise specified on the permit. The annular seal shall be a minimum of two (2) inches thick at all depths, except the annular seal for hardrock wells shall be a minimum of one (1) inch thick at all depths. In no event shall the thickness of an annular seal be less than three (3) times the diameter of the largest aggregate used in the sealing material. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4751. SURFACE SEAL: All water wells shall be provided with a watertight concrete base poured in a single, continuous operation on thoroughly compacted earth. Except for individual domestic wells, the base shall have a minimum total thickness of fourteen (14) inches of which art least ten (10) inches shall extend above the ground level at the casing. The base of individual domestic wells shall have a minimum total thickness of four (4) inches. The base shall extend horizontally in all directions at least one (1) foot from the outside of the well casing or the well of the bore hole on gravel packed wells. The concrete base shall be adequately sloped so as to drain water away from the well casing to the edge of the base. The Health Officer may approve a base of a different design where the variation from this pattern of construction would serve a practical purpose or is essential to the integrity or utility of the well and will not lessen well protection. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4752. SURFACE SEAL ON EXISTING WELLS: NUISANCE: MISDEMEANOR: All public domestic water wells constructed prior to the effective date of this Chapter which do not have an effective surface seal shall be provided with a concrete base which meets the requirements of section 4751 of this Article and shall comply with the requirements of section 4754 and 4755 of this Article. They shall also have an annular seal two (2) inches thick which extends down the outside of the outermost casing not less than three (3) feet from the ground surface. A public domestic well which, within one (1) year after the effective date of this Chapter, does not meet all of the requirements of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance within the meaning of section 4730 of this Chapter. It shall be unlawful to maintain such a nuisance. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4753. SAMPLE SPIGOT: Public domestic wells shall be provided with a sample spigot on the pump discharge line as close to the pump as practical. The sample spigot shall be on the discharge side of the check valve when a check valve is installed. The spout of the spigot shall not be threaded unless the pump has a check valve. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4754. ANTI-SIPHON DEVICES: 
(a)  All wells constructed after the effective date of this Chapter shall have a check valve, air gap or flap which will prevent water from the discharge line from flowing into the well. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Chapter, all existing public domestic wells shall have a device of the type described in subsection (a) of this section and it shall be unlawful, and a public nuisance, to maintain a well without such a device. 
(c)  The devices of the type required to be installed under subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be placed as close to the pump as practicable. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to inject any herbicide, chemical or any other pollutant into the discharge line of a well which is not equipped with a device of the type described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4755. ACCESS AND AIR VENT PIPE: All wells shall be provided with a pipe or other effective means by which disinfectants can be introduced into the well or the depth of the well may be measured. The pipe, if provided, shall be extended to a height of not less than three (3) inches above the concrete base and shall be kept sealed and shall be provided with a threaded cap. On public domestic wells the pipe shall also serve as an air relief vent, terminate downward, be covered with sixteen (16) per inch or finer wire mesh screen and be protected against the possibility of contamination by material entering the pipe. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4756. DISINFECTION OF WELLS: After the pump has been installed, all domestic wells shall be disinfected with a solution containing at least fifty (50) parts per million available chlorine, which shall remain in the well for a period of not less than twenty-four (24) hours or by an equivalent method of disinfection satisfactory to the Health Officer, and such procedure shall be repeated on all public domestic wells as necessary to produce water which will yield negative results on two (2) consecutive biological samples tested in the manner prescribed in section 4760 of this Chapter. The gravel used in domestic gravel packed wells shall be disinfected by mixing one-half (½) pound of tablets containing seventy (70) percent available chlorine with each ton of gravel introduced to the well. The chlorine tablets shall be evenly distributed throughout the volume of gravel used. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4757. PUMP INSTALLATION: After the effective date of this Chapter, pumps and pump motors installed or reinstalled directly over the casing of any well shall be provided with a sanitary seal between the pump base and the concrete base or between the well casing and the pump column pipe. Wells on which a submersible pump or a pump offset from the casing is installed or reinstalled shall have a steel plate fitted over the top of the casing with a watertight seal between the plate and the casing and between the casing and any pipes or conduits which enter the well through the steel plate. No pipe or conduit shall enter the casing from the side except access, air vent, and pump discharge pipes as required by this Chapter. Holes in the base of the pump which open into the well shall be sealed. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4758. WELL DEVELOPMENT: CLEANING: Before being placed in service, all wells developed or redeveloped shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign substances. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
ARTICLE 7. PARTICULAR TYPES OF WELLS 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.) 
SECTION 4760. RIVER WELLS: The Board of Supervisors hereby finds that, because of the great variation of conditions existing along rivers, it is not practical or desirable to establish general standards for public domestic river well construction, deepening or reconstruction. Accordingly, any river well, when used as a public domestic water well, shall meet the design criteria and the filtration and disinfection requirements established by the Health Officer with regard to that particular well. Such criteria and filtration and disinfection requirements shall be conditions of the permit. All public domestic river wells constructed prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall meet the water quality standards prescribed in sections 7011, 7012 and 7020 of Title 17 of the California Administrative Code which are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this Chapter with the same effect as if fully set forth herein. The Health Officer may inspect and take samples from such wells from time to time to determine whether the water produced meets said standards. If the water produced fails to meet said standards, the Health Officer shall prescribe design criteria and filtration and disinfection requirements necessary to bring the well water into compliance with such standards, and such design criteria shall be deemed permit conditions within the meaning of sections 4716 and 4730 of this Chapter. If he finds that it is not possible to bring the well water into conformity with such standards, he shall order that the well no longer be used as a source of public domestic water supply. It shall be unlawful to supply water to the public from the well after the receipt of such an order unless the order is reversed by the Board of Supervisors. An appeal may be taken from such an order pursuant to section 4716 of this Chapter. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4761. HARDROCK WELLS: In addition to complying with the order requirements of this Chapter, every public domestic hardrock well shall be continuously disinfected. The Health Officer shall prescribe the method of disinfection to be used as a condition of the permit. This requirement may be waived by the Health Officer upon submission of sufficient hydrological and geological evidence that water produced will be safe without such disinfection. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4762. CATHODIC PROTECTION WELLS: Cathodic protection wells shall be constructed in conformance with the cathodic well standards set forth in the State of California Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-1 which is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this Chapter with the same effect as if fully set forth herein. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4763. INJECTION, DISPOSAL AND AIR CONDITIONING WELLS: Injection, disposal and air conditioning wells are subject to the requirements of sections 4740 to 4743, both inclusive, 4747, 4750, that portion of 4751 applicable to individual domestic wells, and that portion of 4757 applicable to wells having submersible pumps. In addition, disposal water injected into any water bearing formation through a disposal, injection or air conditioning well shall not cause the temperature of the adjacent ground water at any point greater than fifty (50) feet in a horizontal direction from such well to increase more than eight (8) degrees Fahrenheit. Disposal water which so heats the ground water is a contaminant. It shall be unlawful to introduce into a disposal well greater than forty (40) feet in depth or penetrating a water bearing formation, sewage, contaminants, toxic materials or other substances which will alter the existing ground water quality or cause the existing ground water in the disposal area to be contaminated. A sampling tap shall be provided on all disposal and injection wells in such a manner that water, representative of the water entering the well, may be withdrawn. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
ARTICLE 8. DEFECTIVE AND OUT OF SERVICE WELLS, AND WELL DESTRUCTION STANDARDS 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.) 
SECTION 4770. DEFECTIVE WELLS: It is the duty of every owner of land on which there exists a well or test hole which impairs, or allows the impairment of, the quality of the underground water or water bearing formations or constitutes a health or safety hazard to correct the defective conditions or to destroy the well or test hole. Whenever a well or test hole is corrected pursuant to this section, that correction shall be deemed a reconstruction and shall be performed pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter. This section shall not be construed to require a permit for installation of a surface seal and annular seal pursuant to section 4752 of the Chapter. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4771. OUT OF SERVICE WELLS: It is the duty of every owner of land on which there is a well or test hole which is not being used to cap the well or test hole with a watertight seal and keep the well site free of trash, weeds and debris. Whenever any well or test hole is capped, notice shall be sent to the Health Officer stating the owner's name, the location of the well or test hole, the fact that it has been taken out of service and the anticipated date of return to service if that date is known. Any owner who wilfully fails to perform the duties imposed by this section or who introduces or knowingly allows sewage or other pollutants to flow into an out of service well or test hole shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4772. DESTRUCTION: Except as provided in section 4773 and 4774 of this Article, well destruction shall be accomplished by clearing the shaft of any obstructions, if possible, and filling the shaft in the following manner: 
(a)  Where the water table is greater than fifty (50) feet from the surface, the shaft shall be filled to within three (3) feet of the surface with inorganic material. The top three (3) feet of the shaft shall be filled with impervious material. 
(b)  Where the water table is less than fifty (50) feet from the surface, the shaft shall be filled to within twenty (20) feet of the surface with inorganic material. The top twenty (20) feet of the shaft shall be filled with impervious material. If an annular space exists, the casing shall be perforated twenty (20) feet from the surface and the impervious material allowed to flow into and seal the annular space. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4773. SAME: SEALING STRATA: Where a well penetrates one or more aquifers containing water the quality of which is such that the quality of water in other aquifers will be significantly reduced if the waters are allowed to intermingle, in addition to the impervious seal required by section 4772 of this Article, the Health Officer shall require that the shaft be sealed at such depths and in such a manner that no such intermingling of waters will occur through the shaft or through the annular space. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4774. SAME: RESIDENTIAL AREA: Whenever a well to be destroyed is located on a parcel one-half (½) acre or less in area on which is located one or more dwellings, a hole shall be excavated around the well casing to a depth of six (6) feet below the ground surface. The well casing shall be removed to within six (6) inches of the bottom of the hole. The well shaft shall be filled in the manner provided in sections 4772 and 4773 of this Article, except that the depth to which impervious fill is required shall be measured from the bottom of the hole excavated pursuant to this section rather than from the surface of the surrounding ground. Such impervious fill shall be allowed to spill over into the excavation to form an effective seal. After such impervious fill has set, the excavation shall be filled with native soil. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
SECTION 4775. SAME: FILL MATERIAL: Impervious materials used in well destruction must have a coefficient of permeability of less than one hundred (100) feet per year. Suitable materials include, but are not limited to, neat cement, cement grout, concrete and bentonite clays. Materials which may be used as inorganic fill include, but are not limited to, clay, sand, silt, native soils and any of the impervious materials referred to above. No fill material shall contain matter which will pollute the underground water. Used drilling mud shall not be used as a fill material. 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.)
ARTICLE 9. VIOLATIONS 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74; but see footnote to section 4700.) 
SECTION 4780. VIOLATIONS: 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of sections 4760, 4763 and 4771 of this Chapter which are declared to be unlawful shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in section 106 of this Ordinance Code. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of section 4726 of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than Fifty Dollars ($50.00). 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter which are declared to be unlawful, other than sections 4726, 4760, 4763 and 4771, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). 
(Added by Ord. No. 1758, effective 10-12-74, but see footnote to section 4700; amended by Ord. No. 1923, effective 6-5-76.)  
Chapter 8.48 - SMOKING RESTRICTIONS 
Sections: 
 
8.48.010 - Smoking prohibited in Woodlake buildings or vehicles—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to smoke or use tobacco products in any building which is owned, controlled, leased or managed by the city, or any vehicle owned or leased by the city. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 530C § 1, 1998) 
Chapter 8.50 - MEDICAL MARIJUANA 
Sections: 
 
8.50.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.	"Medical marijuana" is defined in strict accordance with California Health and Safety Code Sections 11018 for the treatment of a serious medical condition as defined in Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq. 
B.	"Cultivation of medical marijuana" means the growing of medical marijuana for medical purposes as defined in strict accordance with California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq. 
C.	"Collective or cooperative cultivation" means the association within California of qualified patients, persons with valid identification cards, and designated primary caregivers to cultivate marijuana for medical purposes as defined in strict accordance with California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq. 
D.	"Development application" means an application for any permit or approval to be issued by any city officer, employee, department or other office, including subdivisions, land-use permits, variances, building permits or any other entitlement for use. 
E.	"Medical marijuana dispensary" means a facility where marijuana is made available for medical purposes in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 (Proposition 215). Notwithstanding the foregoing, "medical marijuana dispensary" shall not include the following uses, so long as the location of such land uses are otherwise regulated by the this Code or applicable law: 
1.	A clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
2.	A healthcare facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
3.	A residential care facility for persons with chronic life threatening illness licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
4.	A residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
5.	A licensed residential hospice; and
6.	A home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code, as long as any such use complies strictly with applicable law including, but not limited to, California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et. seq. 
F.	"Mobile marijuana dispensary" means any clinic, cooperative, club, business or group which transports or delivers, or arranges the transportation or delivery, of medical marijuana to a person. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 3, 2-8-2016; Ord. No. 584, § 2, 7-9-2012)  
8.50.020 - Regulations applicable to the consumption of medical marijuana. 
No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise consume medical marijuana in the city unless such smoking, ingesting or consumption occurs entirely within a private residence or on the premises of a private residence but out of public view. "Out of public view" shall mean out of view from public rights-of-way where members of the public are lawfully entitled to be. "Inside a private residence" shall mean inside habitable areas and shall include garages, whether attached or detached, and other accessory buildings and that no smoke or odor resulting from such smoking, ingesting or consumption may be detected from any neighboring property or residence. 
(Ord. No. 584, § 2, 7-9-2012)  
8.50.030 - Medical marijuana dispensaries are prohibited. 
Medical marijuana dispensaries as defined in Section 8.50.010 are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 584, § 2, 7-9-2012)  
8.50.040 - Medical marijuana prohibitions. 
A.	Notwithstanding any other portion of this Code, no person shall cause or permit the establishment, development, construction, maintenance, operation or enlargement of a medical marijuana dispensary within any zoning district within the city, nor shall any development application be accepted, filed, processed, issued or approved for such a medical marijuana dispensary. 
B.	Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no person shall engage in or allow the cultivation of medical marijuana or the processing of medical marijuana nor any derivative thereof within any zoning district within the city. 
C.	Notwithstanding any other portion of this Code or any uncodified ordinance of the city, medical marijuana dispensaries and cultivation of medical marijuana are not permitted land uses within any zoning district within the city. 
D.	Each medical marijuana plant cultivated in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
E.	Each and every day that a violation exists as to any prohibition within this section shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
F.	Each violation of this chapter may be enforced by any and all lawful remedies available under this code and applicable state statutes, including but not limited to those in Title 1, civil fines and penalties, public nuisance abatement and civil injunction, and all available remedies shall be cumulative and not preclude other available remedies. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 5, 2-8-2016; Ord. No. 584, § 2, 7-9-2012)  
8.50.050 - Amortization of non-conforming medical marijuana dispensary. 
Any cultivation of medical marijuana or marijuana dispensary existing on the effective date of this section, which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, shall be regarded as a non-conforming use which may be continued only until six months after the effective date of this section. On or before such date, all such non-conforming uses must be terminated. 
(Ord. 603, § 6, 2-8-2016;Ord. No. 584, § 2, 7-9-2012)  
8.50.060 - Violation and enforcement. 
Each and every violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures authorized by Title 1, Chapter 1.20 of this Code. The minimum infraction fine for each violation is five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. Additionally, as a nuisance per se, any violation of this chapter shall be subject to injunctive relief, payment to the city of any and all monies unlawfully obtained, costs of abatement, costs of investigation, attorney fees, civil penalties as set by the city council by resolution and any other relief or remedy available at law or equity. The city may also pursue any and all remedies and actions available and applicable under local and state laws for any violations of this chapter. 
The city police department, with administrative assistance from the city administrator's office, shall have primary responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing on the enforcing officer or the city any duty to issue any notice to abate, nor to abate, nor to take any other action with regard to any marijuana dispensary in violation of this chapter, and neither the enforcing officer nor the city shall be held liable for failure to issue an order to abate, nor for failure to abate, nor for failure to take any other action with regard to any marijuana dispensary in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 584, § 2, 7-9-2012)  
Chapter 8.51 - MOBILE MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES 
Sections: 
 
8.51.010 - Definitions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this Code, the following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows: 
A.	"Mobile marijuana dispensary" means any clinic, cooperative, club, business or group which transports or delivers, or arranges the transportation or delivery, of medical marijuana to a person. 
B.	"Person" means any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other organization. The term "person" shall include any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or salesperson. 
C.	"Operation" means any effort to locate, operate, own, lease, supply or allow to be operated a mobile marijuana dispensary, or to aid, abet or assist in the operation of a mobile marijuana dispensary. 
(Ord. No. 604 § 2, 2-8-2016)  
8.51.020 - Mobile marijuana dispensaries prohibited. 
Mobile marijuana dispensaries are prohibited within the city. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated or aide, abet or assist in the operation of any mobile marijuana dispensary within the city. 
(Ord. No. 604 § 2, 2-8-2016)  
8.51.030 - Medical marijuana delivery prohibited. 
A.	No person shall deliver medical marijuana to or from any location within the city from a mobile marijuana dispensary, regardless of where the mobile marijuana dispensary is located, or engage in any operation for this purpose. 
B.	No person shall deliver any marijuana-infused product such as tinctures, baked goods or other consumable products, to or from any location within the city from a mobile marijuana dispensary, regardless of where the mobile marijuana dispensary is located, or engage in any operation for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 604 § 2, 2-8-2016)  
8.51.040 - Public nuisance declared. 
Operation of any mobile marijuana dispensary within the city in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to all available remedies. 
(Ord. No. 604 § 2, 2-8-2016)  
8.51.050 - Violations. 
Violations of this chapter may be enforced by any applicable law. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Code, a violation of this chapter is not subject to criminal penalties. 
(Ord. No. 604 § 2, 2-8-2016)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE 
  
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.04 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY 
Sections: 
 
9.04.010 - Prohibition against unreasonable obstruction and interference with free passage. 
No person shall stand in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public way open for pedestrian or vehicle travel, or otherwise occupy any portion thereof as to obstruct or unreasonably interfere with the free passage of persons or vehicles. 
No person shall loiter in any tunnel, pedestrian subway, or on any bridge, overpass or at or near the entrance thereof or exit therefrom or at or near any abutment or retaining wall adjacent to such entrance or exit, or any retaining wall or abutment adjacent to any freeway, street or highway open and used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or on any public property in the proximity of such bridge, overpass, or retaining wall or abutment. 
No person shall sit, lie or sleep in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public way. 
No person shall physically block, impede or obstruct any public place or any entrance, exit or approach to any place of business in or upon any public place in a manner calculated or with intent to prevent, delay, hinder or interfere with the free passage there along or there through of any other person who is entering, occupying or leaving any place of business, or public facility. 
Provisions of this section shall not apply to encroachments approved and authorized by the city council or allowable under existing law. 
(Ord. 517 § 1, 1995: Ord. 232 § 1, 1970) 
9.04.020 - Throwing objects. 
It is unlawful for any person to throw any object or material at vehicles, persons, animals, buildings or any property of another. 
(Ord. 232 § 2, 1970) 
9.04.030 - Alcoholic beverage consumption in public places. 
A.	It is unlawful for any person to consume or drink any beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage on any street, sidewalk, alley, highway, mall or other public street improvement within the city. This section shall not be deemed to make punishable any act or acts prohibited by any law of the state of California. 
B.	Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than ninety (90) days. 
(Ord. 244 §§ 1, 2, 1972) 
9.04.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of Section 9.04.010 or 9.04.020 or executive order issued pursuant thereto shall be guilty of an offense against the city, and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 232 § 9, 1970) 
Chapter 9.08 - CURFEW[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 597, § 2, adopted December 14, 2015, in effect repealed former ch. 9.08, § 9.08.010, and enacted a new ch. 9.08, §§ 9.08.010—9.08.050 as set out herein. Former ch. 9.08, § 9.08.010 pertained to loitering in public places by minors restricted and derived from Ord. 455, adopted in 1990.
 
9.08.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Curfew hours" refers to ten p.m., local time on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday or Saturday, until four a.m. the following day. 
"Emancipated minor" is a minor who has entered into a valid marriage, is on active duty with any of the armed forces, or has received a declaration of emancipation, as more fully set forth in California Family Code Sections 7000 et seq. 
"Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances which results in a reasonable necessity for immediate responsive or protective action, including but not limited seeking to obtain medical, police, fire or other reasonably urgent assistance. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury, loss of life or significant property damage. 
"Establishment" means any privately owned place of business, operated for a profit, to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
"Express parental permission" is the verifiable permission of a minor's parent or legal guardian for the minor to be in or on any public street, public park or any other public place during the curfew hours set forth in this chapter. When stopped for a possible violation of this chapter, it shall be the minor's responsibility to demonstrate that he or she has express written parental permission. The minor may satisfy this burden through any reasonably verifiable means including, but not limited to, signed and verifiable documentation from a parent or legal guardian specifying the date, time and purpose of permission or presentation of a form developed and administered by the city police department. Written verification shall not be required in the case of an emergency or when unforeseen circumstances arise which reasonably prevent the minor from obtaining prior written permission. If a minor is unable to demonstrate that he or she has express written parental permission and no other exception applies, the minor may be transferred to the city police department and shall not be subject to custodial interrogation for a violation of this chapter. For minors who allege but are unable to demonstrate express parental permission, the peace officer with custody of the minor at the station must promptly attempt to contact the minor's parent or legal guardian to determine if the minor has express parental permission. If the peace officer determines that the minor has express written parental permission and the minor is not being held for any other charges, the minor must be released promptly and returned to the place of initial detention as authorized by the minor's parent or legal guardian. If the peace officer does not determine that the minor has express parental permission, the minor shall be deemed to be in violation of the appropriate provision of this chapter. 
"Legitimate employment." Legitimate employment is any lawful source of employment or self-employment in connection with a business, trade, profession or occupation. 
"Minor" is any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
"Other public place" includes all other public or private property, in addition to a public street, public alley or public park, which is outdoors and immediately accessible by the public in general, such as plazas, parking lots, doorways or breezeways. Not included in this definition is the residence of a minor or the minor's actual relative or the portion of street, sidewalk or yard adjoining such residences. 
"Operator" means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
"Parent or legal guardian" is a person or spouse of a person who has the legal custody or care of a particular minor. For purposes of this chapter, parent or legal guardian also includes an adult who is accompanying a minor with the express written permission of the minor's parent or legal guardian. 
"Public park" includes all grounds, roadways, squares, recreation facilities and other property placed under the control, management, and direction of the city public works department. 
"Public street" includes all public sidewalks, crosswalks, roadways, alleys and intersections, but not sidewalks that are adjoining to a minor's residence or the residence of the minor's actual relative. 
"Religious or political activity" includes, but is not limited to, a rally, demonstration, march, vigil, service or distribution of information which has as its primary focus political or religious purposes. 
"Remain" means to linger, stay or fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a peace officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
9.08.020 - Curfew prohibitions. 
A.	No minor shall remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
B.	No parent or guardian of a minor shall permit, or by insufficient control allow, any minor who is subject to their authority to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
C.	No owner, operator, or employee of any establishment shall allow a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
9.08.030 - Exemptions; conduct that does not violate curfew prohibitions. 
A.	It is a defense to prosecution under Section 9.08.020 if the minor was: 
1.	Accompanied by the minor's parent or legal guardian.
2.	On an errand at the written direction of the minor's parent or legal guardian, without any detour or stop. 
3.	Engaged in legitimate employment activity, or going to or returning home from a legitimate employment activity, without any detour or stop. 
4.	Involved in an emergency.
5.	On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor, if the neighbor did not complain to the city police department about the minor's presence. 
6.	Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a local school district, a nonprofit charity, a locally recognized civic organization or another similar lawful entity that has taken responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from the same, without any detour or stop. 
7.	Exercising rights secured by the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States of America in accordance with all valid and applicable time, place and manner regulations. 
8.	An emancipated minor.
B.	It is a defense to prosecution of a parent or legal guardian under Section 9.08.020B. if, at the time of the minor's violation, the parent or legal guardian reported to the city police department that the minor was out during curfew hours without permission, or the minor failed to obey an order of reporting parent or legal guardian to stay home during curfew hours. 
C.	It is a defense to prosecution of owner, operator or employee of an establishment under Section 9.08.020C. if the prosecuted owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the city police department that a minor remained on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours after being asked by the establishment to leave. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
9.08.040 - Enforcement action and probable cause. 
Before transporting a minor or taking any enforcement action for a violation of Section 9.08.020, a peace officer must ask for the apparent offender's age and inquire into the minor's reason for being in the public place. The peace officer must not cite the apparent offender for violation of Section 9.08.020, unless the peace officer reasonably believes that an offense under Section 9.08.020 has occurred, and that none of the exemptions under Section 9.08.030 are applicable. No provision within this chapter shall authorize a peace officer to engage in custodial interrogation of a minor for a violation of Section 9.08.020. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
9.08.050 - Consequences for violation. 
A.	To the extent permitted by applicable law, including the terms of this section, all remedies prescribed in this section for a violation of Section 9.08.020 shall be cumulative and not mutually exclusive, and are in addition to any other remedy or penalty authorized by law. 
B.	In addition to any other authorized remedy, each violation of Section 9.08.020 shall constitute a public nuisance that shall be subject to abatement through any lawful means. 
C.	Violation of Section 9.08.020 constitutes an infraction. 
D.	Any person violating the provisions of Section 9.08.020 shall be subject to the corresponding warning, fees and community service prescribed by Welfare and Institutions Code Section 625.5(d) and (e) or its corresponding successor statute, if any, as amended from time to time. Any court order imposing community service upon a minor should not exceed any statutorily prescribed limits, including those in Welfare and Institutions Code Section 258(a)(13), which as of the date of this section limits community service by minors for violation of curfew to a total time of twenty (20) hours over a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. The chief of police or his/her designee is hereby authorized and charged with the responsibility to issue the notices described in Welfare and Institutions Code Section 625.5(d). 
E.	In order to facilitate the city's recovery of a fee, under Welfare and Institutions Code Section 625.5(e), for actual costs of administrative and transportation services for the return of a minor to his or her place of residence, or to the custody of his or her parents or legal guardian, the city council may from time to time enact a resolution setting forth the city's actual costs on an hourly or other reasonable basis. Such resolution may authorize city staff to calculate and collect the final fee without further approval from the city council, and to conduct any hearing required by said statute and make any related findings and orders authorized thereunder including without limitation the imposition of community service, provided that any appeal thereof shall be heard by the city council or its designee. 
F.	In addition to fees and community service which may be imposed under this section, for a second and subsequent violation of Section 9.08.020, the violator shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the amounts specified in Section 1.12.070 for infractions. 
G.	A minor whose violation of Section 9.08.020 is not litigated in conjunction with a petition under Sections 601 or 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code may be heard and disposed of by a juvenile hearing officer pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 256. A minor's ability or inability to appeal a court's disposition is governed by Welfare and Institutions Code Section 800, as amended from time to time. [In re K.S. (2003) 112 Cal. App. 4th 118.] 
(Ord. No. 597, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
Chapter 9.12 - FIREARMS 
Sections: 
 
9.12.010 - Unlawful to discharge firearms in city. 
It is unlawful, for any person to fire or discharge, within the city limits any pistol, rifle or weapon of any type which may be powered by compressed gas, air or CO2 gas, except in facilities specifically constructed as firing ranges which have been inspected and approved by the city building and police departments, and which have obtained all necessary city planning and building approvals. 
(Ord. 518 § 2, 1995) 
Chapter 9.16 - PUBLIC NUDITY 
Sections: 
 
9.16.010 - Public nudity. 
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally appear in public in a state of nudity. "Nudity or state of nudity" means: (a) the appearance or display of the human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or (b) a state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human buttock, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of the female breast. "Public place" means any location frequented by the public, or where the public is likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected to be observed by members of the public. Public places include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, business and commercial establishments (whether for profit or not for profit, whether open to the public at large, or whether entrance is limited by a cover charge or membership requirement), hotels, motels, restaurants, night clubs, country clubs, cabarets, and/or meeting facilities. Premises, or portions thereof, such as hotel rooms, used solely as a private residence, whether permanent or temporary in nature, shall not be deemed to be a public place. This section shall not apply to children under ten years of age. This section shall not apply to women when nursing in public. Furthermore, this section shall not apply to a person appearing in a state of nudity in a modeling class operated pursuant to the applicable provisions of the city code. 
(Ord. 546 § 1, 2002) 
Chapter 9.20 - GRAFFITI 
Sections: 
 
9.20.010 - Purpose. 
A.	Graffiti abatement. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the prompt abatement of graffiti from public and private properties in the city; to provide for methods of controlling the unauthorized use of aerosol paint containers, wide-tipped marker pens, and paint sticks by minors; and to encourage citizens to report occurrences of graffiti vandalism within the city. 
B.	Nuisance declared. Due to the increase of graffiti vandalism on both public and private property, a condition has arisen within the city which has resulted in a deterioration of property values and concern for the quality of life of the city's citizens. The city council finds and determines that graffiti constitutes a public nuisance which, left unabated, adversely affects the city's image, business development, retail sales, and residential housing costs. Allowing graffiti to remain on public or private property encourages additional unacceptable occurrences of graffiti, fuels fear among the community and is a factor which not only depreciates the value of the property which has been the target of such vandalism, but also depreciates the value of adjacent and surrounding properties. 
C.	Minimize impact. The purpose of this chapter is, therefore, to minimize the impact which graffiti has on the city's quality of life, economic stability, environmental image, aesthetic standard, and the overall sense of feeling of safety and security of its citizens. Because the existence of graffiti tends to breed community discontent and criminal and gang-related activities, the chapter will serve to mitigate these problems through quick removal and control of graffiti vandalism. 
(Ord. No. 594, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
9.20.020 - Terms defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
"Aerosol paint container" means any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, used for the purpose of spraying paint or other substance capable of defacing property. 
"Felt tip marker" means any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth-inch but less than three-eighths of an inch, containing a transferable ink that is not water-soluble. 
"Graffiti" defined as, but not limited to, any unauthorized inscription, work, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any surface. 
"Graffiti implement" shall be defined in the same manner, and have the same meaning, as "marking substance" is defined within California Penal Code Section 594.2(c)(2), or any successor statute thereto, which may be amended from time to time. 
"Minor" means a person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
"Paint stick" means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, epoxy, or other similar substance, capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width, visible from a distance of twenty (20) feet, and not water-soluble. 
(Ord. No. 594, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
9.20.030 - Sale of graffiti implements to minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell or cause to be sold, any graffiti implements, including, but not limited to, any felt tip marker pen, or any paint stick, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who is not accompanied by a responsible adult. 
(Ord. No. 594, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
9.20.040 - Possession by minors—Prohibited. 
A.	It is unlawful for any minor to possess any graffiti implement:
1.	While upon public property; or
2.	While upon private property, without the consent of the owner, or operator thereof. Such consent must be given in advance and must authorize the minor's presence while in the possession of a graffiti implement. 
B.	This section is not intended to conflict with California Penal Code Section 594.1 and shall not apply while a minor is attending, or traveling to or from a school, who has a dated permission slip from a parent or a teacher. 
(Ord. No. 594, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
9.20.050 - Signs, display requirement. 
A.	Signs. Any person engaged in the retail sale of graffiti implements, including, but not limited to, any aerosol containers of paint, any felt tip marker pens, or paint sticks, shall display at the location of retail sales, a sign clearly visible and legible to employees and customers which states as follows: 
1.	It is unlawful for any person to sell, lend, or give to any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years, who is not accompanied by a responsible adult, any aerosol container of paint or any felt tip marker pen or paint stick with a tip greater than one-eighth-inch. 
B.	Display requirement. Every person or business engaged in a commercial enterprise shall display for sale, trade or exchange, any aerosol paint container or felt tip marker either: 
1.	In an area continuously observable, through direct visual observation or surveillance equipment, by employees of the retail establishment during the regular course of business; 
2.	In an area not accessible to the public in the regular course of business without employee assistance. Nothing herein shall relieve such person or business entity from, at all times, complying with the requirements of California Penal Code Section 594.1(c) by posting signs as described therein. 
(Ord. No. 594, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
9.20.060 - Removal. 
A.	General. Any person applying graffiti within the city shall have the duty to remove same in a manner approved by the city and the property owner within twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the city or public or private owner of the property involved. Failure of any person to so remove graffiti shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter. Consistent with Civil Code Section 1714.1 where graffiti is applied by minors, the parent or guardian shall be responsible for such removal or payment of costs thereof. 
B.	Public property. Whenever the city administrator, or his/her designated representative, determines that graffiti exists upon property owned by the city, it shall be removed as soon as possible. When the property is owned by a public entity other than the city, the removal of the graffiti may be authorized by the city manager, or his/her designated representative, and removal undertaken by city only after securing written consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the property. The public entity shall execute a release and waiver as approved by the city's risk manager. 
C.	Multiple offenses. The city may, at its sole discretion, require any owner of property who has been cited two times or more for graffiti removal to, in addition to any other penalties/fines applicable under this chapter, plant vegetation or to take any other reasonable measures necessary to prevent or restrict the ability to create graffiti on the property in question. 
D.	Notice of affected area; requirement to remove graffiti.
1.	Where graffiti is located upon private property and said graffiti is capable of being viewed by persons utilizing any public right-of-way or sidewalk within the city, it is the property owner's duty to remove said graffiti promptly from the property and to restore said property at least to the condition it was in prior to such act of vandalism. If the property owner fails to promptly remove said graffiti, the city shall cause a written notice to be served upon the owner of the affected property notifying the owner of the location and description of the graffiti and of the property owner's obligation to remove said graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to commence removal of the graffiti described in the notice within ten days after the effective date of service or personal delivery of the notice, and to diligently and promptly pursue total removal of said graffiti; provided that an exception may exist in cases of undue hardship as established pursuant to Subsection D.2 of this section. The service is complete at the time of deposit of the notice in the U.S. mail or by personal delivery of the notice to the owner of the property subject to removal of graffiti. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceeding. 
2.	Undue hardship; optional procedure for removal. In the event the property owner cannot comply with the requirement of subsection D.1. of this section, due to hardship, the property owner shall file a written request for waiver of the removal requirement with the city. The property owner shall explain his/her reason(s) for making such request. The written request shall be filed within the ten-day removal period stated in Subsection D.1. of this section. In determining whether the request for waiver will be granted, and subsequent assistance provided to the property owner in removal of said graffiti, the city shall consider the following circumstances: 
a.	The cost of restoration of the property to its original state prior to the imposition of the graffiti in proportion to the relative value of the property; 
b.	The ability of the owner to pay for such removal;
c.	Whether or not the property has been the target of previous incidents of graffiti or whether a pattern of vandalism to such property exists. 
The decision of the city in the form of a written decision by the city manager, as to whether or not to grant the waiver shall be final. 
3.	City's release from liability. A written request to waive the requirements of Subsection D.1. of this section shall be accompanied by a "release from liability" form signed by the property owner which shall release the city and its authorized agents from any and all liability that may be caused or attributed to removal of graffiti from the owner's premises by persons acting under the authorization of the city. 
4.	Approval for city to remove graffiti. A written request to waive the requirements of Subsection D.1. of this section accompanied by a signed "release from liability" form shall constitute an express approval by the property owner that the city or its authorized representatives may provide for the removal of the graffiti on owner's property by persons acting under the authorization of the city. 
5.	Failure to remove graffiti or seek waiver of removal. In the event the owner fails to remove graffiti from his or her property and fails to request a waiver of such removal, the city may declare the property a public nuisance and the city may take any of the following courses of action: 
a.	Administrative procedure to abate nuisance. The city may direct the removal of graffiti from the property with the cost of work performed billed to the property owner who may select the option of direct payment of such costs. Failure to make direct payment for the abatement of graffiti shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel plat to which it relates. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. Upon completion of the graffiti abatement work, the city manager shall cause to be recorded in the office of the recorder of the county, a "notice of completion of graffiti abatement proceedings" against a particular parcel involved. The notice of completion of graffiti abatement proceedings shall have the effect when recorded of conclusively establishing that graffiti abatement proceedings have been completed and that all proceedings have been completed and that all necessary charges incurred on account thereof by the city are due and owing and constitute a special assessment against the subject real property. This notice shall specify the name of the current owner of the parcel as shown on the last equalized assessment rolls of the county, and the county assessor's parcel number for the parcel involved. 
b.	The city may commence criminal proceedings to abate a public nuisance under applicable Penal Code provisions. 
c.	The city shall be authorized at its own expense to temporarily cover or to remove any portion of any graffiti on located on private property which has been visible from a public vantage point for at least twenty-four (24) hours provided that such graffiti contains either: 
(i)	The name of any criminal street gang already known to law enforcement authorities;
(ii)	Words or phrases which the Federal Communications Commission has prohibited from being broadcast through free public television or radio programming which is accessible by the general public; or 
(iii)	Any depiction or message which qualifies as obscene under then-existing constitutional obscenity standards used by the United States Supreme Court, which may include but is not limited to a depiction of sexual acts or sex organs. 
The city's exercise of its authority under this subsection shall not relieve a property owner from any obligation under this chapter, including but not limited to the obligation to promptly and diligently pursue appropriate remedial action in connection with any and all graffiti located on their own real property. 
(Ord. No. 594, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
9.20.070 - Responsibility. 
Any individual who is found guilty of violating any provisions of this chapter shall pay restitution to the property owner, in addition to authorized penalties. If the violator is a minor, the parent or guardian shall be responsible for payment of restitution. If unable to pay, the juvenile may be permitted to work off his/her payment under the direction of at least one parent by painting out graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 594, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
9.20.080 - Penalties. 
A.	It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to apply graffiti on any premises as described herein. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction. 
B.	It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for a minor to possess any "graffiti implement" as described herein in violation of Section 9.20.040 of this chapter. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction. 
C.	Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter shall be punished by: (1) a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00); and/or thirty (30) days in the county jail for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or ninety (90) days in the county jail for a second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a fine not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and/or six months in the county jail for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. 
D.	Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall be punished by: (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 594, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
9.20.090 - Alternative. 
Nothing in the foregoing sections shall be deemed to prevent the city from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under applicable Civil or Penal Code provisions as an alternative to the proceedings set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 594, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
  
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - CITY TRAFFIC CODE 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Definitions. 
A.	The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall for the purpose of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. 
B.	Motor Vehicle Code Definitions to be Used. Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. 
"Bicycle" means a light vehicle without a motor, having two wheels, handlebars and a seat or seats, and propelled by the operator. 
"Coach" means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. 
"Council" means the council of the city of Woodlake. 
"Curb" means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be marked by curbing construction, or not so marked; the word "curb" as herein used shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. 
"Divisional island" means a raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. 
"Loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Official Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this city. 
"Park" means to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
"Parkway" means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
"Pedestrian" means any person afoot. 
"Police officer" means every officer of the police department of this city or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
"Stop," when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
"Stop or stand," when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
"Vehicle code" means the Vehicle Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 446 § 1, 1990) 
10.04.020 - Police administration. 
There is established in the police department of this city a traffic division to be under the control of the chief of police. 
(Ord. 446 § 2, 1990) 
10.04.030 - Duty of traffic division. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic division with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the division by this chapter and the traffic ordinances in this city. 
(Ord. 446 § 2.1, 1990) 
10.04.040 - City traffic engineer. 
The office of city traffic engineer is established. The city traffic engineer shall be appointed by the council and shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this chapter and in the traffic ordinances of this city. Whenever the city traffic engineer is required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic control devices or signals, he may cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained. 
(Ord. 446 § 2.2, 1990) 
10.04.050 - City traffic engineer— Powers and duties— Delegation. 
It shall be general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals, to conduct analysis of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. Whenever, by the provisions of this chapter a power is granted to the city traffic engineer or a duty imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him. 
(Ord. 446 § 2.3, 1990) 
10.04.060 - Authority of police and fire department officials. 
Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or members of the fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this chapter or the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 446 § 3, 1990) 
10.04.070 - Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic. 
No person other than an officer of the police department or members of the fire department or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the city traffic engineer. 
(Ord. 446 § 3.1, 1990) 
10.04.080 - Obedience to police or authorized officers. 
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the fire department, or a person authorized by the chief of police or by law. 
(Ord. 446 § 3.2, 1990) 
10.04.090 - Required obedience to traffic ordinance. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person driving any vehicle or other conveyance upon any street or any pedestrian, to do any act forbidden, or fail to perform any act required as applicable to any such person under this chapter. 
(Ord. 446 § 3.3, 1990) 
10.04.100 - Traffic regulations apply to persons riding bicycles or riding or driving an animal. 
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Ord. 446 § 3.4, 1990) 
10.04.110 - Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers. 
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this city in their enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this chapter shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this chapter, constitute such interference or obstruction. 
(Ord. 446 § 3.5, 1990) 
10.04.120 - Public employees to obey traffic regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state, any county or city , and it is unlawful for any operator to violate any of the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance or by the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 446 § 3.6, 1990) 
10.04.130 - Exemption of certain vehicles. 
A.	The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call. 
B.	The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of others. 
C.	The provisions of those ordinances regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. 
(Ord. 446 § 3.7, 1990) 
10.04.140 - Report of damage to certain property. 
A.	The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within twenty-four (24) hours after such accident make a written report of such accident to the police department of this city. 
B.	Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident. 
C.	The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he shall make a report as required in subsection A of this section within twenty-four (24) hours after regaining ability to make such report. 
(Ord. 446 § 3.8, 1990) 
10.04.150 - When vehicles may be removed from streets. 
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department of this city may remove or cause to be removed: 
A.	Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours; 
B.	Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this city and signs are posted giving notice of such removal; 
C.	Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal. 
(Ord. 446 § 3.9, 1990) 
10.04.160 - Authority to install traffic control devices. 
A.	The city traffic engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this chapter. 
B.	Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law the city traffic engineer is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto. 
C.	The city traffic engineer may also place and maintain or cause to place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as the council may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Ord. 446 § 4, 1990) 
10.04.170 - Traffic control signs required for enforcement purposes. 
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Ord. 446 § 4.1, 1990) 
10.04.180 - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with this chapter unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. 
(Ord. 446 § 4.2, 1990) 
10.04.190 - Installation of traffic signals. 
The city traffic engineer is directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazards determined by the council. 
(Ord. 446 § 4.3, 1990) 
10.04.200 - Lane marking. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the highway. 
(Ord. 446 § 4.4, 1990) 
10.04.210 - Distinctive roadway markings. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such markings or signs and markings. Such markings placed by the State Department of Public Works are pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 446 § 4.5, 1990) 
10.04.220 - Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue traffic control devices. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this chapter whenever the council shall so determine. 
(Ord. 446 § 4.6, 1990) 
10.04.230 - Traffic control devices— Hours of operation. 
The city traffic engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 446 § 4.7, 1990) 
10.04.240 - Unauthorized painting of curbs. 
No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this city pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. 446 § 4.8, 1990) 
10.04.250 - Authority to place and obedience to turning markers, intersections and multiple lanes. 
A.	The city traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the city traffic engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
B.	When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Ord. 446 § 5, 1990) 
10.04.260 - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated in the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Ord. 446 § 5.1, 1990) 
10.04.270 - Obedience to no-turn signs. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Ord. 446 § 5.2, 1990) 
10.04.280 - The city traffic engineer to sign one-way streets and alleys. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. 446 § 6, 1990) 
10.04.290 - The city traffic engineer to erect stop signs. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows: 
A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designed and at those entrances of other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. Every such sign shall conform with, and shall be placed as provided in, the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 446 § 7, 1990) 
10.04.300 - Stop at through street or stop sign. 
A.	Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be through streets for the purposes of this section. 
B.	The provisions of this section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the council. 
C.	The provisions of this section shall apply at those highway railway grade crossings as established by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 446 § 7.1, 1990) 
10.04.310 - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alley way or driveway. 
(Ord. 446 § 7.2, 1990) 
10.04.320 - Driving through funeral procession. 
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the police department. 
(Ord. 446 § 8, 1990) 
10.04.330 - Clinging to moving vehicle. 
No person shall attach himself with his hands, or to catch on, or hold on to with his hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. 
(Ord. 446 § 8.1, 1990) 
10.04.340 - Commercial vehicles using private driveways. 
No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited. 
For the purpose of this section a "commercial vehicle" means a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton. 
(Ord. 446 § 8.2, 1990) 
10.04.350 - Limited access. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. 
(Ord. 446 § 8.3, 1990) 
10.04.360 - Obedience to barriers and signs. 
No person, public utility or department in the city shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the city traffic engineer or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this city. 
(Ord. 446 § 8.4, 1990) 
10.04.370 - No entrance into intersection that would obstruct traffic. 
No operator of any vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Ord. 446 § 8.5, 1990) 
10.04.380 - Riding or driving on sidewalk. 
No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk or curb excepting over permanently constructed driveways and except when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk or curb; provided further, that the sidewalk or curb area be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick, and written permission be previously obtained from the city traffic engineer. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours from six p.m. to six a.m. 
(Ord. 446 § 8.6, 1990) 
10.04.390 - Commercial vehicles weighing over six thousand (6,000) pounds prohibited from using certain streets. 
A.	Whenever any resolution of this city council designates and describes any street or portion of a street, as a street the use of which by any commercial vehicle weighing over six thousand (6,000) pounds is prohibited or limited in time, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such resolution. 
B.	Those streets and parts of streets established by such resolution of the city council are declared to be streets, the use of which is prohibited or limited by any commercial vehicle weighing over six thousand (6,000) pounds. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission. 
C.	As an alternative to prohibiting such usage by such commercial vehicles, or in addition to a time limitation, the council by resolution may limit the speed of commercial vehicles weighing over six thousand (6,000) pounds on certain streets to twenty (20) or fifteen (15) miles per hour, and the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such ordinance. 
(Ord. 446 § 8.7, 1990) 
10.04.400 - Traffic engineer to establish marked crosswalks. 
A.	The city traffic engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows: 
Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections within the central traffic district and at such intersections outside such district, and at other places within or outside such district where the city traffic engineer determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in subsection B of this section. 
B.	Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred (400) feet in length and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-block. 
(Ord. 446 § 9, 1990) 
10.04.410 - Stopping, standing and parking for certain purposes or in certain places— Application of regulations. 
A.	The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
B.	The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. 446 § 10, 1990) 
10.04.420 - Stopping or standing in parkways prohibited. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. 
(Ord. 446 § 10.1, 1990) 
10.04.430 - Traffic engineer to maintain no stopping zones and no parking areas. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this chapter. 
When the curb markings or signs are in place no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 446 § 10.2, 1990) 
10.04.440 - No parking areas. 
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or other authorized officer, of traffic sign or signal: 
A.	Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs of markings; 
B.	On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
C.	In any area where the city traffic engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
D.	In any area established by resolution of the council as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
E.	Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay, or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track; 
F.	In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property; 
G.	On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the effective time of such no parking; 
H.	At any place within twenty (20) feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
I.	At any place within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection (in the central traffic district or) in any business district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop; 
J.	Within twenty (20) feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device. 
(Ord. 446 § 10.3, 1990) 
10.04.450 - Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of one hundred twenty (120) hours. 
(Ord. 446 § 10.4, 1990) 
10.04.460 - Parking for demonstration. 
No operator of any vehicle shall park the vehicle upon any street in this city for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale, unless authorized by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 446 § 10.5, 1990) 
10.04.470 - Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets. 
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. 
(Ord. 446 § 10.6, 1990) 
10.04.480 - Washing or polishing vehicles. 
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city. 
(Ord. 446 § 10.7, 1990) 
10.04.490 - Parking adjacent to schools. 
A.	The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
B.	When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. 446 § 10.8, 1990) 
10.04.500 - Parking on grades. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent (within any business or residence district) without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. 
(Ord. 446 § 10.9, 1990) 
10.04.510 - Parking commercial vehicles in residential districts. 
No person shall park on any public street any commercial vehicle, having an unladen weight exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds in any residential district except: (a) while loading or unloading property; or (b) when such vehicle is parking in connection with or in aid of, the performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which such vehicle is parked. 
(Ord. 446 § 10.10, 1990) 
10.04.520 - Emergency parking signs. 
A.	Whenever the city traffic engineer shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the city traffic engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city traffic engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the city traffic engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
B.	When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. 
(Ord. 446 § 10.11, 1990) 
10.04.530 - Display of warning devices when commercial vehicle disabled. 
Every motor truck having an unladen weight of four thousand (4,000) pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated upon any street or highway during darkness shall be equipped with and carry at least two flares or two red lanterns or two warning lights or reflectors, which reflectors shall be of a type approved by the Department of California Highway Patrol. When any vehicle above mentioned or any trailer or semi-trailer is disabled upon streets or highways outside of any business or residence district within this city and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of two hundred (200) feet during darkness, a warning signal of the character indicated above shall be immediately placed at a distance of approximately one hundred (100) feet in advance of, and one hundred (100) feet to the rear of, such disabled vehicle by the driver thereof. The continuous flashing of at least four approved class A-Type I turn signal lamps, at least two toward the front and at least two toward the rear of the vehicle, shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section until the devices mentioned above can be placed in the required locations. The warning signals herein mentioned shall be displayed continuously during darkness while such vehicle remains disabled upon such street or highway. 
(Ord. 446 § 10.12, 1990) 
10.04.540 - Ten minute parking. 
Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than ten minutes at any time between nine a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays. 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign or parking meter in violation thereof. 
(Ord. 446 § 11, 1990) 
10.04.550 - One hour parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than one hour. 
(Ord. 446 § 11.1, 1990) 
10.04.560 - Two hour parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than two hours. 
(Ord. 446 § 11.2, 1990) 
10.04.570 - Parking space markings. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbing where authorized parking is permitted. 
When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such a vehicle makes compliance impossible. 
(Ord. 446 § 11.3, 1990) 
10.04.580 - No stopping zones. 
The city traffic engineer shall designate established no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and day when stopping is prohibited. 
During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop the vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the council as no stopping zones. 
(Ord. 446 § 11.4, 1990) 
10.04.590 - Authority to establish loading zones. 
A.	The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows: 
1.	At any place in the business district;
2.	Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. 
B.	In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
C.	Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones. 
D.	Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones. 
(Ord. 446 § 12, 1990) 
10.04.600 - Curb markings to indicate no stopping and parking regulations. 
A.	The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and the curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth. 
1.	Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
2.	Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purposes other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty (20) minutes. 
3.	White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows: 
a.	When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox the restrictions shall apply at all times; 
b.	When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed. 
4.	When the city traffic engineer as authorized under this chapter has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 446 § 12.1, 1990) 
10.04.610 - Effect of permission to load or unload. 
A.	Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes. 
B.	The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pick-up of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. 
C.	Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes. 
D.	Within the total time limits above specified the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted. 
(Ord. 446 § 12.2, 1990) 
10.04.620 - Standing for loading or unloading only. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for time as is permitted in Section 10.04.610. 
(Ord. 446 § 12.3, 1990) 
10.04.630 - Standing in passenger loading zone. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 10.04.610. 
(Ord. 446 § 12.4, 1990) 
10.04.640 - Standing in any alley. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. 
(Ord. 446 § 12.5, 1990) 
10.04.650 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Said fines for violations shall be set forth and adopted by resolution. 
(Ord. 535 § 1, 1999: Ord. 519 § 2, 1995: Ord. 446 § 13, 1990) 
Chapter 10.08 - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - Declaration of nuisance. 
Pursuant to the determination made and the authority granted by the State Legislature under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof from private and public property as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations: 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 472 § 2, 1992) 
10.08.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions of words and phrases set forth in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter. 
"Abandoned vehicle" includes the following: 
1.	Public Nuisance Vehicle. Any vehicle that is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or any inoperative parts thereof, that is on public or private property, not including highways, and that creates a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, promotes blight and deterioration, invites plundering, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance endangering the health and safety of minors, harbors rodents and insects, or jeopardizes health, safety and general welfare. 
2.	Abandoned Vehicle. A vehicle is abandoned if it is left on a highway, public property, or private property in such inoperable or neglected condition that the owner's intention to relinquish all further rights or interest in it may be reasonably concluded. 
In reference to highways or public rights-of-way, abandonment is presumed to have occurred if a vehicle is parked, resting or otherwise immobilized on any highway or public right-of-way and lacks an engine, transmission, wheels, tires, doors, windshield or any other part or equipment necessary to operate safely on the highway. Such vehicles are presumed to be a hazard to public health, safety and welfare and may be removed immediately upon discovery by a peace officer or other designated employee. 
3.	Wrecked Vehicle. Any vehicle that is damaged to such an extent that it cannot be operated upon the highway. A vehicle which has been wrecked in a traffic accident, and which has been removed from the roadway to a storage facility, but which has not been claimed by its owner, will not be considered an abandoned vehicle. 
4.	Dismantled Vehicle. Any vehicle that is partially or wholly disassembled.
5.	Inoperative Vehicle. Any motor vehicle that cannot be moved under its own power.
"Employee" means a city employee designated by the director of public works. 
"Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. Highway includes a street, and all or any part of the entire width of the right-of-way of the highway. 
"Peace officer" means an individual as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Penal Code. 
"Vehicle" is a device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 472 § 3, 1992) 
10.08.030 - Chapter provisions not exclusive. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances enacted by the county, state or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 472 § 12, 1992) 
10.08.040 - Enforcement by director of public works. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or by law, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the director of public works or employees designated in writing by the director of public works. 
(Ord. 472 § 5, 1992) 
10.08.050 - Authority of peace officer or employee to remove abandoned vehicles. 
Any peace officer or any other employee in the territorial limits in which the officer or employee is authorized to act, who has reasonable grounds to believe that a vehicle has been abandoned, may remove the vehicle from a highway or from public or private property. 
(Ord. 472 § 6, 1992) 
10.08.060 - Authority of peace officer to remove vehicles left for seventy-two hours on a highway. 
Any peace officer may remove a vehicle located within the territorial limits in which the officer or employee may act, when any vehicle is abandoned, parked or left standing upon a highway for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours. 
(Ord. 472 § 7, 1992) 
10.08.070 - Authority to immediately remove from a highway vehicles which lack necessary equipment. 
Motor vehicles which are abandoned, parked, resting or otherwise immobilized on any highway or public right-of-way and which lack an engine, transmission, wheels, tires, doors, windshield or any other part or equipment necessary to operate safely on the highways of this state are a public nuisance and may be removed immediately upon discovery by a peace officer or employee. 
(Ord. 472 § 8, 1992) 
10.08.080 - Authority of contractor to remove abandoned vehicles. 
Any person performing a franchise or contract award pursuant to subdivision (a) of Vehicle Code Section 22710, may remove a vehicle from a highway or from public or private property, after a determination by a peace officer or other employee, that the vehicle is abandoned, as determined pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22523. 
(Ord. 472 § 9, 1992) 
10.08.090 - Authority to enter private property. 
In the enforcement of this chapter, the director of public works and his designated employees may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this chapter to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 472 § 10, 1992) 
10.08.100 - Authority of contracted person to enter private property. 
When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons for the abatement of abandoned vehicles, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 472 § 11, 1992) 
10.08.110 - Abandoned vehicles on highway—Infraction. 
A.	No person shall abandon a vehicle upon any highway. Any violation of this section constitutes an infraction. 
B.	Every person who parks or leaves standing a vehicle on a highway for seventy-two (72) consecutive hours or more is guilty of an infraction. 
C.	No person shall abandon a vehicle upon public or private property without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property. Any violation of this section constitutes an infraction. 
D.	A person convicted of a violation of this section shall pay a penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and in addition, such person shall provide proof that the costs of removal and disposition of the vehicle have been paid. No part of any fine imposed shall be suspended. The fine may be paid in installments if the court determines that the defendant is unable to pay the entire amount in one payment. 
E.	Proof that the costs of removal and disposition of the vehicle have been paid shall not be required if proof is provided to the court that the vehicle was stolen prior to abandonment. That proof may consist of a police report or other evidence acceptable to the court. 
(Ord. 472 § 4, 1992) 
10.08.120 - Abandoned vehicles on public or private property, excluding a highway. 
A.	Upon discovery on public or private property, excluding a highway, of an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle which lacks an engine, transmission, wheels, tires, doors, windshield or other major part or equipment necessary to operate safely on the highway, the director of public works shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal of the vehicle in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this section. 
B.	Except as otherwise provided by law or this chapter, not less than a ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance shall be issued for a vehicle abandoned on public or private property, excluding a highway, unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof, except as provided in Vehicle Code Section 22661(c). 
C.	The ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove a vehicle or part thereof, when required by this chapter, shall contain a statement of hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and of the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that he (or she) may appear in person at a hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his (or her) reason for such denial, in lieu of appearing. The notice of intention to abate shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owners of record unless the vehicle is in such condition that the identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. 
D.	A request for a hearing shall be made to the director of public works within ten days after the mailing of notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or at the time of signing a release. 
E.	Upon a request for a hearing by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land upon which such vehicle is located, a public hearing shall be held before the director of public works or his designee. 
F.	If such a request is not received within such period, the appropriate public body, agency or officer shall have the authority to remove the vehicle. 
G.	The director of public works or his designee shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts, and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The director of public works or his designee shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
H.	The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located is authorized to appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his (or her) reason for such denial. 
I.	If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the land owner and that he (or she) has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the local authority shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property on which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such cost from the owner. 
J.	If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his (or her) land within such time period, this statement shall be construed as a request for hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting such request. 
K.	The director of public works, or his designee, may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle, or parts, if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the director of public works, or his designee, may find that a vehicle, or parts, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same be removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts and correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available. 
L.	Any interested party may appeal the decision of the director of public works, or his designee, by filing a written notice of appeal with the city council within five days after his decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the city council, which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate. The city clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, to the owner of the land, and the owner of the vehicle. In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
M.	This section shall not apply to: (1) a vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or (2) a vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or junk yard. 
(Ord. 472 § 13, 1992) 
10.08.130 - Storage of vehicle—Mileage. 
A.	Whenever a peace officer or employee removes a vehicle from a highway, or public or private property, unless otherwise provided, he shall take the vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage designated by the city where the vehicle shall be placed in storage. 
B.	At the time of removal, the officer or employee shall determine the amount of mileage on the vehicle. 
C.	A vehicle placed in storage shall be released to the owner or person in control of the vehicle only if the owner or person furnishes to the law enforcement agency or employee who placed the vehicle in storage, satisfactory proof of current vehicle registration. In lieu of obtaining proof of current registration, the agency which caused the vehicle to be stored may, in its discretion, issue a notice to appear for the registration violation. 
(Ord. 472 § 14, 1992) 
10.08.140 - Notice and hearing rights— Low value vehicles. 
If a vehicle is determined to have a value not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00), a peace officer or employee shall provide notice and the opportunity for a hearing in accordance with Vehicle Code Sections 22851.2 through 22851.12. 
(Ord. 472 § 15, 1992) 
10.08.150 - Storage—Notice and hearing. 
Whenever a peace officer or employee directs the storage of any vehicle, the vehicle's registered and legal owners of record, or their agents, shall be given notice and the opportunity for a post-storage hearing if required by Vehicle Code Section 22852. 
(Ord. 472 § 16, 1992) 
10.08.160 - Disposition of abandoned vehicles. 
Vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, automobile dismantler's yard, or other suitable site. 
(Ord. 472 § 17, 1992) 
10.08.170 - Prohibition against reconstruction. 
After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not be reconstructed or be made operable unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 5004, in which case, the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. 472 § 18, 1992) 
10.08.180 - Notice to the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles within five days after the date of removal, identifying the vehicle or part thereof and any evidence of registration available, including, but not limited to, the registration card, certificates of ownership, or license plates. 
(Ord. 472 § 19, 1992) 
10.08.190 - Notice to California Highway Patrol. 
An employee, other than a peace officer, designated to remove vehicles pursuant to Section 22669 of the Vehicle Code, may do so only after he or she has mailed or personally delivered a written report identifying the vehicle and its location to the California Highway Patrol located nearest to the vehicle. 
(Ord. 472 § 20, 1992) 
10.08.200 - City administrative costs fixed by resolution. 
The last registered owner of record is responsible for abandonment and is thereby liable for the cost of removal and disposition of the vehicle. The city council, by resolution, shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as vehicle abatement administrative, hearing and appeal costs. The cost in the resolution shall not include costs and expenses which are not incurred by the city. 
(Ord. 472 § 21, 1992) 
10.08.210 - Collection of costs as tax assessment in cases of nonpayment. 
If the administrative hearing and appeal costs and the cost of removal, which are charged against the owner are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, a statement of these charges shall be sent to the owner by the city. If not paid, such costs shall be assessed against the owner's parcel of land pursuant to Government Code Section 25845 and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority of other taxes. 
(Ord. 472 § 22, 1992) 
Chapter 10.12* - TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt regulations which improve air quality by reducing air pollutant emissions that result from vehicle commute trips to worksites with one hundred (100) or more employees by increasing the average vehicle readership. (AVR) 
(Ord. 491 § 1 (part), 1994) 
10.12.020 - Adoption of transportation demand management regulations. 
In compliance with the California Health and Safety Code Sections 40910 et. seq., the city adopts Rule 9001 of the San Joaquin Valley unified air pollution control district as administered by, and as amended from time to time by the district as the transportation demand management regulation within the city. 
(Ord. 491 § 1 (part), 1994) 
10.12.030 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to employers with one hundred (100) or more employees at a worksite where at least forty (40) employees report to work between six and ten a.m. for the purpose of determining the applicability of this chapter, the number of employees at a worksite is determined as the maximum number of employees reporting to that worksite on any single weekday Monday through Friday during the current calendar or fiscal year. 
(Ord. 491 § 2, 1994) 
10.12.040 - Definitions. 
"Air pollution control officer (APCO)" means the air pollution control officer of the San Joaquin Valley unified pollution control district (district) or his designee. 
"Average vehicle readership (AVR)" is the number of employees who arrive at a worksite divided by the number of vehicles those employees use to arrive at the worksite, averaged over the survey week. AVR can be averaged across multiple worksites. 
"Buspool" means a privately operated or chartered bus which provides commute transportation on a subscription basis to sixteen (16) or more passengers. 
"Carpool" means a vehicle occupied by two to six people traveling together between their residence and their worksite or destination for the majority of the total trip distance. Employees who work for different employers, as well as non-employed people, are included within this definition as long as they are in the vehicle for the majority of the total trip distance. 
"Commute trip" means the trip made by an employee from home to the worksite. The commute trip may include stops between home and the worksite. 
"Compressed work week" means a regular full-time work schedule which eliminates at least one round-trip commute trip (both home-to-work and work-to-home) at least once every two weeks. Examples include, but are not limited to working three twelve-hour days (3/36) or four ten-hour days (4/40) within a one-week period; or eight nine-hour days and one eight-hour day (9/80) within a two-week period. 
"Delegated program" means implementation of this chapter by a local jurisdiction through the APCO approval of a delegation request from a local jurisdiction. 
"Disabled employee," for purposes of the performance objective calculation, means an employee with a physical impairment which prevents the employee from traveling to the worksite by means other than a vehicle and the employee has been issued a disabled person placard or plate from the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
"Employee" means any person conducting work activity for an employer for twenty (20) or more hours per week on a regular full-time or part-time basis. The term excludes field construction workers, agricultural workers, employees defined as field personnel pursuant to this section, independent contractors, seasonal/temporary employees, volunteers and emergency health and safety employees that are required to have an authorized emergency response vehicle (as defined by the California Vehicle Code Section 165) at home on an on call basis. 
"Employee days" means the total number of employees who start work or are assigned to a worksite during the peak period each work day Monday through Friday of the survey week. 
"Employee transportation coordinator (ETC)" means an employee, other individual, or entity appointed by an employer to develop, market, administer and monitor the employer trip reduction program or employer trip reduction plan on a full or part-time basis. A transportation management association (TMA), as defined by this chapter, may perform the duties of the ETC with prior approval by the APCO. 
"Employee transportation survey" means an APCO-approved questionnaire distributed by employers to employees designed to provide sufficient information to calculate AVR for the worksite. 
"Employer" means any person(s), firm, business, education institution, government agency, nonprofit agency or corporation, or other entity which employs one hundred (100) or more persons at a single worksite where at least forty (40) employees report to work between six and ten a.m. 
"Employer program manager (EPM)" means an employee with policy and budget authority who is responsible for the implementation of the employer trip reduction program or employer trip reduction plan and for fulfilling the requirements of this rule. 
"Employer trip reduction plan" means a document describing in detail the employer trip reduction program, including an implementation schedule, and all of the elements listed in Section 10.12.080(C). 
"Employer trip reduction program" means a measure or group of measures implemented by an employer, designed to provide transportation information, assistance and/or incentives to employees. The purposes of such measures are to reduce mobile source emissions by reducing the number of motor vehicles driven to the worksite by increasing the AVR, and to achieve and maintain performance objectives. 
"Field construction worker" means an employee who reports for work to a temporary field construction site. 
"Field personnel" means employees who spend twenty (20) percent or less of their worktime at the work site and who do not report to the worksite during the peak period for pick-up and dispatch of an employer provided vehicle. 
"Local jurisdiction" means a city, county or public agency, including a public agency formed through a joint powers agreement, with authority to adopt, implement, and enforce an employer trip reduction ordinance. 
"Peak period" means the time from six a.m. through ten a.m. Monday through Friday inclusive. 
"Seasonal employer" means an employer with worksites where eighty (80) percent of its employees work for less than sixteen (16) weeks in any twelve (12) month period. 
"Seasonal/temporary employee" means an employee who works for the employer for less than sixteen (16) continuous weeks in any twelve (12) month calendar period. 
"Single-occupant vehicle (SOV)" means a vehicle occupied by one person. 
"Survey week" means a regular five-day Monday through Friday (inclusive) workweek. The survey week for worksites with Saturday and Sunday work schedules will include only those work days Monday through Friday. The survey week cannot contain a federal, state or local holiday, regardless of whether the holiday is observed by the employer. A survey week that meets the above criteria is to be selected by the employer during January through May or September through November for the employee transportation surveys. 
"Telecommuting" means a system of working at home or at an off-site, non-home telecommute facility that reduces the one way trip to work by at least fifty (50) percent of the commute distance or completely eliminates the trip to work. The employee must work at home or at an off-site, non-home location at least one day per week. 
"Tier I employer" means employers for which each worksite has achieved the performance objectives according to the schedule listed in Section 10.12.060(A) shall comply with the Tier 1 administrative requirements. In 1995 all employers must comply with the Tier 1 administrative requirements. 
"Tier II employer" means employers with worksites that do not meet the performance objectives according to the schedule listed in Section 10.12.060(A) and employers who fail to comply with the Tier I administrative requirements, shall comply with the Tier II administrative requirements. 
"Transportation management association (TMA)" means an organization through which developers, property managers, employers and/or local jurisdictions cooperate in designing, implementing and assessing employer trip reduction programs or other transportation demand or system management programs and measures. 
"Vanpool" means a vehicle occupied by seven to fifteen (15) employees including the driver who commute together to work for the majority of their individual commute trip distance. Employees who work for different employers are included within this definition as long as they are in the vehicle for the majority of their individual trip distance. 
"Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except the following: (1) a device moved exclusively by human power, (2) a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, (3) buses used for public or private transit, (4) electric vehicle. 
"Vehicle trip days" means the total number of vehicles used by employees who start work or are assigned to the worksite each work day Monday through Friday of the survey week. 
"Volunteer" means an individual who does not receive any wages, salary or other form of financial reimbursement from the employer for services provided. 
"Worksite" means a location or building in and around which employees work. A worksite is also a group of buildings in close proximity. Close proximity means that the individual buildings making up the group of buildings are no more than one mile from a central work location with the largest number of employees reporting, are served by a common circulation or access system and are not separated by an impassable barrier to pedestrian travel which may include a freeway, flood control channel, railroad, etc. 
(Ord. 491 § 3, 1994) 
10.12.050 - Exemptions. 
A.	Employers are exempt from the district's implementation of this rule if they are subject to the requirements of a local jurisdiction's ordinance that is currently approved by the air district for delegation. 
B.	Employers who present verifiable proof to the APCO that a compressed work week schedule has been instituted at an affected worksite that is sufficient to meet the 1995 performance objectives as specified in Section 10.12.060(A) are exempted from the Employee Transportation Survey requirements listed in Section 10.12.070(D) for 1995. 
C.	Seasonal employers as defined in Section 10.12.040 are not required to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 491 § 4, 1994) 
10.12.060 - Requirements. 
A.	Performance Objective. Performance objectives are expressed in terms of Average Vehicle Ridership (AVR). The AVR performance objectives are as follows: 
AVR Performance Objectives and Year. 
Year 	AVR
December 31, 1995	1.25
December 31, 1996	1.33
December 31, 1997	1.42
December 31, 1998+	1.50
 
B.	Accelerated Performance Objectives. The performance objective for the Fresno carbon monoxide (CO) nonatainment area shall be increased to 1.5 AVTR upon EPA notification to the district that a CO contingency measure is required for the CO nonatainment area. The 1.5 AVT performance objective shall become effective within twelve (12) months of the EPA notification, and shall apply only to the CO nonatainment area referred to by the EPA notification. 
(Ord. 491 § 5, 1994) 
10.12.070 - Administrative requirements—Tier I employers. 
A.	Tier I—Employer. Employers for which each worksite has achieved the performance objectives according to the schedule listed in Section 10.12.060(A) shall comply with the administrative requirements listed in this section. 
1.	Rule Orientation Attendance. Employers shall have a representative attend an orientation on Rule 9001 provided by the district. 
2.	Employee Notification. Employers shall facilitate the participation of employees and employee organizations in the development of employer trip reduction programs and employer trip reduction plans by providing the following information to its employees at the times specified below. 
3.	Information explaining the requirements and applicability of this chapter to the employer and its worksite(s) prior to or at the time of registration. 
4.	The content and implementation schedule of the employer trip reduction program required by subsection C of this section during its development. 
5.	Notification may be provided through employee bulletins, notices posted on bulletin boards, articles in any newsletter generally circulated or provided to employees, or any other reasonable means to assure that employees have adequate opportunity to participate in the development of trip reduction programs and measures, and are informed about the full range of trip reduction programs and measures available at the worksite. 
6.	Information explaining the requirements and applicability of this rule to the employer and its worksite(s) must be posted in a conspicuous place in all worksites. 
B.	Employer Registration. All employers with one hundred (100) or more employees at a single worksite shall register with the APCO pursuant to the schedule in Section 10.12.090 (A). Registration shall be completed as follows. Employer registration shall include the following information: 
1.	Employer name and mailing address;
2.	Separate identification of each worksite(s) including locational address;
3.	Employee transportation coordinator and employer program manager name and telephone number for each worksite(s). A transportation management association (TMA), as defined by this rule, may perform the duties of the ETC with prior approval by the APCO; 
4.	The total number of employees reporting or assigned to each worksite(s).
C.	Employer Trip Reduction Program. Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the employer registers with the APCO, the employer shall develop and implement an employer trip reduction program. 
D.	Employee Transportation Surveys. Employers shall conduct employee transportation surveys as specified in this section to establish whether or not the performance objectives listed in Section 10.12.060(A) have been achieved. Employers shall use the methodology in Section 10.12.100 to conduct employee surveys. 
1.	The employer shall submit to the district: the completed survey forms; the results of the survey; a tally showing the number of surveys distributed, the number completed and the number of nonrespondents. 
2.	Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC). Employers shall designate an ETC for each affected worksite. Employers with multiple affected worksites within the district may designate one ETC for more than one worksite with approval of the APCO. An ETC may also serve as the employer program manager provided that the individual meets the criteria specified in Section 10.12.040. 
E.	Employer Program Manager (EPM). Employers shall designate an employer program manager (EPM). Employers with multiple affected worksites within the district may designate one employer program manager for more than one worksite with approval of the APCO. 
(Ord. 491 § 6, 1994) 
10.12.080 - Administrative requirements—Tier II employers. 
Employers with worksites that do not meet the performance objectives according to the schedule listed in Section 10.12.060(A) and employers who fail to comply with the administrative requirements of Section 10.12.070(A) shall comply with the administrative requirements as specified in this section. 
A.	Complete the administrative requirements listed in Section 10.12.070(A). 
B.	ETC Training. ETCs shall complete an APCO-certified training curriculum within ninety (90) days of the notification to do so by the APCO. 
C.	Requirement to Submit Employer Trip Reduction Plan. Employers shall prepare and submit an employer trip reduction plan for that worksite to the APCO within one hundred eighty (180) days of a determination that the performance objective was not achieved. An employer may submit a consolidated plan that covers multiple worksites. The employer trip reduction plan shall contain the following: 
1.	A description of the measures taken to comply with Section 10.12.060(A); 
2.	All the registration information required by Section 10.12.070(B); 
3.	A detailed description and inventory of measures contained in the employer trip reduction program developed and implemented pursuant to Section 10.12.070(C) including a list of specific trip reduction measures already implemented; 
4.	A description, schedule and commitment to implement additional or enhanced measures to demonstrate attainment of the next annual performance objective; 
5.	Summary and discussion of the results of an attitudinal survey of employees or an employer/employee work group designed to ascertain employee attitudes toward various incentive and disincentive measures; 
6.	A discussion of the progress achieved to date and an analysis of why the employer trip reduction program did not achieve the performance objective including special issues, circumstances or conditions at the worksite. 
D.	The plan shall be submitted to the highest ranking responsible official of the employer at the worksite or each worksite when a consolidated plan is submitted that covers multiple worksites. 
E.	Employees shall be notified in writing of the content, implementation schedule and availability of the employer trip reduction plan at least ten days prior to the submittal of the employer trip reduction plan to the APCO. 
F.	An employer shall revise and resubmit to the APCO any disapproved plan within ninety (90) days of the disapproval. Disapproval of a resubmitted plan constitutes a final disapproval. Final disapproval is a violation of this chapter. An employer shall remain in violation of this chapter each day until an APCO approvable employer trip reduction plan or an APCO approvable alternative compliance plan is submitted. 
G.	An employer may appeal any APCO disapproval of its employer trip reduction Plan pursuant to the procedures listed in Regulation V (Procedures Before the Hearing Board). 
H.	An employer subject to this section shall update its employer trip reduction plan once every year after plan approval until such time as the performance objective is achieved. Such plan updates are to be submitted every year to the APCO on or before the anniversary date of plan approval. 
I.	An employer shall revise and resubmit its employer trip reduction plan within ninety (90) days of a final determination that an element of an approved employer trip reduction plan violates any provision of law issued by an agency or court with jurisdiction to make such a determination. 
(Ord. 491 § 7, 1994) 
10.12.090 - Compliance schedule. 
A.	Employer Registration Schedule. Employers who become subject to this chapter shall register with the APCO by September 1, 1994 or within one hundred eighty (180) days after hiring the one hundredth employee. 
B.	Employee Survey Schedule. Employee surveys shall be conducted within two weeks prior to or two weeks following the employer's survey date as stipulated by the APCO. 
1.	Employee transportation survey results are to be submitted to the APCO within forty-five (45) days of the survey week. 
2.	Subject to APCO approval, an employee transportation survey conducted prior to the effective dates of the ordinance codified in this section may be submitted to fulfill the requirements of this subsection provided that the survey was conducted within one hundred eighty (180) days of its submittal date and it provides sufficient data to calculate AVR pursuant to subsection A of this section. 
3.	Employers who become subject to this rule subsequent to the schedule above due to an increase in employees or the establishment of a new or expanded worksite shall conduct an employee transportation survey within one hundred eighty (180) days after meeting the requirements of Section 10.12.070(B). 
(Ord. 491 § 8, 1994) 
10.12.100 - Calculations. 
AVR Calculation. AVR for each affected worksite is to be computed as follows: 
A.	The employer conducts an employee transportation survey during a survey week.
B.	The employer shall calculate the AVR only for those employees who start work or are assigned to the worksite during the peak period. 
C.	If less than sixty (60) percent of the survey forms are returned for processing from those employees who start work during the peak period, all survey forms not returned shall be counted as single-occupant vehicles for purposes of calculating AVR. 
D.	If sixty (60) percent or more of the survey forms are returned for processing from those employees who start work during the peak period, one-half of those survey forms not returned shall be assumed to have the same AVR as that calculated from the response to the surveys returned, and one-half shall be counted as single-occupant vehicles for purposes of calculating AVR. 
E.	The employer shall calculate the AVR for the worksite by dividing the total employee-days for the survey week by the total vehicle trip-days for the survey week. 
1.	AVR = Total Employee Days/Total Vehicle Trip Days. Employee-days shall be determined by the total number of employees who start work or are assigned to a worksite during the peak period each work day Monday though Friday of the survey week. Each day of the survey week that an employee starts work during the peak period counts as one employee-day. For example, an employee who starts work each day Monday through Friday of the survey week between six a.m. and ten a.m. counts as five employees-days. The following procedures are used in totaling employee-days: 
Employees telecommuting or are off due to a compressed work week schedule are counted as reporting to the worksite in calculating the total employee-days. 
2.	The following employees are not included in the employee-days total:
a.	Employees not working because of vacation, sickness or other time off;
b.	Employees who report to a different worksite or an off-site work related activity;
c.	Disabled employees.
F.	Vehicle Trip Days. Vehicle trip days shall be determined as follows:
The total number of vehicles used by employees who start work or are assigned to the worksite each work day Monday through Friday of the survey week. A vehicle trip-day is based on the means of transportation used for the greatest distance of an employee's home to work commute trip. For example an employee who starts work during the peak period and arrives at the worksite each day of the survey week Monday through Friday in a single occupant vehicle counts as five vehicle trip-days. The following numerical values are used in calculating the total vehicle trip-days: 
1.	Single occupant vehicle (drive alone) equals one;
2.	Carpool equals one divided by the number of people in the carpool;
3.	Vanpool equals one divided by the number of employees in the vanpool;
4.	Motorcycle, moped, motorized scooter or motor bike equal one;
5.	Dedicated compressed natural gas vehicle equals one-fourth;
6.	Dedicated propane vehicle equals one-half;
7.	Dual or flexible fueled vehicle equals three-fourths;
8.	The following all equal zero vehicle trip-days:
a.	Public transit vehicles,
b.	Private buspool or club bus,
c.	Vehicle under human power,
d.	Pedestrians,
e.	Electric vehicle.
G.	Random Sample Method. The method described in this section shall be followed when an employer chooses to use a random sample to meet the requirements of this Section. 
1.	Employers with four hundred (400) or more employees at a single worksite have the option of calculating AVR based upon a random sample of the employee population. The random sample option is available only for worksites where four hundred (400) or more employees start work during the peak period (six a.m. through ten a.m.). 
2.	The size of the random sample depends upon the number of employees who start work during the peak period at the worksite. The means to determine the minimum size of the random sample is described in subsection G(5)(b) of this section. 
3.	The sample shall be selected as described in subsection G(5) of this section. Once the sample group has been selected, the employer shall not send additional survey forms to employees beyond the original sample group. Such additional surveys invalidate the result of the survey and void the employ-er's option to utilize the random sample method. 
4.	A high response rate is critical to ensure that the random sample produces an accurate AVR for the worksite. The employer should make a concerted effort to obtain a completed survey form from each employee in the sample. All nonrespondents in the sample will be treated as drive alone commuters (i.e. commuting in a single occupant vehicle) for purposes of calculating the worksite AVR. 
5.	Basic Random Sample Selection Methodology.
a.	The employer shall compile a complete list of employees at the worksite, in alphabetical order and assign a consecutive number to each employee. The employer shall exclude from the list employees who are known to regularly start work outside the six a.m. through ten a.m. peak period. 
b.	The employer shall determine the number of employees to be included in the random sample using the following formula, where (n) is the sample size and (N) is the number of employees who start work between six a.m. and ten a.m. 
n = N/1+O.0026*(N-1) 
A sample of size "n" based on this formula should produce an AVR with a sampling error of at most plus or minus 0.05, with ninety-five (95) percent probability. The sample size based on this formula is displayed in the table below: 
Number of Peak Period Employees at worksite	Sample Size
400 to 420 	200
421 to 440 	205
441 to 460 	210
461 to 480 	214
481 to 500 	218
501 to 550 	225
551 to 600 	235
601 to 650 	240
651 to 700 	248
701 to 750 	255
751 to 800 	260
801 to 850 	265
851 to 900 	270
901 to 950 	274
951 to 1000 	278
1001 to 1500 	300
1501 to 2000 	320
2001 to 3000 	340
3001 to 4000 	350
4001 to 6000 	360
6001 to 10,000 	370
>10,000 	380
 
c.	In no case can the random sample size be less than indicated in the above table. The employer may choose to include a larger number of employees in the survey. A larger sample group should more accurately represent the entire employee population provided that the employer obtains a high response rate. 
d.	After the sample size has been determined, the employer shall use a random number list generated by the district to select the sample. 
(Ord. 491 § 9, 1994) 
10.12.110 - Fees. 
The fee schedule for Rule 9001 is contained in Rule 3130 (trip reduction plan review fee). 
(Ord. 491 § 10, 1994) 
10.12.120 - Alternative emission control. 
At the option of the employer, with approval of the APCO an alternative vehicle emission reduction program may be used which achieves emission reductions equal to or greater than those that would have been achieved if the performance objectives of Rule 9001 were met, and that these alternative measures are not required by any other federal, state or local control measure or regulatory requirement. Such an alternative emission reduction program shall include an update and progress monitoring report to be submitted at least every year. 
(Ord. 491 § 11, 1994) 
10.12.130 - Delegation requirements. 
A local jurisdiction may be delegated responsibility for the implementation of this rule by the APCO providing that the local trip reduction ordinance and program to implement the ordinance meet the requirements of the California Health and Safety Code Section 40717(e). 
(Ord. 491 § 12, 1994) 
Chapter 10.16 - BICYCLES 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Bicycle defined. 
"Bicycle," for the purposes of this chapter, means any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains or gears having either two or three wheels at least twenty (20) inches in diameter and a frame size of at least fourteen (14) inches. The provisions of this chapter are also applicable to motorized bicycles. 
(Ord. 319 § 1, 1977) 
10.16.020 - License requirement. 
A.	It is unlawful for any person to operate any bicycle on any street, road, highway or other public property within the city unless such bicycle is licensed in accordance with this chapter. 
B.	The city shall provide license indicia and registration forms as required by Division 16.7 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California, and it shall be the duty of the police department to attach the required license indicia to the frame of each bicycle and to issue a corresponding registration card for the licensee. 
(Ord. 319 §§ 2, 3, 1977) 
10.16.030 - Records. 
The police department shall maintain records of each bicycle registered. Such records shall include, but not be limited to, the license number, the serial number of the bicycle, the make and type of the bicycle, and the name and address of the licensee. Records shall be maintained by the police department during the period of validity of the license or until notification that the bicycle is no longer to be operated. 
(Ord. 319 § 4, 1977) 
10.16.040 - Term of license. 
Bicycle licenses shall be renewed on January 1st of the third year following the year of registration. 
(Ord. 319 § 5, 1977) 
10.16.050 - Destruction of license unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to tamper with, destroy, mutilate or alter any license indicia or registration form, or to remove, alter or mutilate the serial number, or the identifying marks on any bicycle frame licensed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 319 § 6, 1977) 
10.16.060 - Fees. 
The license fee to be paid for each new licensing of a bicycle shall be five dollars ($5.00) and shall be payable in advance. The fee for each renewal of a license shall be one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) and shall be payable in advance. The fee for replacement of a license or registration form shall be one dollar ($1.00). 
(Ord. 510 § 1 (part), 1995: Ord. 319 § 7, 1977) 
10.16.070 - Change of address. 
Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter changes his address, he shall within ten days notify the police department of the old and new address. 
(Ord. 319 § 8, 1977) 
10.16.080 - Sale or transfer. 
Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter sells or otherwise disposes of his bicycle, he shall within ten days notify the police department of the sale or disposal. Any person who purchases or otherwise acquires possession of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter shall within ten days apply to the police department for a transfer of the license to his name. 
(Ord. 319 § 9, 1977) 
10.16.090 - Fine for violation. 
No fine imposed for any violation of this chapter shall exceed ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. 510 § 1 (part), 1995: Ord. 319 § 10, 1977) 
Chapter 10.19 - RESIDENTIAL PARKING. 
Sections: 
 
10.19.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by requiring a minimum level of maintenance of private property to protect the livability, appearance and social and economic stability of the city and to protect the public from the health and safety hazards and the impairments of property values that result from the neglect and deterioration of property. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
10.19.020 - Definitions. 
"Boat" means a boat of any kind, whether self-propelled or propelled by any other means, including sailing vessels and all other structures adapted to be navigated on water from place to place for recreational purposes or for the transportation of merchandise or persons. 
"Motor vehicle" means a passenger vehicle, truck, recreational vehicle, motorcycle, motor scooter, golf cart, or other similar self-propelled vehicle. "Motor vehicle" does not mean a motorized wheelchair, bicycle, tricycle or quadricycle. 
"Property" means any real property not owned by the city, the federal or state government or any political subdivision or agency thereof. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a motor vehicle designed and equipped for human habitation. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
10.19.030 - Parking on unpaved surfaces prohibited. 
A.	Notwithstanding any other ordinance of the city, on any improved parcel used for residential purposes, no person shall keep, store or park any trailer, recreational vehicle, boat or motor vehicle on any portion of a front yard or side yard which adjoins either a public street or a public sidewalk, unless the area is paved in accordance with city standards. 
B.	No owner, tenant, manager or occupant of any improved parcel used for residential purposes shall allow or suffer another person to keep, store or park any trailer, recreational vehicle, boat or motor vehicle on any portion of a front yard or side yard which adjoins either a public street or a public sidewalk, unless the area is paved in accordance with city standards. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
10.19.040 - Enforcement. 
A.	The city administrator or designee is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. All enforcement officers to whom the city administrator has delegated enforcement responsibilities are authorized to inspect property and to take any other appropriate enforcement action as may be reasonably necessary or convenient in order to carry out, administer or otherwise enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
B.	Any private person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement procedures for each violation through any lawful means available to the city, including without limitation, the administrative citation procedures or the general penalty provisions of Chapter 1.12. 
C.	A violation of this chapter by any private person shall constitute a public nuisance which, in addition to any other potential remedies available, shall be subject to abatement by any lawful means including, but not limited to, the procedures in Chapter 8.28. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 2, 12-14-2015)  
Chapter 10.20 - PARKING OF LARGE TRUCKS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS 
Sections: 
 
10.20.010 - Restrictions. 
It is unlawful to leave, park or allow to be parked any commercial vehicle of more than five thousand (5,000) pounds tare weight commonly described as a truck, truck and trailer, trailer, or tractor whether attended or unattended in any residential or commercial zone or in a residential or commercial zone area within the city, except to the extent that it may be necessary in order to make deliveries or to perform services at such locations. This prohibition shall apply regardless of whether the commercial vehicle is located on any public street, highway or alley, or on private property within such residential or commercial zone or area. 
(Ord. 557 § 1, 2005: Ord. 534 § 1 (part), 1999) 
10.20.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 10.04.650 of this code. 
(Ord. 534 § 1 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 10.21 - SKATEBOARDS, IN-LINE SKATES, ROLLERSKATES 
Sections: 
 
10.21.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this section: 
"In-line skate" means any vehicle, device, or contrivance with any number of wheels in a straight line attached to a shoe, or other foot gear, which is designed to be, or can be propelled by human power, and which is not defined as a bicycle by the California Vehicle Code. The term in-line skate also includes motorized in-line skates. 
"Rollerskate" means any vehicle, device or contrivance with any number of wheels attached to a shoe, or other foot gear, which is designed to be, or can be propelled by human power, and which is not defined as a bicycle by the California Vehicle Code. The term rollerskate also includes motorized rollerskates. 
"Skateboard" means any vehicle, device, or contrivance with any number of wheels, with a riding surface of any design, upon which a person may place one or more feet, and which is designed to be, or can be propelled by human power, and which is not defined as a bicycle by the California Vehicle Code. The term skateboard also includes motorized skateboards. 
(Ord. 545 § 1 (part), 2002) 
10.21.020 - Riding skateboard, in-line skates or rollerskates on posted property prohibited. 
The riding of skateboards, in-line skates, rollerskates, or other similar contrivances, as defined in Section 10.21.010 of this chapter shall be prohibited upon any private or public property when such property has been posted pursuant to this section. Property owners and/or their managers are authorized to post or erect signs, at their own expense, prohibiting the riding of skateboards, in-line skates, rollerskates, or similar contrivances in or on those premises for which such a request has been made to, and approved by, the chief of police or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 545 § 1 (part), 2002) 
10.21.030 - Warning signs posted. 
The property owner or its manager shall erect authorized signs giving notice of the prohibition set forth in Section 10.21.020 of this chapter. Authorized signs shall be a minimum of seventeen (17) inches by twenty-two (22) inches, with one-inch letters, posted adjacent to the entrances to the subject property. These signs may be erected in such a position to prevent vandalism or theft. The property owner, or manager, shall have on file with the police department a signed consent form authorizing the police department to enforce such ordinance. 
Example sign: "Skateboards, Rollerblades, Rollerskates or Similar Contrivances Prohibited on Posted Property by Woodlake Municipal Code Sec. 10.21.030, Woodlake Police Department (559) 564-3346." 
(Ord. 545 § 1 (part), 2002) 
10.21.040 - Exception—State law. 
Section 10.21.030 of this chapter shall not be deemed to make punishable an act or acts which are prohibited by any statute of the state of California. 
(Ord. 545 § 1 (part), 2002) 
10.21.050 - Penalty. 
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable as hereinafter provided: 
A.	A fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00);
B.	On the fifth calendar day following the date indicated on the citation as the date to appear if no appearance has been made by either: 
1.	Payment of bail,
2.	Payment of a fine imposed by this section,
3.	The filing of a notice of contest with the collecting agency, the citation shall be deemed delinquent and a fine of five dollars ($5.00) shall be imposed in addition to that imposed under subsection A of this section; 
C.	On the fortieth calendar day following the date indicated on the citation as the date to appear if no appearance has been made by either: 
1.	Payment of bail,
2.	Payment of a fine imposed by this section,
3.	The filing of a notice of contest with the collecting agency; the citation shall be deemed delinquent and an additional fine of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be imposed in addition to that imposed under subsections A and B of this section. 
(Ord. 545 § 1 (part), 2002) 
10.21.060 - Severability. 
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this chapter are distinct and severable and, in the event that any subsections, paragraphs, clauses, and/or phrases are declared unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity, or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining subsections, paragraphs, clauses, or phrases of this chapter. 
(Ord. 545 § 1 (part), 2002) 
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 12.04 - PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
12.04.010 - Datum plane established. 
The level or datum plane of all grades, levels and elevations of the city is established at a point in the northeast corner of Section 25, Township 17 South, Range 26 East, Mount Diablo Base and Meridian, which is twenty (20) feet south and forty (40) feet west of an existing road junction, said point being the top of an iron post stamped "30 M 1923 P.T. 60 S" and set by the United States Department of Interior Geological Survey, which point shall have an elevation of 453.33 feet. 
All grades, levels and elevations of the city shall refer to the above established datum plane. 
(Ord. 67 §§ 1, 2, 1947) 
12.04.020 - Preference to employ local residents. 
A.	In the performance of any public work by the city, the expense of which is payable by the city or out of money deposited in the treasury of the city, preference in the performance of labor in connection with such public work shall be given to persons who are bona fide residents of the city. 
B.	In the letting of any contracts for the performance of public work for the city, the expense of which is payable by the city or out of money deposited in the treasury of the city, preference in the letting of such contract shall be given to persons who are bona fide residents of the city, insofar as the law applicable to the letting of such contract allows. 
C.	Preference in the purchase of public supplies shall be given to businesses operated in the city, insofar as the law allows. 
(Ord. 6 §§ 1—3, 1941) 
Chapter 12.08 - EXCAVATIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.08.010 - Permit required. 
A.	A permit shall be obtained for all underground facilities where pavement, driveways or sidewalks are cut, or excavations are made in public rights-of-way in the city where the city has accepted the streets, alleys or public ways for maintenance. 
B.	A permit for the necessary work is to be obtained from the city clerk, City Hall, Woodlake, California. Permit shall be obtained prior to the starting of any work, and permittee shall notify the city clerk the day the work is to be started. The fee for the permit shall be set by resolution of the city council and may be amended by resolution. 
(Ord. 198 §§ 1, 2, 1966) 
12.08.020 - Certificate of insurance. 
Every person applying for a permit shall file with the city clerk a policy, true copy thereof or certificate of insurance as evidence that the applicant has in effect public liability insurance for bodily injury in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for each accident and for property damage in the amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). Failure of applicant to file such certificate, policy or such copy thereof and obtain the approval of the city thereof shall be grounds for denying any permit provided for herein. Franchised public utilities operating under the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission are exempt from the provisions of this section for work performed by their own forces. 
(Ord. 198 § 3, 1966) 
12.08.030 - Minimum cover for underground facilities. 
All underground facilities installed shall have a minimum cover of twenty-four (24) inches for installation within the traveled way between curbs. In the parkway and sidewalk area the cover may be reduced to such minimums as approved by the superintendent of public works. 
(Ord. 198 § 4, 1966) 
12.08.040 - Conduct of operation. 
A.	The operation shall be conducted in a matter to interfere with traffic as little as possible. Sufficient standard warning signs, lights and barricades shall be provided to adequately protect the public. At all times when a street is out, temporary access is to be provided for all property owners. The maximum length of trench to be open at any one time shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet except in business and commercial districts the trench length shall not exceed four hundred twenty (420) feet. 
B.	Temporary patching will be required when permanent paving must be delayed more than one week. Temporary patching must be replaced with permanent paving within forty-five (45) days. 
C.	Dust control shall be maintained during construction by use of water or dust pallative or both. At the conclusion of the work, all dirt shall be removed from the street and the entire area left in a dirt and dust free condition. 
(Ord. 198 § 5, 1966) 
12.08.050 - Work and materials. 
A.	Pavement and base shall be replaced in kind but in no case shall the pavement be less than two inches thick or shall the base be less than six inches thick. 
B.	All concrete and asphalt concrete shall be sawed or cut prior to any pavement removal with cutting lines to be parallel. All other surfaces shall be cut to a neat line with an impact cutting device. All surfacing material removed for the work proposed is to be disposed of off the public right-of-way. The backfill is to be compacted in lifts with a hydro hammer or similar impact device. 
C.	That portion of the fill more than twenty-four (24) inches below the surface shall have a minimum relative compaction of ninety (90) per cent and that portion within twenty-four (24) inches of the surface shall have a minimum relative compaction of ninety-five (95) percent. All necessary tests are to be paid for by the permittee. 
D.	No pavement shall be replaced until the backfill and base have been inspected and approved by the superintendent of public works or his representative. 
E.	All work done and materials used shall be in conformance to the Standard Specifications of California Division of Highways, Department of Public Works, dated January, 1964. 
(Ord. 198 § 6, 1966) 
12.08.060 - Applicability. 
A.	The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to work on state highways where the permit is issued by the state and inspection is performed by the state. Neither shall the provisions of this chapter apply to excavations for telephone, telegraph or electric poles or their appurtenances. 
B.	The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the city public works department except that the requirements for permits and fees are waived. Fees will be waived for public utility work required in conjunction with city initiated public works projects. 
(Ord. 198 §§ 7, 8, 1966) 
12.08.070 - Exceptions. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any person, firm or corporation, maintaining any pipe or conduit in any public street, alley or other public place, by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit, from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property or for the restoration of electric, gas, water, communication facilities, or emergency and governmental services, when such necessity arises during such hours as the offices of the city are closed; provided, that the person, firm or corporation making such excavation shall apply for a permit therefor within eight hours after the city is first opened subsequent to the making of such excavation. 
(Ord. 198 § 9, 1966) 
12.08.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 198 § 11, 1966) 
Chapter 12.12 - CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS 
Sections: 
 
12.12.010 - Curbs and gutters. 
Standard curb and gutter shall be installed, where same does not exist, on all street frontage of properties for which the building permits for the following classes of work are issued: 
A.	New dwellings, or commercial or industrial buildings on vacant properties, or remodeling of existing dwellings or commercial or industrial buildings involving the addition of fifty (50) percent or more of the existing floor space; 
B.	Replacement of existing dwellings, commercial or industrial buildings;
C.	Conversion of existing dwelling occupancies to more intensive occupancies, i.e., single-family to multiple-family occupancies; residential occupancies to commercial occupancies; 
D.	New structures on properties created by lot splits or other subdivisions of land.
(Ord. 449 § 1, 1990) 
12.12.020 - Driveway approaches. 
Standard concrete commercial or residential driveway approaches shall be included in such curb and gutter construction where driveways exist or are proposed for use by owners or permittees. 
(Ord. 449 § 2, 1990) 
12.12.030 - Sidewalks. 
Standard concrete sidewalks shall be installed in accord with the standard plans and policies of the city as to placement and design on all street frontages on properties on which building permits for the following classes of work are issued: 
A.	New commercial or office buildings, or parking developments on vacant property, or remodeling of existing commercial or industrial buildings involving the addition of fifty (50) percent or more of the existing floor space. 
B.	Replacement of existing commercial or office buildings or conversion to parking usage.
C.	Conversion of existing residential occupancies to commercial, office or parking occupancy.
D.	New commercial or office buildings or parking facilities or uses on properties created by lot splits or subdivisions. 
(Ord. 449 § 3, 1990) 
12.12.040 - Condition of building permit issuance. 
The above installations shall be a condition of building permit issuance, and final inspections shall not be performed for building, electrical or plumbing work involved in the permitted construction until required sidewalk, curb and gutter, or gutter, and driveway approach construction is completed to city standards. 
(Ord. 449 § 4, 1990) 
12.12.050 - Cash deposits. 
Where, in the opinion of the city, installation of curb, gutter and/or sidewalk required by the preceding sections is impractical because of existing street grades or other conditions precluding adequate drainage or creating drainage problems, the city may elect to require a cash deposit in the amount estimated by the city to be sufficient to complete the required installation, such cash deposit shall be made to the city until such time as, in the opinion of the city, the required installation can be properly made. 
The city may permit the property owner to make the cash deposit in installments with the last installment payable before the expected date of installation, or within one year, whichever is sooner. 
(Ord. 449 § 5, 1990) 
12.12.060 - Cash reimbursement. 
In the event that the city does not cause to be constructed curbs, gutters and/or sidewalks, for which cash deposits have been received, the city shall reimburse the party which paid the cash deposit. The reimbursement shall be equal to amount of cash deposit. Reimbursement shall become effective three years after a cash deposit has been received. 
(Ord. 449 § 6, 1990) 
12.12.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in the county jail for not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 449 § 7, 1990) 
Chapter 12.16 - CITY AIRPORT 
Section: 
 
12.16.010 - Land description. 
The land and areas and appurtenances hereinafter described are declared to be and to constitute an airport and aviation field and shall be known as the Woodlake Municipal Airport. Such areas are situated within the city of Woodlake, county of Tulare, state of California and are more particularly described as follows: 
Lots 296 and the North 300 feet of Lot 294 and Lot 295 of Woodlake Tract No. 2 as per Map recorded in Book 11, Page 24 of Maps in the Office of the County Recorder of Tulare County. 
(Ord. 344 § 1, 1979) 
12.16.020 - Administration. 
Municipal powers and jurisdiction and the powers and administrative functions of the several departments of the city are extended and made applicable to the Woodlake Municipal Airport and every part thereof. All laws and ordinances of the city; all resolutions, orders, rules and regulations of the council of the city and all orders, rules and regulations of any and all officers, boards and commissions of the city so far as the same may be adaptable shall be applicable to the Woodlake Municipal Airport. 
(Ord. 344 § 2, 1979) 
12.16.030 - Airport use. 
The Woodlake Municipal Airport is and shall be conducted and managed as a terminal facility of the city and for the accommodation of aircraft and for the promotion of aviation and air commerce in and around the Woodlake community. 
(Ord. 344 § 3, 1979) 
12.16.040 - Airport manager. 
The airport manager is that person or persons designated by the fixed base operator operating at the Woodlake Municipal Airport. The fixed base operator will inform the city as to the name or names of the individual or individuals designated as the airport manager or managers. Such person or persons shall perform all acts required of the airport manager pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 344 § 4, 1979) 
12.16.050 - Liability. 
All permissions, leases, agreements and all permits granted by the city to use the Woodlake Municipal Airport facilities shall be conditioned upon the assumption of full responsibility for any and all damages occasioned by or arising out of each use. Each permitted user shall release from and hold harmless and indemnify the city and its officers, agents and employees from any and all responsibilities, liabilities, loss or damage caused by or arising out of the use of the airport facilities by such permitted user. 
(Ord. 344 § 5, 1979) 
12.16.060 - Insurance. 
All fixed base operators shall secure and maintain throughout the terms of their lease or agreement with the city a public liability and property damage insurance policy in the amounts to be specified by separate agreement with the city and such policies shall name the city as a co-insured, A certificate of insurance shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 344 § 6, 1979) 
12.16.070 - Accident reports. 
Every person involved in an accident on the Woodlake Municipal Airport, including but not limited to, pedestrian, aircraft or automotive, shall make a report thereof to the airport manager not later than twenty-four (24) hours after the accident occurs who shall in turn forthwith notify the city manager of the city. 
(Ord. 344 § 7, 1979) 
12.16.080 - Loitering. 
No person shall loiter in or about any building or structure located upon the Woodlake Municipal Airport or upon the Woodlake Municipal Airport property itself nor interfere with, tamper with or put into motion an aircraft or vehicle or other equipment without the express permission of the owner thereof unless so directed to do by the airport manager. 
(Ord. 344 § 8, 1979) 
12.16.090 - Compliance with rules and regulations. 
Any person, firm or corporation refusing to comply with the rules and regulations of the Woodlake Municipal Airport after proper request from the airport manager shall be considered a trespasser and treated as such. 
(Ord. 344 § 9, 1979) 
12.16.100 - Motor vehicles. 
All operators of motor vehicles on the Woodlake Municipal Airport most possess a current and valid California driver's license and must possess liability insurance covering the motor vehicle operated by him in each instance. 
(Ord. 344 § 10, 1979) 
12.16.110 - Right-of-way. 
Pedestrians and aircraft shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles on the Woodlake Municipal Airport. Vehicles shall pass to the rear of taxiing aircraft and vehicles must remain clear of the runway and all taxi ways. When parked adjacent to a runway, vehicles must be placed parallel to the runway and at least one hundred (100) feet from the outside of the runway lights or from the runway shoulder where there are no lights. 
(Ord. 344 § 11, 1979) 
12.16.120 - Trash disposal. 
The fixed base operator shall provide metal disposal bins, the location of which shall be approved by the airport manager. 
(Ord. 344 § 12, 1979) 
12.16.130 - Petroleum products. 
Petroleum products and chemicals shall not be placed in drains, basins or ditches on the Woodlake Municipal Airport. 
(Ord. 344 § 13, 1979) 
12.16.140 - Flying clubs. 
Each flying club wishing to operate on the Woodlake Municipal Airport shall receive prior written permission from the airport manager to so operate. Each flying club shall file with the airport manager a list of the names and addresses of its members, a copy of the by-laws of the flying club and all other rules and regulations covering the flying club's operations. Each flying club shall designate not less than three persons to be contacted by the airport manager concerning the affairs of the flying club. 
(Ord. 344 § 14, 1979) 
12.16.150 - Commercial activity. 
Persons engaged in a commercial activity of any nature on the Woodlake Municipal Airport, including flight instruction, shall be required to enter into a written contract with the city or with the fixed base operator should such commercial activity be within the purview of the activities of the fixed base operator. In the event the commercial activity involves a charge for a fee or service a city business license shall be obtained. 
(Ord. 344 § 15, 1979) 
12.16.160 - Signs. 
Signs, posters, advertisements, circulars or other written or printed matter, shall not be placed or posted on the Woodlake Municipal Airport or any buildings located thereupon without the prior written permission of the airport manager, except that a sign evidencing the fact that an aircraft is for sale or lease may be placed in any aircraft. The fixed base operator is required to maintain a bulletin board on which shall be posted the names and telephone numbers of the police, the fire department, airport manager, licensed physician, and a copy of these rules and regulations concerning the activities to be conducted upon the Woodlake Municipal Airport. 
(Ord. 344 § 16, 1979) 
12.16.170 - Equipment or facility damage. 
Any person damaging any light fixture or device or structure or any facility of any kind located upon the Woodlake Municipal Airport shall report such damage to the airport manager and shall be responsible for any and all costs required to replace and repair the damaged facility or device. The airport manager shall in turn notify the city manager. 
(Ord. 344 § 17, 1979) 
12.16.180 - Aircraft operation. 
Aircraft being operated upon or around the Woodlake Municipal Airport shall comply with the following rules and regulations: 
A.	General.
1.	Aircraft permanently based at the Woodlake Municipal Airport shall be registered with the airport manager. 
2.	Permanently based aircraft shall be parked or hangered in specific areas designated by the airport manager. 
3.	Disabled aircraft and aircraft parts shall be promptly removed from runways and taxi-ways to a designated storage area, If the owner or operator fails to remove such disabled aircraft or parts within a reasonable time, the airport manager my require removal and storage at the owner's expense. 
B.	Ground Operations.
1.	Engine warmup, prolonged engine test operations or pre-flight engine operational checks may not be performed in any area that would result in a hazard to other aircraft, persons or property. 
2.	Aircraft shall be taxied in accordance with the prescribed taxiing patterns established by the airport manager. Taxiing is permitted only on the surfaced area prepared for that purpose or unless otherwise authorized by the airport manager. 
C.	Air Operations.
1.	The Woodlake Municipal Airport is an uncontrolled airport operating without a control tower. Aircraft using the Woodlake Municipal Airport shall operate in accordance with Federal Aviation regulations pertaining to operation of airports without air traffic control towers. 
2.	Pilots of aircraft are encouraged to establish radio contact on the assigned unicom frequency prior to landing or take-off, Landings or take-offs shall be confined only to the designated runways. 
3.	Aircraft shall not fly directly over the Airport at an altitude of less than five hundred (500) feet above designated pattern altitude unless in the process of landing or taking off or executing a go-around. 
4.	Turns shall not be made after take-off until the aircraft is outside the boundary of the Woodlake Municipal Airport and a safe altitude has been reached. 
5.	Aircraft shall enter the traffic pattern at a 45° angle. Straight in landing approaches are prohibited except in emergencies or by prearranged agreement. 
6.	Landing aircraft shall maintain not less than the assigned traffic pattern altitude until turning onto the base leg, prior to commencing final approach. 
7.	Three hundred sixty (360) degree tactical approaches are discouraged.
8.	The airport manager may delay or restrict any flight or other operations at the Woodlake Municipal Airport or may refuse take-off clearance to any aircraft in order to safeguard the safety of persons or property. 
D.	Fire Regulations. All orders emanating from the office of the fire chief of the city shall be complied with by the fixed base operator, all tenants and personnel at the Woodlake Municipal Airport. 
E.	Agricultural Operations. No dusting, spraying insecticide or other flights of an agricultural nature shall he permitted off the Woodlake Municipal Airport without the prior and direct permission of the airport manager. This provision shall apply only to the hauling of such materials to aircraft from the Woodlake Municipal Airport and does not preclude the normal empty operation of agricultural aircraft to and from the airport. Fees or charges will be made by the fixed base operator. 
F.	Glider Operations. All glider operations shall be conducted in compliance with applicable F.A.A. regulations. 
(Ord. 344 § 18, 1979) 
12.16.190 - Fees. 
Fees shall be established from time to time by the fixed base operator after approval by the city council. The fixed base operator shall notify the city council of its intention to increase fees at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the change in fees. This notice of proposed new fees will include the amount of the new fees and the reasons therefor. Payment for the use of airport facilities, storage or other services shall be made before flight departure. The airport manager may impound the subject aircraft if such payment has not been made or suitable credit arranged. 
(Ord. 344 § 19, 1979) 
12.16.200 - Enforcement. 
Any person, firm or corporation operating or handling aircraft, operating any vehicle, equipment or apparatus, or using the Woodlake Municipal Airport or any of its facilities in violation of the rules and regulations contained herein may be removed from the airport by the direction of the airport manager. Such person may be refused further use of the Woodlake Municipal Airport facilities for such length of time as the airport manager deems necessary in order to safeguard the public safety of the Woodlake Municipal Airport facilities. Any person violating or aiding in the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. The airport manager shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. If any portion of this chapter is declared invalid or unenforceable, all other portions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 344 § 20, 1979) 
12.16.210 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the airport manager under the terms of this chapter may appeal such decision to the city council in writing. The city council shall review the decision of the airport manager and may affirm, reverse or modify such decision. The action of the city council in affirming, reversing or modifying the decision shall be concluded within thirty (30) working days after the appeal has been instituted by the person aggrieved. 
(Ord. 344 § 21, 1979) 
Chapter 12.20 - CITY PARK 
Sections: 
 
12.20.010 - City park defined. 
The "city park" is that parcel of property bordered by Naranjo Boulevard, Magnolia Street, Antelope Avenue and Olive Lane, and operated by the city as a park. 
(Ord. 333 § 1, 1979: Ord. 332 § 1, 1979) 
12.20.020 - Loitering. 
A.	Except as provided in subsection B of this section, it is unlawful for any person to loiter in or about, or be present in any portion of the city park hereinabove defined, at any time between sunset and sunrise, from November 1st to April 30th in any year, or between ten p.m. and five a.m. from May 1st to October 31st in any year. 
B.	The provisions of this section shall not apply to any employee of the city, or any other agency of the federal, state or county government, while in the performance of his or her duties, and shall not apply to any person in attendance at or traveling to and from any lawful activity at the Rotary Club Building, also known as Boy Scout Building, located in the city park. 
C.	Every person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section is guilty of an infraction. Upon conviction thereof he shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. 333 §§ 2—4, 1979) 
12.20.030 - Alcoholic beverages. 
A.	It is unlawful for any person to serve or consume an alcoholic beverage in the city park (except pursuant to subsection B of this section) and it is unlawful for a person to possess an open container of alcoholic beverage in the city park (except pursuant to subsection B of this section). 
B.	A permit for the use of the city park may be issued which would allow the serving, possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages in the city park, and the application for such a permit shall be made in writing to the Woodlake police department at least five days prior to the proposed use. Such permits shall be issued only to organized, nonprofit groups, associations or organizations for organized functions related to the activities of such groups, associations or organizations. Such permit shall be limited as to time and date, and no such permit shall be issued for more than two consecutive days. Each group, organization or association shall be limited to two such permits during any one calendar year. 
C.	Every person, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this section is guilty of an infraction. Upon conviction thereof, he shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this section occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. 
(Ord. 332 §§ 2—4, 1979) 
Chapter 12.22 - SKATEBOARD FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
12.22.010 - Skateboard facilities. 
A.	In any skateboard park or facility owned or operated by the city, any person riding a skateboard, in-line skates, or similar device shall wear a helmet, elbow pads and kneepads. 
B.	The public works department shall cause a sign or signs to be posted at all such parks or facilities providing reasonable notice of subsection A of this section and stating that any person failing to comply with subsection A of this section will be guilty of an infraction and subject to citation. Subsequent violations by the same person within one hundred twenty (120) days shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
C.	Any person who fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter and who is injured while using the park or facility shall be deemed negligent. 
D.	The public works superintendent shall prepare and post rules for use of city-owned skateboard facilities consistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. 561 § 1, 2006) 
Chapter 12.24 - TREES 
Sections: 
 
12.24.010 - Planting restrictions. 
A.	It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to plant any tree or trees within twenty-eight (28) feet of the center of any forty (40) foot public street, or within thirty-three (33) feet of the center of any fifty (50) foot public street, or within thirty-eight (38) feet of the center of any sixty (60) foot public street or within forty-three (43) feet of the center of any seventy (70) foot public street within the city except as hereinafter provided. 
B.	It shall be lawful to plant the following enumerated trees within twenty-five (25) feet of the center of any forty (40) foot public street, or within thirty (30) feet of the center of any fifty (50) foot public street, or within thirty-five (35) feet of the center of any sixty (60) foot public street, or within forty (40) feet of the center of any seventy (70) foot public street in the city. The enumerated trees are as follows: 
Botanical Name	Common Name
Callistemon Citrinius	Bottlebrush
Callistemon Viminalis	Weeping Bottlebrush
Dodonaea Viscoss 'purpurea'	Hopseed bush
Ilex altaclarensis 'wilsonii'	Wilsoni Holly
Lagerstoemina Indica	Crape Myrtle
Laurus nobilis	Grecian Bay Laurel
Ligustrum Lucidum	Wax leaf privit
Maytenus boaria	Mayten Tree
Nerium oleander	Oleander
Podocarpus gracilior	Fern Pine
Podocarpus macrophyllus	Yew Pine
Prunus caroliniana	Carolina Cherry
Prunus ceraifer 'Atropurpurea'	Red leaf Plum
Pyrus kawakamii	Evergreen Pear
Eriobotrya deflexa	Bronze Loquat
Eucalyptus nicholii	Willon leafed
	peppermint
Liquidambar styracifluaq	Sweet Gum
Ginko bioloba	Midenhair Tree
 
(Ord. 447 §§ 1, 2, 1990) 
12.24.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, persons, firm or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions of Section 12.24.010 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 447 § 3, 1990) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
  
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.04 - WATER SERVICE SYSTEM[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 596, § 2, adopted December 14, 2015, repealed former ch. 13.04, §§ 13.04.010—13.04.250, and enacted a new ch. 13.04, §§ 13.04.010—13.04.290 as set out herein. Former ch. 13.04 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 417, adopted in 1987; Ord. 526, adopted in 1996; and Ord. 549, adopted in 2003.
 
13.04.010 - Definitions. 
"Service connection" is the components and materials installed that establish a connection from a water meter to the city's water supply and distribution system. 
"Service lateral" is the pipeline that connects the water service from a building or premise to a water meter which has a service connection to the city's water supply and distribution system. 
"Dwelling unit" is a building or portion of a building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by not more than one single-family and having facilities for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitary purposes. 
"Multi-single-family dwelling unit" is a building which is designed, improved, arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by not more than one single-family and having facilities for sleeping, cooking and sanitary purposes, but which is actually being occupied by more than one single-family. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.020 - Rates. 
The rates to be charged and collected by the city for water service shall be fixed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.030 - Wasting water discouraged. 
Consumers must use reasonable care to prevent the waste of water; must not allow taps and wash basins, water closets, baths and urinals to be left running and must not allow water to run or waste from his property onto street, highway or alley. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.040 - Meters. 
Meters may be installed on any and all service at the option of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.050 - Installation and/or connection of service connections. 
A.	Except as otherwise directed by the city, the city will install all service connections, making connections therefrom to main distribution lines and charging the landowner for the cost thereof. This installation will terminate at the water meter which must be installed near the edge of property line and within a public right-of-way (e.g. sidewalk) unless a different location for installation of a water meter is expressly authorized by a resolution of, or written agreement with, the city council. The required line and grade to said termination will be determined by the city, as will be the required procedures for requesting such installations. Before, after and during installation, the city shall be entitled to inspect each connection to the city's water main line and each water meter where such connection terminates, for initial compliance and for ongoing maintenance and safety monitoring purposes or any other lawful purposes. 
B.	Where determined by the city to be in the best interest of the city and/or the landowner, and in all new subdivision installations, the landowner is required to have the service connection installed by a licensed contractor in lieu of city installation. 
C.	In either case, city installation or landowner installation, all costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of a service connection and water meter must be borne by the property owner, except where otherwise specified in this chapter or a written resolution approved by the city council. 
D.	After installation and approval thereof by the city, the water meter and service connection must be conveyed to the city and the city shall be responsible for subsequent maintenance of the service connection and water meter, and the landowner shall retain responsibility for maintenance of the service lateral connecting the landowner's building(s) or other facilities to the city's water meter. Preparation of any required title transfer documentation shall be the responsibility of the landowner and must be accomplished within one year of the city's approval of the installed service connection and water meter. If the landowner fails to do so, the landowner shall be estopped from claiming ownership of said facilities. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.060 - Connection to public water distribution system. 
A.	The applicant for water service must notify the city when the service connection is ready for inspection and connection to the city's water distribution system. 
B.	From the effective date of this chapter, every dwelling unit wholly detached from any other dwelling unit or other building must be separately connected to the city's water distribution system. Any detached auxiliary buildings associated with a dwelling unit and not intended for use as a dwelling unit, commercial or other building, may utilize the dwelling unit's connection only if such building(s) does not contain facilities intended to be used communally by more than one nearby dwelling unit (e.g. detached laundry facilities). If there is more than one dwelling unit on a lot, each detached dwelling unit must be separately connected to the city's water distribution system, otherwise each residential occupancy building containing two or more dwelling units which are not legally approved for separate ownership must be connected through a single water meter and service connection to the city's water distribution system. 
C.	In each residential occupancy building containing two or more dwelling units which have been legally approved for separate ownership, each dwelling unit must be separately metered and separately connected to the city's water distribution system. However, all communally owned and detached auxiliary facilities and buildings (e.g. community swimming pools, irrigation sprinklers for commonly owned areas, common laundry room) must be connected to the city's water distribution system through a single water meter and service connection. 
D.	Each lot containing one or more non-residential occupancy buildings under common ownership must be connected to the city's water distribution system through a single water meter and service connection, unless one or more additional service connections are expressly authorized by a resolution of, or written agreement with, the city council. In each non-residential building containing two or more occupancy units which were legally approved for separate ownership, each unit must be separately metered and separately connected to the city's water distribution system. However, all communally owned or detached auxiliary facilities and buildings (e.g. irrigation sprinklers for commonly owned areas, common restrooms) must be connected to the city's water distribution system through a single water meter and service connection. 
E.	Adjacent buildings or dwelling units, on a single lot or on multiple lots, which are detached from one another and which are under separate ownership must not utilize the same service connection to the city's water distribution system. 
F.	A water service permit approved by the city and which covers any existing residential, commercial or industrial building shall automatically terminate when such building is subsequently legally divided into separate occupancy units that may be legally transferred, sold and owned. The termination shall be deemed to have occurred upon the legal approval and creation of such separate units and, thereafter, in order to obtain a water service permit, each unit is subject to and must be in full compliance with all city requirements, conditions and procedures for new service (e.g. installation of separate service connection and separate water meter). 
G.	For any mixed-use building containing two or more occupancy units, when at least one is used as a residential dwelling unit and at least one other unit is used for commercial or industrial purposes, separate service connections and metering are required for each unit if the occupancy units in such mixed-use building were lawfully divided into separate occupancy units that may be separately transferred, sold and owned. Otherwise, in any such mixed-use building that is not lawfully divided into separate occupancy units that may be separately transferred, sold and owned, a single meter and service connection to the city's water distribution system is required. 
H.	Every connection to the city's water distribution system must comply with the cross-connection provisions of Title 17 of the California Administrative Code and with the city's cross-connection ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.070 - Changes of ownership; new customers; fixture inspections. 
A.	When there is a change in ownership of premises using city water service, water service charges to the new owner shall be placed in the new owner's name upon the new owner's written request to the city to do so, if all other city requirements are satisfied. Said service shall then be subject to the service charges established by this chapter. If the city staff has reasonable grounds to believe that the owner of record or the renter of premises receiving water service is deceased, and if a new owner or renter has not requested to be the new account holder, then the city may commence proceedings for abandonment of capacity rights under this chapter. 
B.	Notwithstanding any other provision of any other ordinance of the city, prior to authorizing water service to the premises of any landowner, tenant or other prospective customer, said person must sign an authorization form provided by the city which authorizes the city to enter upon the premises and all buildings thereon which will receive water service, for the purpose of conducting an inventory inspection to ascertain and/or confirm the number of plumbing fixtures to be used in connection with the city's water service. However, this section must not be construed to impose an affirmative duty upon the city to always complete such an inspection or to discover any plumbing or related problems during any such inspection, which may subsequently result in property damage or other harm to any person. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.080 - Water service—Owner responsibility. 
Where there are two or more dwellings, apartment or households under the same ownership using water from the same service connection, the owner of the real property must apply for and pay for the water service. Each habitable unit on the real property which is occupied must pay a full charge for water service. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.090 - Billing for service—Delinquency—Termination. 
A.	Bills for water service will be rendered to the consumer or the property owner on or before the first day of every month, and all bills are due and payable on that date, at the offices of the city, or by mail to the city. If the payment is not made on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the month following the rendering of the bills, the bill shall be considered delinquent and a six dollar ($6.00) penalty shall be added to the water bill. When a water bill is delinquent, the water service may be terminated and shut off, and shall not be turned on again until the delinquent bill, the six dollar ($6.00) penalty and an additional sum of forty dollars ($40.00) for turning off and restoring service, shall be paid. 
B.	A consumer's water service may be discontinued for the nonpayment of a bill for water service of the same class rendered to him at a previous location if the bill is not paid within thirty (30) days after presentation at the new location. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.100 - Discontinuance of service—Notice to be sent—Hearing. 
Prior to discontinuing service for nonpayment of charges, a final notice shall be sent to the customer informing him that service will be discontinued if payment of all charges, including delinquent charges and penalties, is not made within fifteen (15) days. The notice shall provide that the customer may request a hearing before the city council if the customer feels that the billing which has been prepared and rendered is in error. Such request must be made in writing and submitted to the city clerk prior to the expiration of the fifteen (15) day period. In cases where a hearing is requested, service shall not be subject to termination until such hearing has been conducted. The decision of the city council after such hearing shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.110 - Emergency shut off of service. 
No charge will be made for emergency shut off and turn on service during regular working hours when same is made at the request of the owner or consumer after all charges due against the service connection are paid. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.120 - Temporary stop of service at customers request and call out fees. 
If the customer requests a temporary stop of service (one month minimum) a ten-dollar ($10.00) fee will be charged for turn on and shut off of water service during regular office hours. Shut off and turn on of water service after regular working hours, on weekends and holidays will be done by our standby person. The overtime fee will be charged as call out time and materials plus an administrative fee of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.130 - Access for inspection. 
Applicants for water service and water consumers shall answer without concealment all questions relative to the purpose for which water is, or is to be, used. The director of public works or other authorized agent shall have free access at proper hours of the day, to all parts of every building or property where water is used, for the purpose of inspecting the condition of pipes and the manner in which the water is being used. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.140 - Applicants to establish credit. 
An applicant for water service or water consumer must establish credit by one of the following methods: 
A.	Proven ownership of property on which service connection is made;
B.	A cash deposit for water service, amount to be set by resolution.
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.150 - Deposits. 
Deposits shall be kept in the water service deposit fund in the city treasury as long as water service is continued to the person making the deposit. Upon termination of water service deposits may be returned to the depositor upon application of the depositor made within two years of the termination of water service. Deposits shall first be applied to the outstanding water bill of the depositor before any refund shall be made. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.160 - Changes in service—Notification. 
The consumer or owner shall notify the director of public works or other authorized agent of any changes in the service desired, including discontinuance on account of vacancy of the property. 
In case of failure of the owner or consumer to give such notice, the minimum monthly water rate will be charged and collected for each month for which charges have accrued prior to such notice. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.170 - Reselling water prohibited. 
No person or family shall furnish or resell water from his service to any other person or to any other premises. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.180 - Service line damage—Responsibility. 
All persons taking water must keep their own service line from city valve at property line to house connection in good order and free from leaks, and will be held responsible for all damage which may result from neglect to do so. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.190 - Boilers. 
All consumers having arrangements for hot water and steam must have a tank from which to feed the boilers. The city will not be responsible for the safety of boilers on the premises of the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.200 - Equipment maintenance—Consumer responsibility. 
The consumer shall, at his own risk and expense; furnish, install and keep in good and safe condition all equipment that may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing water, and the city shall not be responsible for any loss or damage caused by the improper installation of such equipment, or the negligence or wrongful act of the customer or of any of his tenants, agents, employees or contractors, in installing, maintaining or operating such equipment. The city shall not be responsible for damage of property caused by faucets, valves and other equipment that are open when water is turned on at the meter, either originally or when turned on after a temporary shutdown. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.210 - Fire alarm—Discontinuance of water use. 
Immediately upon an alarm of fire being sounded from any part of the city, all persons using water for sprinkling or irrigating purposes shall close all hydrants and discontinue the use of the water for such purposes until the fire is extinguished. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.220 - Tampering with fire hydrants or other equipment. 
A.	No person or persons (except a fireman in the discharge of his duties) shall, without permit from the director of public works, open or in any way tamper with any fire hydrant, control valves or any other part of the mains of the water system. 
B.	No person or persons shall place or cause to be placed upon or about any fire hydrant, water gate, or control valve connected with the water mains of the city, any building material or other substances so as to prevent free access at all times. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.230 - Alterations to tap, pipe or water valve. 
No person shall tap any main and no addition or alteration whatsoever in or about any tap, pipe or water valve, shall be made or caused to be made by any person without permission of the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.240 - Turning water on or off—Authorized agent only. 
No one except a properly authorized agent of the city shall turn water on or off at any property without a written permit. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.250 - Molestation of city water system property. 
No person shall, without permission of the director of public works: enter into any pump house or enclosure, or molest any machinery, materials or tools; change any meter, gauge or register; or molest in any way any of the property of the city water system. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.260 - Shut off of water for repairs or extensions. 
The city reserves the right to shut off the water at any time for the purpose of making repairs or extensions to the system or for any other purpose, and will not be responsible for any damage resulting from the same. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.270 - Connection restricted. 
No connection will be made to any property with an orifice greater than three-fourths of an inch in diameter except where special arrangements are made with the city. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.280 - Violation—Shut off—Payment. 
For any violation of these rules and regulations, the water may be shut off and not be opened again with satisfactory assurance of an intention on the part of the delinquent to comply with the rules and regulations, and the payment of twenty dollars ($20.00) for the closing and opening of the control valve. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
13.04.290 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 3, 12-14-2015)  
Chapter 13.08 - CROSS-CONNECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.08.010 - Definitions. 
The definitions attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and noted as "Appendix A" are made a part of this chapter as though they were repeated herein. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 1, 1992) 
13.08.020 - Rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations concerning cross-connections to the water system of the city are adopted, and all work in respect thereto shall be performed as herein required and not otherwise. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 2-01, 1992) 
13.08.030 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is: 
A.	To protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the user's internal distribution system or the user's private water system such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water system; 
B.	To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the user's in-plant potable water system and nonpotable water system, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and 
C.	To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of the city's water system. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 2-02, 1992) 
13.08.040 - Enforcement responsibility. 
The city council shall be responsible for the protection of the water system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through a water service connection. If, in the judgment of the council, an approved backflow prevention assembly is required for the safety of the water system, the council, or its designated agent, shall give notice in writing to the user to install such an approved backflow prevention assembly at such specific locations on his premises. The user shall immediately install such approved assemblies at the user's own expense. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the user to install, have tested and maintain the assemblies shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 2-03, 1992) 
13.08.050 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "cross connection ordinance of the city of Woodlake." 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 2-04, 1992) 
13.08.060 - Protection at point of connection. 
Protection of the public water system at the service connection shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.	Each public water service connection supplying water to premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the public water system by the proper installation of an approved method of backflow protection; 
B.	Each public water service connection supplying water to premises on which any substance is or may be handled in such a fashion as to permit introduction into the water system shall be protected against-backflow of the substance into the public water system. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the public water system which have been subjected to deterioration in bacteriological and/or chemical quality; and 
C.	Approved backflow protection measures shall be initiated on the service connection from the public water system to any premises that has a cross-connection. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 3-01, 1992) 
13.08.070 - Protection on user premises. 
Protection of potable water systems within the user premises shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.	Plumbing Connections. Where the circumstances are such that there is danger to health from the backflow of sewage, as from sewers, toilets, hospital bedpans and the like, into a drinking water system, a dependable form of backflow protection shall be installed to prevent such backflow. 
Devices suited to the purpose of avoiding backsiphonage from plumbing fixtures are roof tanks or separate pressure systems which are separately piped to supply such fixtures, recognized approved vacuum or siphon breakers and other backflow protective devices which have been proved by appropriate testing laboratories to be dependable for destroying the vacuum. 
More specifically, plumbing connections shall comply with the provisions of the most recent edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code. 
B.	Separate Drinking Water Systems. Whenever the city determines that it is not reasonably possible to protect the water system against entry of water from a source or piping system on user premises, or equipment is proposed which cannot be approved as safe or resulting in a water supply which is potable for human use, an entirely separate drinking water system shall be installed. 
C.	Fire Systems.
1.	Water systems for fighting fires, derived from a supply and/or source that cannot be approved as safe or potable for human use shall be kept wholly separate from drinking water pipelines and equipment. In cases where the domestic water system is or may be used for fire fighting purposes, an approved form of backflow protection shall be installed to protect such individual drinking water lines as are not used for fire fighting purposes. In no instance shall the domestic water piping be utilized to carry nonpotable water for fire fighting purposes. 
When disinfection of an auxiliary water supply is depended upon to render the water safe, the means of applying the disinfectant under this regulation shall be automatic with operation of the pump or pumps employed with the dangerous water in question. Adequate supplies of chlorine and its compounds must be kept on hand at all times. Chlorine dosing equipment shall be tested daily and kept in good operating condition. 
The public water supply must be protected against backflow from such domestic fire systems as detailed in Sections 13.08.080 and 13.08.090; and 
2.	An approved form of backflow protection shall be provided on the public water service connection supplying water to automatic fire extinguishing systems. 
D.	Process Waters. Potable water pipelines connected to equipment for industrial processes or operations shall be disconnected therefrom if practicable. Where disconnection is not practicable, a suitable form of backflow protection located beyond the last point from which drinking water may be taken shall be provided on the feed line to process piping or equipment. In the event the particular process liquid is especially corrosive or apt to prevent reliable action of the backflow prevention device, an approved air-gap separation shall be provided. 
E.	Sewage Treatment Plants and Pumping Stations. Sewage pumps shall not have priming connections directly connected to any drinking water system. No cross-connections shall exist between the drinking water system and any other piping, equipment, or tank in any sewage treatment or sewage pumping station. 
F.	Water Line Sizing. Inasmuch as many serious plumbing hazards are due to undersized piping, water supply piping which is too small, thereby causing vacuum conditions when fixtures are flushed or water is drawn from the system in other ways, shall be enlarged whenever possible. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 3-02, 1992) 
13.08.080 - Protection of public water systems. 
The specific type of approved backflow protection (air-gap separation, reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, double check valve assembly or pressure type vacuum breaker) required shall depend on the degree of hazard involved. This shall include, but not be limited to, the following criteria. 
A.	An approved air-gap separation shall be used where there is a health hazard, system hazard, contamination hazard or a plumbing hazard which cannot be presently eliminated. The air-gap separation shall be located on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practicable. All water piping from the service connection to the air-gap separation shall be above grade and entirely visible. If these conditions cannot reasonably be met, the public water supply may be protected by proper installation of an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, providing this alternative is acceptable to the city. 
B.	An approved double check valve assembly shall be provided on the service connection to a premises on which there is an auxiliary water supply handled in a separate piping system with no known cross-connection. 
C.	An approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be provided at the service connection to a premise on which there is an auxiliary water supply where cross-connections exist which cannot be presently eliminated. 
D.	An approved air-gap separation shall be provided at the service connection to any sewage treatment plant, sewage pumping station or stormwater pumping station. If these conditions cannot be reasonably met, the public water supply may be protected by the proper installation of an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, provided this alternative is acceptable to the city. The final decisions in these matters shall rest with the State Department of Health Services. 
E.	Low head sewage lift stations on residential and commercial premises may be protected as follows: 
1.	Isolation of the pumping unit from the rest of the building, prohibition of water piping in the sewage pump room and installation of an approved double check valve assembly at the service connection; or 
2.	Industrialization of the water line into the sewage pump room area (if there must be water service in the area) by providing an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device on the water line supplying the area. All hose connections and/or valved outlets beyond the device that may be used for drinking water shall be identified as "DANGER-UNSAFE WATER" or "UNSAFE WATER-NOT FOR DRINKING." 
F.	An approved air-gap separation shall be provided at the service connection to any premises on which any materials dangerous to health or toxic substance in toxic concentration is or may be handled under pressure. If these conditions cannot reasonably be met, the public water supply may be protected by the proper installation of an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, provided this alternative is acceptable to the city. 
G.	An approved double check valve assembly shall be provided at the service connection to a premises on which a substance that would be objectionable, but not necessarily hazardous to health is or may be handled in such a manner as to permit entry into the water system. 
H.	The minimum of an approved double check valve assembly shall be provided at the service connection to an automatic fire extinguishing system. All systems shall be reviewed to determine when more stringent backflow protection is justified. 
I.	An approved backflow prevention device as designated by the city shall be provided at the service connection to any premises on which the city determines that a special hazard exists. This shall include, but not be limited to, such premises where cross-connections have been eliminated, but where the water system is of such size and the water use so extensive and diversified that a high potential exists for creating cross-connections. 
J.	Internal backflow protection may be accepted in lieu of master protection, provided this alternative is acceptable to the city. 
K.	The following is a list of premise uses which generally require backflow protection for the public water service connection. The required type of backflow prevention device is indicated. Backflow protection requirements for premises not appearing on this list shall be discussed with the city. 
	Premise Use	Type of
Device Required
1. 	Air conditioning plants 	RP
2. 	Animal clinics, animal grooming shops and animal boarding 	RP
3. 	Apartment or office complex with pond, lake or fountain 	RP
4. 	Automotive repair with steam cleaner, acid cleaning equipment or solvent facilities 	RP
5.	Automobile detail shop 	RP
6. 	Automotive plants 	RP
7. 	Auxiliary water systems or sources (interconnected or not interconnected) 	D.C. or RP
8. 	Bakeries 	RP
9. 	Barber shops, beauty shops or salons 	RP
10. 	Bars, taverns or cocktail lounges 	RP
11. 	Battery manufacturing or rebuilding 	RP
12. 	Bottling plants - beverage and chemical 	RP
13. 	Boat manufacturing 	RP
14. 	Buildings with boilers or cooling towers 	RP
15. 	Buildings with landscape fountains or ponds 	RP
16. 	Buildings with storage tanks over two stories 	RP
17. 	Buildings with house booster pumps and/or approved water storage tank 	D.C.
18.	Building with sewage pumps 	RP
19.	Canneries or packing houses 	RP
20.	Carbonic gas recharging facilities 	RP
21.	Car wash (with or without water reclamation system) 	RP
22.	Chemical plants 	RP
23.	Chemically treated (nonpotable) water system 	RP
24.	Chemically treated (potable) water system D.C	.
25.	Churches with baptismal pools 	RP
26.	Home sprinkler systems 	VB
27.	Cleaning and dye works 	RP
28.	Commercial laundries 	A.G. or RP
29.	Convalescent homes and clinics 	D.C. or RP
30.	Convenience markets 	RP
31.	Crematories 	RP
32.	Dairies and cold storage plants 	D.C. or RP
33.	Dental offices 	RP
34.	Dialysis clinics 	RP
35.	Experimental lab facilities 	RP
36.	Fabricating plants (metal, fiberglass, plastic, foam) 	RP
37.	Film processing laboratories 	RP
38.	Fire extinguisher recharging facilities 	RP
39.	Fire protection system with auxiliary supply 	RP
40.	Fire protection system with pump and/or storage tank 	D.C.
41.	Food processing facilities using nontoxic materials 	D.C.
42.	Food processing facilities using toxic materials 	RP
43.	Foundries 	RP
44.	Ice manufacturing plants 	RP
45.	Ice skating rings 	RP
46.	Health spas 	RP
47.	Hospitals 	RP
48.	Laboratories 	RP
49.	Landscaping of elevated areas or with drip irrigation system 	RP
50.	Laundromats 	RP
51.	Machine shop 	RP
52.	Manufacturing, processing and fabrication facilities using nontoxic materials 	D.C.
53.	Manufacturing processing and fabrication facilities using toxic materials 	RP
54.	Medical offices 	RP
55.	Metal manufacturing 	D.C. or RP
56.	Metal stripping plants 	RP
57.	Mobile home parks 	D.C.
58.	Mobile equipment - pest control, drain cleaning, steam cleaning, rug and carpet cleaning 	RP
59.	Mortuaries and morgues 	RP
60.	Office or shopping center with uncommitted lease space 	RP
61.	Paint manufacturing 	RP
62.	Painting shops using water in any process 	RP
63.	Pest control businesses 	RP
64.	Pet shops 	RP
65.	Photography studios with processing equipment 	RP
66.	Plating plants 	RP
67.	Radiator works - repair or backflushing 	RP
68.	Reduction plants and rendering plants 	RP
69.	Rest homes - nonambulatory or over one story 	RP
70.	Rest homes - ambulatory only 	D.C.
71.	Restaurants or buildings with commercial kitchen (commercial includes any of the following:	
	booster heater, 180° hot water or commercial dishwasher) 	RP
72.	Restricted, classified or other closed facilities 	RP
73.	Sand and gravel, asphalt batch and ready-mix cement plants 	RP
74.	Sanitary dump for recreation vehicles or septic service tankers 	RP
75.	Schools and colleges 	RP
76.	Service stations with radiator repair or backflushing 	RP
77.	Sewerage and storm drainage facilities 	RP or A.G.
78.	Solar heating systems (other than domestic hot water) 	D.C. or RP
79.	Super markets with meat cutting and/or cooling towers 	RP
80.	Theaters with food and/or drinks 	D.C. or RP
81.	Warehouse with uncommitted space 	RP
82.	Where a cross-connection is maintained 	RP
83.	Where the use of a substance, process water, or water supplied by the city is such as to subject the water to deterioration in sanitary quality 	RP
84.	Where the water use is in conjunction with any pollutant (non-health hazard) 	D.C.
 
NOTE: 
Whenever a water service includes a combination of two or more usages, the usage with the most restrictive device shall control. An air gap is the most restrictive and a vacuum breaker is the least restrictive device. 
DEVICE DEFINITIONS: 
AG	-  Approved air gap—all piping visible between customer service valve and receiving tank with no taps or tees. 
D.C.	-  Approved double check valve assembly.
RP	-  Approved reduced pressure principle assembly.
VB 	-  Approved pressure type vacuum breaker assembly.
 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 4-01, 1992) 
13.08.090 - Protection of internal (on premises) domestic water supplies. 
The specific type of approved backflow prevention device (air-gap separation, approved reduced pressure principle backflow preventer, approved double check valve assembly, approved pressure type vacuum breaker, and atmospheric type vacuum breaker) required shall depend on the degree of hazard involved. These requirements shall include, but not be limited to, those requirements established by other administrative authorities having jurisdiction in the area. Attention is called to the California Administrative Code, Title 17, Regulations Relating to Cross-Connections, Article 1 (Section 7583) and Article 4, Article 8 Administrative Procedures; the Uniform Plumbing Code requirements; and special requirements adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 4-02, 1992) 
13.08.100 - Backflow prevention devices—Types to be used. 
Potential types of backflow prevention devices which can be submitted for approval, as applicable, include the following types: 
A.	Air-gap separation;
B.	Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device;
C.	Double check valve assembly;
D.	Pressure type vacuum breaker; and
E.	Atmospheric type vacuum breaker (on premises only).
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 5-01, 1992) 
13.08.110 - Backflow prevention devices—Approval of device. 
Only those devices that have met the specifications and received the approval of an approved testing laboratory and have been accepted by both the city and the State Department of Health Services shall be approved for use in protecting public water supplies. Internal (on premises) protection may be afforded by use of an atmospheric type vacuum breaker provided this type of device has met the specifications and received the approval of an approved testing laboratory and has been accepted by the city. City approval shall also be required if an atmospheric type vacuum breaker is to be accepted in lieu of master protection. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 5-02, 1992) 
13.08.120 - Backflow prevention devices—Installation requirements. 
Public water service connection protection installations shall be as follows and shall be at the expense of the water user: 
A.	Air-Gap Separation (A.G.). The air-gap separation shall be located on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practicable. All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above grade and be entirely visible. No water use shall be provided from any point between the service connection and the air-gap separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate a distance of at least two pipe diameters of the supply inlet, but in no case less than one inch above the overflow rim of the receiving tank. 
B.	Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Device (R.P.). The approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practicable. The device shall be installed not more than three feet nor less than twelve (12) inches above the surrounding grade and shall be readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water supplied from any point between the service connection and the R.P. shall be protected in a manner approved by the city. 
C.	Double Check Valve Assembly (D.C.). The approved double check valve assembly shall be located on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practicable. The double check valve assembly shall be installed not more than three feet nor less than twelve (12) inches above surrounding grade, and shall be readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water supplied from any point between the service connection and the D.C. shall be protected in a manner approved by the city. 
D.	Pressure Type Vacuum Breaker (P.V.B.). The approved pressure type vacuum breaker shall be located on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practicable. The P.V.B. shall be installed such that the critical level (C-L) is a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the highest point reached by any water downstream from the device, not less than twelve (12) inches, nor more than sixty (60) inches, above the surrounding floor or grade and shall be readily accessible for maintenance and testing. The P.V.B. shall not be exposed to any back-pressure. Water supplied from any point between the service connection and the P.V.B. must be protected in a manner approved by the city. 
E.	Atmospheric (Nonpressure) Type Vacuum Breaker (A.V.B.). The atmospheric (non-pressure) type vacuum breaker shall be located such that the critical level is at least six (6) inches above the highest point any water reaches downstream from the A.V.B. Fixtures with integral vacuum breakers manufactured and approved as a unit may be installed in accordance with their approval requirements. At no time shall the vacuum breaker be subjected to back-pressure. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 5-03, 1992) 
13.08.130 - Backflow prevention devices—Testing and maintenance. 
A.	It shall be the duty of the water user on any premises on which reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices, double check valve assemblies and/or pressure type vacuum breakers are installed to have competent inspections made of these devices to verify effective operation on an annual basis. The City shall perform the tests and charge a fee to the water user in accordance with a resolution adopted from time-to-time by the city council. 
B.	All testing of devices and completion of backflow prevention device test and maintenance reports shall be restricted to those persons that have been certified by the Department of Health Services and are in possession of a current valid backflow prevention device tester identification card. 
C.	The device shall be tested immediately upon being put into operation and at least once each year thereafter should the device continue in service. A backflow prevention device test and maintenance report must be filed for each test performance. Additional and/or more frequent testing shall be required because of, but not limited to, the following conditions: 
1.	Relocation. If a device is relocated, a test shall be made prior to putting the device back into service. 
2.	Repiping. If the supply line is changed, the device shall be tested prior to being put back into service. 
3.	Repair or Overhaul. If repaired, the device shall be tested prior to being put back into service. The device may be required to be tested again in three months. Cleaning is considered to represent repair. 
4.	Devices or assemblies that are not commensurate with the degree of hazard involved shall be tested at least every three months. Devices or assemblies in this category shall be replaced with approved devices either upon successive inspections indicating repeated mechanical failure (excluding cleaning) or as directed by the city. 
5.	All backflow prevention devices, installation, tests, repairs, overhaul and/or replacement shall be at the expense of the water user. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 5-04, 1992) 
13.08.140 - Backflow prevention device removal. 
Approval must be obtained from the city before a backflow prevention device is removed, relocated or replaced. 
A.	Removal. The use of a device may be discontinued and the device removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the city to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is likely to be created in the future. 
B.	Relocation. A device may be relocated following confirmation by the city that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required. 
C.	Repair. A device may be removed for repair, provided the water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the device is returned to service, or the water use is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the city. A retest will be required. 
D.	Replacement. A device may be removed and replaced provided the water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed. All replacement devices must be approved and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved. 
Note: Nonapproved devices (assemblies) and/or approved devices (assemblies) that are not commensurate with the degree of hazard involved shall be replaced immediately. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 5-05, 1992) 
13.08.150 - Records. 
A.	Records of such tests, repairs, overhaul, relocation and/or replacement shall be filed with the city. The city shall provide forms for this purpose. A copy of this report shall be submitted to the water user as follows: 
1.	Upon notification of a newly installed device (new or replacement);
2.	Annually: to comply with the requirements set forth in Chapter 5, Subchapter 1, Group 4, of the California Administrative Code; 
3.	Three months following repair or overhaul (if deemed necessary).
B.	The report shall be accompanied by correspondence directing the water user to have the necessary repairs made if necessary, and to return a card to the city within a thirty (30) day period. The time period shall be identified by a return date typed on the report form. In the event that there is need to exceed the return date, information explaining such delay shall be filed with the city in writing prior to expiration of said return date. 
If information is not received, a second notice will be sent. Noncompliance with the second notice will be followed by a city council hearing to discuss discontinuance of water service. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 5-06, 1992) 
13.08.160 - Marking safe and unsafe water lines. 
The water user shall be responsible for marking safe and unsafe water lines. When the premises contains dual or multiple water systems and piping, the exposed portions of these pipelines shall be painted, banded and/or marked at sufficient intervals to distinguish clearly which lines contain water that is safe for drinking purposes (potable/domestic) and which lines contain water which is not safe (nonpotable/industrial). All outlets from potentially contaminated water systems shall be posted as being contaminated and unsafe for drinking purposes. All outlets intended for drinking purposes shall be plainly marked to indicate that fact. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 6-01, 1992) 
13.08.170 - Methods of line identification. 
A.	Identification of water line shall be as follows:
1.	Complete color painting of all visible parts of the pipe; or
2.	A color band a minimum of ten inches in width, located at least every twenty-five (25) feet of line length and on each side where a pipe passes through a wall. The color shall be Federal Safety Green (933). This color and requirement has been selected to be in concurrence with the recommendations of the American Standards Association and not to be in conflict with Title 17 of the California Administrative Code or Title 8, Division of Industrial Safety General Industry Safety Orders which cite line and outlet identification standards; 
B.	1. The name of the type of water being transported shall be lettered or stenciled on the piping adjacent to each band or at least every twenty-five (25) feet at a minimum of two locations on the exposed piping and on each side where a pipe passes through a wall if all visible parts of the pipe are painted. The letter size and color of the letters and the letter background shall be such as to be immediately legible (see subsection D of this section for names); or 
2.	A sub-color band two inches in width, identifying the type of water is applicable when applied at a visible edge of the ten-inch band described in subsection A(2) of this section or every twenty-five (25) feet on each side where a pipe passes through a wall as described in subsection A(2) of this section. (See subsection D of this section for colors); 
C.	The names and sub-banding legibility shall be maintained;
D.	The names and the four sub-band codes shall be as follows:
2? BAND 	LABEL
Domestic Water (Raw) 	lt. green
Domestic Water (Softened) 	lt. blue
Industrial Water	
(Nonpotable; treated or	
untreated) 	lt. orange
On-site well water 	yellow
 
E.	A placard identifying the color code/labeling designation shall be posted at sufficient locations to prevent confusion. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 6-02, 1992) 
13.08.180 - Method of outlet identification. 
Identification shall be as follows: 
A.	Tags or labels of metal or other suitable materials with applicable wording:
"SAFE WATER" 
or 
"DANGER - UNSAFE WATER" 
shall be securely fastened at or to each respective outlet; 
B.	The tag or label shall be affixed in such a manner as to be immediately identifiable to the outlet user; 
C.	The tag or label letter size, color and background shall be such as to be easily legible; and 
D.	The tag or label legibility shall be maintained.
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 6-03, 1992) 
13.08.190 - Designated representative. 
At each premises where it is necessary, in the opinion of the city, a designated representative shall be designated by and at the expense of the water user. This designated representative shall be responsible for the monitoring of the backflow prevention devices and for avoidance of cross-connections. In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the city shall be promptly advised by the designated representative so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination. The city shall be kept informed of the designated representative's identity. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 7-01, 1992) 
13.08.200 - Initial survey. 
The initial survey shall consist of a thorough investigation of all water uses, planned or existing, within a user's premises to identify existing hazards and/or code infractions. The initial survey shall be performed for at least the following circumstances. 
A.	New service investigation request as received from water user;
B.	Investigation of existing services upon request or upon notification that a hazard may exist; and 
C.	Investigation of remaining user premises selected as to the suspected degree of hazard.
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 8-01, 1992) 
13.08.210 - Consumer notification. 
Customer notification of action requests shall be performed as follows: 
A.	Prepare and transmit a letter to the user confirming survey findings and listing corrective action to be taken if required. This may be accomplished by furnishing a copy of the on site survey report; 
B.	Follow up on delinquent requests to correct plumbing violations as follows:
1.	A second notice shall be sent to the user if evidence that corrective action is being taken, has not been filed with the city office within ten working days following the date of the original user notification. 
2.	If the user fails to respond to the second notice to correct violations, the city shall pursue the following action: 
a.	The user and/or his representative, which may include counsel, shall be notified by certified mail to appear for an office hearing to show cause for noncompliance. The request shall advise specific date, time and place for the office hearing. This hearing shall be attended by the public works director, the designated representative and the engineer. 
b.	The above may be preceded by personal contact between the public works director or engineer and the user. This action may be taken at the discretion of the public works director or at the direction of the city council. A single personal contact shall be considered as being appropriate. 
3.	The city may discontinue water service to the premises if:
a.	The office hearing does not provide evidence that corrective action is being taken, or 
b.	The user does not appear for the office hearing, or
c.	It is determined at the time of the survey that water shut-off is in the best interest for the protection of the city's potable water supply. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 8-02, 1992) 
13.08.220 - Reinspection. 
A.	A reinspection will be made at the request of the user to verify corrective action.
B.	A reinspection may be made prior to sending a second notice.
C.	A reinspection may be made prior to having an office hearing.
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 8-03, 1992) 
13.08.230 - Printed information. 
The following printed information shall be available to users for the city: 
A.	A list of backflow prevention devices (assemblies) approved by recommended testing agencies; 
B.	Illustrations of requirements for properly installing a backflow prevention device (assembly); and 
C.	Information sheets regarding specific backflow prevention requirements.
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 8-04, 1992) 
13.08.240 - Backflow prevention device testing program. 
The following program is adopted to insure proper operation of installed backflow prevention devices. 
A.	Inspection of all newly installed backflow prevention devices shall be required to verify proper location. A test to verify effective operation and obtain other pertinent information (manufacturer, size, type, model, serial number, ownership, etc.) shall be required. The user may be requested to file a maintenance report verifying satisfactory operation of any newly installed backflow prevention device; 
B.	Maintenance of a record of backflow prevention devices in use;
C.	Maintenance of a testing program for all backflow prevention devices in use including the following: 
1.	Notification to users of responsibility in testing and maintaining backflow prevention devices, 
2.	Notifying users when tests are required. Required tests as a minimum shall be as follows:
a.	At least annually as required by the California Administrative Code, or
b.	In three months following repair or overhaul (this requirement may be omitted at the discretion of the city), or 
c.	Every three months for those devices (assemblies) that are not commensurate with the degree of hazard involved (this shall include both approved and non-approved devices), 
3.	Supply necessary backflow prevention device test and maintenance report forms,
4.	Provide at the user's expense, the required testing services necessary for certification of performance of backflow prevention devices, 
5.	Review completed test and maintenance report forms,
6.	Follow up on delinquent test and/or maintenance report forms as follows:
a.	A second notice shall be sent to the user if the test and maintenance report is not received by the scheduled return date (this date shall coincide with the last working day of the testing month). 
b.	If a test and maintenance report indicating proper operation has not been returned or evidence that corrective action is being taken has not been filed with the city within ten working days following the date of the second notice, the matter shall be referred to the public works director with a recommendation to pursue the following course of action: 
i.	The user and/or his representative, which may include counsel, shall be notified by certified mail to appear for an office hearing to show cause for noncompliance. The request shall advise specific date, time and place for the office hearing. This hearing shall be attended by the public works director and/or the engineer. 
ii.	The city may discontinue water service to the premises if:
(A)	The office hearing does not provide evidence that a satisfactory test has been performed and the report is forthcoming within five working days, or 
(B)	The user does not appear for the office hearing;
7.	Notify the user to repair and test a faulty backflow prevention device. (Note: Repair should be made immediately and satisfactory operation confirmed by testing before the device is returned to service. The thirty (30) day test period is deemed to be adequate.) 
a.	A second notice shall be sent to the user if a test and maintenance report indicating proper operation has not been returned or evidence that corrective action is being taken has not been filed with the city within ten working days. 
b.	If a test and maintenance report indicating proper operation is not returned or evidence that corrective action is being taken has not been filed with the city within ten working days following the date of the second notice, the matter shall be referred to the public works director with a recommendation to pursue the following action: 
i.	The user and/or his representative, which may include counsel, shall be notified by certified mail to appear for an office hearing to show cause for noncompliance. The request shall advise specific date, time and place for the hearing. This hearing shall be attended by the public works director and/or engineer. 
ii.	The city may discontinue water service to the premises if:
(A)	The office hearing does not provide evidence that satisfactory repair has been performed and a report is forthcoming within five working days, or 
(B)	The user does not appear for the office hearing, or
(C)	Continued operation without repair is not in the best interest for protecting the city's potable water supply, 
8.	Notify the user to replace a faulty backflow prevention device. (Note: Replacement shall be made following three successive tests indicating repeated mechanical failure. 
a.	A second notice shall be sent to the user if a test and maintenance report indicating proper operation of a replacement device is not returned or evidence that corrective action is being taken has not been filed with the city in writing within ten working days following the date of the original notification. 
b.	If a test and maintenance report indicating proper operation of a replacement device is not returned or evidence that corrective action is being taken has not been filed with the city within twenty (20) working days following the date of the second city notice, the matter shall be referred to the public works director with a recommendation to pursue the following action: 
i.	The user and/or his representative, which may include counsel, shall be notified by certified mail to appear for an office hearing to show cause for noncompliance. The request shall advise specific date, time and place for the office hearing. This hearing shall be attended by the public works director and/or engineer. 
Either of the above may be preceded by personal contact between the public works director and the user. This action may be taken at the discretion of the public works director or at the direction of the city council. A single personal contact shall be considered as being appropriate. 
ii.	The City may discontinue water service to the premises if:
(A)	The office hearing does not provide evidence that satisfactory replacement has been performed and the report is forthcoming within five working days, or 
(B)	The user does not appear for the office hearing, or
(C)	Continued operation without replacement is not in the best interest for protecting the city's potable water supply, 
9.	Maintain a history of each device including test results, repairs, and replacements,
10.	Periodically review records to note particular devices that exhibit a poor history of effective operation. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 8-05, 1992) 
13.08.250 - Water shut-off—Cause and procedure. 
A.	General. From time-to-time the public works director will encounter water uses that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply. In the event that these hazards cannot be immediately abated, either because of mechanical problems, inconvenience and/or refusal on the part of the user, the public works director shall institute the procedure for discontinuing the city's water supply. 
B.	Basis for Termination. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service termination shall include, but are not limited to, the following items: 
1.	Refusal to test backflow prevention device; or
2.	Refusal to repair faulty backflow prevention device; or
3.	Refusal to replace faulty backflow prevention device; or
4.	Refusal to satisfy office hearing requirements; or
5.	Direct or indirect connection between a potable water system or sewer line; or
6.	Unprotected direct or indirect connection between a potable water system and a system or equipment containing chemicals or sewage; or 
7.	Unprotected direct or indirect connection between potable and auxiliary water system; or 
8.	Unprotected direct connection to non- potable pressure or nonpressure system; or
9.	Refusal to correct violations.
C.	Water Service Termination Procedures.
1.	For conditions listed in subsections B(1), (2), (3), (4) and (9) of this section, service termination procedures shall be in accordance with the provisions of the city's adopted water ordinance. 
2.	For conditions listed in subsections B(5), (6), (7) and (8) of this section, the following procedure shall apply: 
a.	Make reasonable effort to advise user of intent to terminate water service;
b.	Advise State Department of Health Services of pending water termination; and
c.	Terminate water supply and lock service valve. The water supply will remain inactive until correction of violations has been approved by the city. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 9, 1992) 
13.08.260 - Testing charges. 
Cross-connection testing service charges for tests performed by the city shall be established from time-to-time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 468 § 2 Art. 10-01, 1992) 
Chapter 13.12 - WATER CONSERVATION REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.12.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to minimize outdoor water use and to control unnecessary consumption of the available potable water supplies in the city. 
(Ord. 498 § 1, 1995) 
13.12.020 - Application of provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons, customers and property within the city limits. 
(Ord. 498 § 2, 1995) 
13.12.030 - Water conservation stages. 
No one within the city shall knowingly make, cause, use or permit the use of water for residential, commercial, industrial, governmental or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this chapter, or in an amount in excess of that use permitted by the conservation stage in effect pursuant to action taken by the city council. 
By resolution the city council, will from time to time, put into effect the following stages applicable to water use within the city. 
A.	STAGE 1: Prohibition on water waste. The following uses of water are defined as "waste of water" and are prohibited except as otherwise authorized. The restrictions shall apply to all persons year round unless a more stringent water conservation stage is implemented. 
1.	The use of water which allows substantial amounts of water to run off to a gutter, ditch or drain. Every water user is deemed to have her/his/its water distribution lines and facilities under her/his/its control at all times and to know the manner and extent of her/his/its water use and excess run-off. Overwatering of lawns, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs or other plants must be avoided; 
2.	The use of water for evaporative (swamp) coolers without recirculation pumps is strictly prohibited; 
3.	The excessive use, loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution facilities for any period of time after such escape of water should reasonably have been discovered and corrected. It shall be presumed that a period of forty-eight (48) hours after discovery is a reasonable time within which to correct such leak or break; 
4.	The washing of vehicles, building exteriors, sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or other paved areas without the use of a positive shut-off, except where necessary to dispose of liquids or substances that would endanger the public's health and/or safety; 
5.	The emptying and refilling of water to swimming pools and/or spas between the hours of eleven a.m. and six p.m. local time from June 1st through August 31st. 
B.	Stage 2: Partial voluntary compliance—Water alert. Effective June 1st through August 31st, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons. All elements of Stage 1 shall remain in effect in Stage 2, except that: 
1.	Irrigation utilizing individual sprinklers or sprinkler systems of lawns, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs or other plants is permitted only on designated days between seven p.m. and ten a.m. local time. No watering during the day between ten a.m. and seven p.m. local time. Excessive watering beyond beneficial use is prohibited. Irrigation of lawns, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs or other plants is permitted at any time if: 
a.	A hand-held hose with a positive shut-off nozzle is used; or
b.	A hand-held faucet-filled bucket of five gallons or less is used; or
c.	A drip or mist irrigation system is used.
Exception: City parks, other city maintained properties, commercial nurseries, similar establishments, and new landscapes are exempt from Stage 2 irrigation restrictions, but will be requested to curtail all nonessential water use. 
2.	Designated days are:
a.	Even numbered addresses:
January:	Wednesday
and Sunday
February:	Wednesday and Sunday
March:	Wednesday and Sunday
April:	Wednesday and Sunday
May:	Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday
June:	Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday
July:	Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday
August:	Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday
September:	Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday
October:	Wednesday and Sunday
November:	Wednesday and Sunday
December:	Wednesday and Sunday
 
b.	Odd numbered addresses:
January:	Tuesday and Saturday
February:	Tuesday and Saturday
March:	Tuesday and Saturday
April:	Tuesday and Saturday
May:	Tuesday, Thursday,
and Saturday
June:	Tuesday, Thursday,
and Saturday
July:	Tuesday, Thursday,
and Saturday
August:	Tuesday, Thursday,
and Saturday
September:	Tuesday, Thursday,
and Saturday
October:	Tuesday and Saturday
November:	Tuesday and Saturday
December:	Tuesday and Saturday
 
3.	The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment is permitted only on designated irrigation days. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a hand-held bucket and/or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses and shall be performed only on the vehicles and other equipment owned by the occupant of the property. The washing of such vehicles and other equipment should be performed on lawn areas to obtain maximum beneficial use of the water and to reduce runoff waste. 
Exception: Washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash. Car washes by nonprofit community group(s) or organizations may be permitted subject to the following: 
a.	Permit for car wash must be obtained from the city;
b.	Responsible person or persons shall sign the permit, assure compliance with regulations and remain at the site the entire time the car wash is taking place; 
c.	Organization or group applying for a car wash permit shall provide written authorization from the property owner authorizing the car wash on their property; 
d.	No more than two car washes shall be allowed per month. Permits will be issued on a first come first serve basis except two consecutive permits shall not be issued to the same organization or group unless no other organization or group applies for a permit; 
e.	Hours of operation shall be from nine a.m. to six p.m.;
f.	Washing shall be done with a hand-held bucket and/or hand held hose equipped with a positive shut off nozzle for quick rinses; 
g.	All car wash activities shall stop immediately upon the direction of a city police officer or city public works employee. 
Vehicle/equipment washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety and/or welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleanings, such as garbage and septic hauling trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables. 
4.	The emptying and refilling of water in swimming pools and or spas will be allowed on designated days between the hours of seven p.m. and ten a.m. local time. 
5.	The operation of any ornamental fountain, waterfall or other structure making similar use of water is prohibited unless it uses a recycling system, such as an electric pump. 
6.	The washing of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, courts, patios or other paved areas is absolutely prohibited, unless it is necessary for the health and/or safety of the public. 
7.	All restaurants are requested to serve water only upon specific customer request.
C.	Stage 3. Mandatory compliance—Water warning. Upon implementation by city council and publication of notice, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons. All elements of Stage 2 shall remain in effect in Stage 3, except that: 
1.	All outdoor irrigation of vegetation, including irrigation of city parks, schools, houses, business and district lawns, shall occur only between eight p.m. and ten a.m. local time on designated days. No watering during the day between ten a.m. and eight p.m. local time. 
2.	Designated days are:
a.	Even numbered addresses:
January:	Sunday
February:	Sunday
March:	Wednesday and Sunday
April:	Wednesday and Sunday
May:	Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday
June:	Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday
July:	Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday
August:	Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday
September:	Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday
October:	Wednesday and Sunday
November:	Wednesday and Sunday
December:	Sunday
 
b.	Odd numbered addresses:
January:	Saturday
February:	Saturday
March:	Tuesday and Saturday
April:	Tuesday and Saturday
May:	Tuesday, Thursday,
and Saturday
June:	Tuesday, Thursday,
and Saturday
July:	Tuesday, Thursday,
and Saturday
August:	Tuesday, Thursday,
and Saturday
September:	Tuesday, Thursday,
and Saturday
October:	Tuesday and Saturday
November:	Tuesday and Saturday
December:	Saturday
 
3.	The draining and refilling of swimming pools and/or spas shall be by permit only issued by the city council. 
4.	All restaurants must serve water only upon specific customer request.
D.	Stage 4: Mandatory compliance—Water emergency. Upon implementation by the city council and publication of notice, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons. All elements of Stage 3 shall remain in effect in Stage 4, except that: 
1.	All outdoor irrigation of vegetation shall be allowed only between eight p.m. and six a.m. local time on designated days. No watering during the day between six a.m. (6 A.M.) and eight p.m. (8 P.M.) local time. 
2.	Designated days are:
a.	Even numbered addresses:
January:	No watering
February:	No watering
March:	Sunday
April:	Sunday
May:	Wednesday and Sunday
June:	Wednesday and Sunday
July:	Wednesday and Sunday
August:	Wednesday and Sunday
September:	Wednesday and Sunday
October:	Wednesday and Sunday
November:	Sunday
December:	No watering
 
b.	Odd numbered addresses:
January:	No watering
February:	No watering
March:	Saturday
April:	Saturday
May:	Tuesday and Saturday
June:	Tuesday and Saturday
July:	Tuesday and Saturday
August:	Tuesday and Saturday
September:	Tuesday and Saturday
October:	Tuesday and Saturday
November:	Saturday
December:	No watering
 
3.	The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment not occurring upon the immediate premises of commercial car washes and not in the immediate interest of the public health, safety and/or welfare shall be prohibited. 
4.	The use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to fire fighting and/or other activities immediately necessary to maintaining the health, safety and/or welfare of the citizens of Woodlake. 
5.	Commercial nurseries shall water only on designated days and shall use only hand-held hoses, drip or mist irrigation systems, or hand-held buckets between the hours of six a.m. and eight p.m. local time; otherwise, sprinklers are permitted only between eight p.m. and six a.m. local time on designated days. 
6.	The operation of any ornamental fountain, waterfall or similar structure is prohibited.
7.	The draining and refilling of swimming pools is prohibited.
E.	Stage 5: Mandatory compliance—Extreme water crisis. Upon implementation by the city council and publication of notice, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons. All elements of Stage 4 shall remain in effect in Stage 5, except that: 
1.	All outdoor irrigation of vegetation is prohibited.
2.	Washing of vehicles shall be done only by a commercial car wash using recycled or reclaimed water. 
3.	Designated days are:
a.	Even numbered addresses:
January:	No watering
February:	No watering
March:	No watering
April:	No watering
May:	No watering
June:	No watering
July:	No watering
August:	No watering
September:	No watering
October:	No watering
November:	No watering
December:	No watering
 
b.	Odd numbered addresses:
January:	No watering
February:	No watering
March:	No watering
April:	No watering
May:	No watering
June:	No watering
July:	No watering
August:	No watering
September:	No watering
October:	No watering
November:	No watering
December:	No watering
 
(Ord. No. 591, § 2, 4-13-2015; Ord. 498 § 3, 1995)  
13.12.040 - Indoor water use—Water conservation measures. 
Low-flush volume, water-saving toilets shall be installed in all new construction for which building permits are issued after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 498 § 4, 1995) 
13.12.050 - General water use—Water conservation measures. 
The city shall make sure that: 
A.	A one-time mailing will provide written notice (in English or Spanish) of the amended water conservation ordinance. 
B.	Each new applicant for water service will be provided a copy of the water conservation regulations in English or Spanish and the stage that is in effect. 
C.	Notice will be published in a local newspaper in English and Spanish to advise the effective date of the stage to be implemented each time there is a change. 
D.	Adequate projected reserve water capacity exists to support any new development prior to the approval by the city council. Adequate projected water supplies must exist before any additional demand is placed upon the city's water system to ensure sufficient water to all existing hookups. 
(Ord. 498 § 5, 1995) 
13.12.060 - Mandatory conservation phase implementation. 
The city administrator shall monitor the projected supply and demand for water within the city and shall recommend to the city council the extent of the conservation required through the implementation and/or termination of particular conservation stages in order to assure the water supply of the city. Thereafter the city council may order that the appropriate phase of water conservation be implemented or terminated in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter at a regularly scheduled meeting. The order shall be made by the adoption of an appropriate resolution which shall be published in English and Spanish a minimum of one time in a local newspaper. 
(Ord. 498 § 6, 1995) 
13.12.070 - Enforcement—Violation—Penalty. 
A.	Enforcement Objectives. It is one of the objectives of the city council that the citizens of Woodlake be encouraged to voluntarily comply with the provisions of this chapter. In furtherance of said objective, the enforcement of this chapter will permit the issuance of a first warning of violation of this chapter, by way of a written notice of violation to the water user, before the issuance of a citation for further violations. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction which shall be punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first infraction, fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second infraction and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the third and each subsequent infraction. Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense, except where the infraction cannot be immediately remedied by shutting off the source, in which case not more than forty-eight (48) hours will be allowed to correct the problem. Beyond that, each new day will constitute a new and separate offense. 
B.	Each citation given for a violation of this chapter shall state on its face the following:
The complaint charging a violation of this Ordinance No. ____________ shall not be filed with the Clerk of the Woodlake Judicial Court for a period of thirty (30) days following the issuance of the citation. Within such thirty-day period, the person receiving the citation shall have the right to voluntarily appear before the City Clerk of the City of Woodlake or her deputy during business hours at the City Hall in the City of Woodlake located at 350 North Valencia and to pay the Clerk the sum of twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) for the first infraction, Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for a second infraction and One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for a third and each additional infraction. If a person receiving the citation pays the amount required to the City Clerk before the filing of a complaint, a complaint will not be filed with the Court and further appearance will not be necessary by the person receiving the citation. Should the person receiving the citation fail to pay the City Clerk the amount above specified within the time specified a complaint charging the infraction will be filed and the matter processed in the usual course at a hearing before the Court. The Court will add Court costs and fees to the fine. 
C.	The water conservation measures of this ordinance shall be strictly enforced.
(Ord. 498 § 7, 1995) 
13.12.080 - Public nuisance—Definitions. 
In addition to any other remedies which may otherwise be available to the city the city council makes the following findings and declarations: 
The waste of water, as that term is defined herein, on public or private property within the city, is found to contribute to and compound drought conditions which may, from time to time, exist in the city, to the detriment of one of our most precious and finite resources, to wit, water. Such conditions cause injury to the health, safety and/or general welfare of the citizens of Woodlake. 
Therefore, the waste of water within the city, on private or public property, except as expressly permitted hereinabove, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated in an action brought on behalf of the people of the state of California, by the city attorney, in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 498 § 8, 1995) 
13.12.090 - Enforcement officers. 
All police officers and persons authorized by law to issue citations within the city shall, in conjunction with the duties imposed upon them by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
All employees of the city are encouraged to notify the police department of any perceived violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 498 § 9, 1995) 
13.12.100 - Application for exemption. 
Consideration of written applications for exceptions regarding regulations and restrictions on water use not otherwise set forth in previous sections of this chapter shall be as follows: 
Written application for exception may be granted by the city administrator, with approval by the city council, if: 
A.	Compliance with this chapter would cause an unnecessary and undue hardship to the applicant, including, but not limited to, adverse economic impacts, such as loss of production or jobs; or 
B.	Compliance with this chapter would cause a condition affecting the health, sanitation, fire protection and/or safety of the applicant or the public. 
(Ord. 498 § 10, 1995) 
Chapter 13.13 - WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE 
Sections: 
 
13.13.010 - Water efficient landscape ordinance. 
The model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance of the State of California, as contained in the Sections 490-495, Chapter 2.7, Division 2, Title 23 in the California Code of Regulations is hereby adopted by reference as the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance of the city. A copy of the model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance of the State of California shall be maintained in the city hall offices and shall be made available for public inspection while this ordinance is in force. 
(Ord. No. 602, § 2, 1-11-2016)  
Chapter 13.16 - WATER SYSTEM IMPACT FEES 
Sections: 
 
13.16.010 - Purpose. 
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the Woodlake Water System Master Plan (1992) and to mitigate the impacts on the city water system caused by new development in the city, certain improvements to the city's water system must be constructed. The city council has determined that a development impact fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for the developments fair share of the construction costs of these improvements. In establishing the fee described in the following sections, the city council has found the fee to be consistent with its general plan and, pursuant to Government Code Section 65913.2 has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the city's housing needs as established in the housing element of the general plan. 
(Ord. 474 § 1, 1992) 
13.16.020 - City water system impact fee. 
A water system impact fee is established on issuance of all building permits, for each single-family dwelling unit, each dwelling unit in a multifamily dwelling structure and each separate office, commercial or industrial unit to pay for water system improvements. The city council shall, in a council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the development fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments and set forth time for payment. As described in the fee resolution, this development fee shall be paid by each developer prior to issuance of a building permit for the commercial or industrial project or the respective dwelling units in a residential project, depending on the applicability of Government Code Section 53077.5, enacted by the chapter, Statutes of 1986. On an annual basis, the city council shall review this fee to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the impacts of developments and whether the described public facilities are still needed. 
(Ord. 474 § 2, 1992) 
13.16.030 - Limited use of fees. 
The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to: 
A.	Pay for the city's future construction of facilities described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.16.020, or to reimburse the city for those described or listed facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or 
B.	Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted by Section 13.16.040, to install such listed facilities which are oversized with supplemental size, length or capacity. 
(Ord. 474 § 3, 1992) 
13.16.040 - Developer construction of facilities. 
Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct a public facility described in a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.020 which facility is determined by the city to have supplemental size, length or capacity over that needed for the impacts of that development, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the facilities network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer and a credit against the fee, which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this chapter on the development project, shall be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not include the portion of the improvement needed to provide services or mitigate the need for the facility or the burdens created by the development. 
(Ord. 474 § 4, 1992) 
13.16.050 - Fee adjustments. 
A developer of any project subject to the fee described in Section 13.16.020 may apply to the city council for a reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the water system impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk not later than ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or, if no development permit is required, at the time of filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction, or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at separate hearing held within fifty (50) days after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. 
This ordinance codified in this chapter was adopted at a noticed public hearing, at which time the council also considered the initial development impact fee resolution, which resolution and associated studies were available to the general public for a period of at least fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing. 
This fee shall apply to the issuance of any building permit, for any residential development and for all other types of development issued thirty (30) days following said ordinance's passage. 
(Ord. 474 § 5, 1992) 
Chapter 13.20 - SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
13.20.010 - Rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations concerning sewer construction, installation, alterations, repairs are adopted. 
(Ord. 440 § 1, 1989) 
13.20.020 - Use of public sewers required. 
Any premises abutting a public street in which a public sewer main is located shall connect to the public sewer unless special permission for another method of waste water disposal is obtained from the city council. 
(Ord. 440 § 2, 1989) 
13.20.030 - Permits required. 
No person, firm, corporation, etc., shall construct, alter, repair or connect with any public sewer main without first obtaining a permit from the city and paying any fees required. 
(Ord. 440 § 3, 1989) 
13.20.040 - Fees. 
Fees, charges, deposits, etc., concerning connection to or use of the public sewer system may be established and/or revised by resolution. 
(Ord. 440 § 4, 1989) 
13.20.050 - Construction. 
Any person constructing, altering or repairing a sewer within any street or public right-of-way shall comply with all state, county or city laws, ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to cutting of pavement, opening, barricading, lighting and protecting of trenches, backfilling, compacting and repaving thereof and shall maintain such barriers, barricades, lights and signals as are necessary to give warning to the public of dangerous conditions that may be encountered. 
Individual property owners shall be responsible for the installation, maintenance and repair of service lines, excluding that portion that is within the public R.O.W. 
All private sewers connected with the public sewer system shall be installed in compliance with city improvement standards. 
Streets, sidewalks, curbs, parkways and any other public property disturbed in the course of work shall be reinstalled in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. 556 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 440 § 5, 1989) 
13.20.060 - Duties of public works director. 
It shall be the duty of the public works director to: 
A.	Care for protects, repair, improve and operate the public sewer system of the city, including the treatment plant and disposal grounds. The city shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of sewer main lines and laterals in city right-of-way; 
B.	To enforce the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state of California in regards to the public sewer system; 
C.	To inspect all connections to the public sewer system and sewer lines on private property, which are intended to be connected with the public sewer system and require them to conform to the ordinances and standards of this city; 
D.	To record the location of each connection to the public system.
(Ord. 556 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 440 § 6, 1989) 
13.20.070 - Regulation of wastewater discharges. 
A.	Prohibitions on Storm Drainage, Groundwater, Swimming Pool etc. Storm-water, groundwater, rain water, water well development water, street drainage, subsurface drainage irrigation drainage, yard drainage or swimming pool drains shall not be discharged through direct or indirect connections to a community sewer unless a permit is issued by the city. The city may approve the discharge of such water only when, in the sole opinion of the city, no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available, and may require cessation of such discharge if found to be existing. If a permit is granted for the discharge of such water into a community sewer, the discharger shall pay the applicable user charges and fees and meet such other conditions as may be required. 
B.	Prohibition on Unpolluted Water. Unpolluted water including, but not limited to, cooling water, process water or blowdown from cooling towers or evaporative coolers shall not be discharged through direct or indirect connection to a public sewer unless a permit to that effect has been issued. The city may approve the discharge of such water only when, in the opinion of the city, no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available, and may require cessation of such discharge if found to be existing. If a permit is granted for the discharge of such water into a community sewer, the discharger shall pay the applicable charges and fees and shall meet such other conditions as may be required. All installations of air conditioning systems require the issuance of a permit by the city and the payment of customary building and/or plumbing permit fees to the city prior to commencement of installation. All installations of evaporative coolers shall be furnished with a recirculating pump. All new installations of industrial, commercial or residential air conditioning units, shall have cooling water discharge recirculated or used for irrigations purposes or disposed of through a private dry well, or public storm drains by permission of the city, or shall be of such type as not to require cooling water discharge. Cooling water discharges shall not connect to the sanitary sewer system. By permit, condensation from recirculation or heat pump units, or bleed-off water from cooling towers, may be discharged to the sanitary sewer system. 
C.	Holding Tank Waste. There shall be no discharge of holding tank waste into a community sewer. 
D.	Limitations of Wastewater Strength. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following: 
Pollutant 	30-Day average Limit (mg/l Above City Water Source)	24-Hour Maximum Limit* (mg/l Above City Water Source)
Arsenic 	0.45 	0.80
Boron 	0.20 	0.50
Cadmium 	0.06 	0.20
Chromium 	0.90 	1.50
Hexavalent 	0.20 	0.20
Copper 	1.00 	1.50
Cyanide 	0.60 	1.00
Lead 	0.50 	0.60
Mercury 	0.10 	0.15
Nickel 	0.70 	1.00
Silver 	4.50 	7.50
Zinc 	0.80 	1.50
Total metals 	5.00 	7.50
Total Phenols 	10.00 	20.00
Pentachlorophenol 	0.10**	0.60
 
*  Primarily designed to prevent industry from discharging entire 30-day average over one or two-day period. 
**  Based on EPA SNARL for Drinking Water. Assumes no treatment plant removal. 
E.	No person shall discharge any wastewater:
1.	Having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) F (sixty-five (65) C);
2.	Containing more than three hundred (300) mg/l of oil or grease of animal or vegetable origin; 
3.	Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil inflammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
4.	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
5.	Any ashes, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, wood or any other solid, or viscous substance capable of causing obstructions to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage system; 
6.	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 8.0 or having any other corrosive characteristic capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage system; 
7.	Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant; 
8.	Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable or creating a public nuisance;
9.	No discharge to the sewer shall be permitted that when blended with the remaining city flow shall cause an excess of the following constituent levels in the discharge from the sewage treatment plant. 
a.	Chlorides - 150 mg/l,
b.	Dissolved solids - 600 mg/l,
c.	Sodium ratio - 70 percent,
d.	pH, outside limits - 6.0 - 7.5 pH units,
e.	Elemental Boron - 2.0 mg/l,
10.	Containing in excess of 0.02 mg/l total identifiable chlorinated hydrocarbons;
11.	Containing in excess of 1.0 mg/l phenolic compounds;
12.	Which exerts an excessive chemical oxygen demand or chlorine demand to such a degree that the total wastewater received at the sewage treatment plant exceeds treatable limits, as established by the city, for such wastewater; 
13.	Which shall produce discoloration of the sewage treatment plant effluent.
F.	Traps Required. Grease, oil and sand traps shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the protection of the sewage system from liquid waste containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such traps shall not be required for buildings used solely for residential purposes. Such traps shall be required, for example, on discharge from all service stations, restaurants, automotive repair garages, and dry cleaning establishments. All traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
G.	Construction of Traps. Grease and oil traps shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place, shall be gas tight and water tight. 
H.	Maintenance of Traps. When installed, all grease, oil and sand traps shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
I.	Preliminary Treatment of Wastes. When necessary, in the opinion of the city, the discharger shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment and monitoring facilities as may be necessary to reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within acceptable levels. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment and monitoring facilities shall be submitted for approval of the city and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until the approval is obtained in writing. Materials which will readily settle, such as sand, glass, metal filings, and diatomaceous earth, for example, or floatable material which is readily removable shall be removed from wastewater prior to discharge to the public sanitary sewer system. The review and approval of such plans and/or proposed operation procedures will in no way relieve the discharger from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported in writing to and be approved by the city. 
J.	Maintenance of Pretreatment Facilities. When preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
K.	Federal Pretreatment Standards. In any instance, effluent limitations promulgated by the Federal Act shall apply where they are more stringent than those in this chapter. Under Section 307(b) of the Act, federal pretreatment standards are designed to achieve two purposes: (1) to protect the operation of publicly owned treatment works; and (2) to prevent the discharge of pollutants which pass through such works inadequately treated. Dischargers in industrial categories subject to effluent guidelines issued under Section 304(b) of the Act which are discharging incompatible pollutants to publicly owned treatment works, are required to adopt the best practicable control technology currently available, as defined by the Administrator, pursuant to Section 304(b) of the Act. 
(Ord. 440 § 7, 1989) 
13.20.080 - Inspection. 
The city reserves the right to inspect any sewer lateral, pretreatment device, or industrial process that discharges wastewater directly or indirectly to the city's sewer system and/or to inspect premises to determine the existence and/or location of any illegal connections or discharges to the sewer system. 
In cases of continued noncompliance with this chapter the public works director shall recommend to the city council that, after a noticed public hearing, the noncomplying connection or discharge be disconnected from the city's sewer system. 
(Ord. 440 § 8, 1989) 
13.20.090 - Backflow, cleanout required. 
A.	A backflow prevention device shall be required for:
1.	All new construction and side sewer replacements shall be equipped with a cleanout riser equipped with a backflow prevention device (BPD); 
2.	Where existing buildings have plumbing drain outlets at an elevation that is twelve (12) inches or less above the ground surface of the next upstream manhole, the property owner shall have and maintain a BPD; 
3.	Issuance of all building permits, adding restroom facilities;
4.	Remodels where plumbing fixtures are added to the property, and/or more than twenty-five (25) percent of the structure area is being remodeled; 
5.	Replacement or repair is made to the sanitary sewer lateral;
6.	Property has been damaged by the blockage of the city sanitary sewer main or lateral;
7.	On all structures where a pump is used to lift sewage to the sanitary sewer lateral and city sanitary sewer main. The backflow relief device shall be located to protect the structure from damage in the event the pump is pumping against a closed backflow prevention device; 
8.	Buildings where the elevation of any floor is at or below the invert of the city sanitary sewer main, or where a condition exists where a plug in the city sanitary sewer main will cause the hydraulic grade line to rise above the lowest floor level. 
B.	The responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the building side sewer and its fittings/device is that of the property owner. 
C.	Failure of the owner to install a backflow prevention device for or as a result of any of the above conditions shall relieve the city of any and all responsibilities for any and all subsequent damage caused by sanitary sewer flooding. 
D.	Property owners are responsible for proper installation and maintenance of building and lateral sewers and cleanouts, and for obtaining the necessary construction and encroachment permits. 
E.	Property owners are responsible for keeping the three-foot radius of the cleanout area clear of vegetation or any obstruction for visibility and easy access. 
(Ord. 556 § 1 (part), 2005) 
13.20.100 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation, whether a principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. 556 § 1 (part), 2005) 
Chapter 13.24 - SEWER SYSTEM IMPACT FEES 
Sections: 
 
13.24.010 - Purpose. 
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the Sewer Fee Study (1993) and to mitigate the impacts on the city sewer system caused by new development in the city, certain improvements to the city's sewer system must be constructed. The city council has determined that a development impact fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for new development's fair share of the construction costs of these improvements. In establishing the fee described in the following sections, the city council has found the fee to be consistent with its general plan and, pursuant to Government Code Section 65913.2 has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the city's housing needs as established in the housing element of the general plan. 
(Ord. 482 § 1, 1993) 
13.24.020 - City sewer system impact fee. 
A sewer system impact fee is established to be assessed upon issuance of all building permits, for each single-family dwelling unit, each dwelling unit in a multifamily dwelling structure and each separate office, commercial or industrial unit, to pay for sewer system improvements. The city council shall, in a council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the development fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments and set forth time for payment. As described in the fee resolution, this development fee shall be paid by each developer prior to issuance of a building permit for the commercial, school or industrial project or the respective dwelling units in a residential project, depending on the applicability of Government Code Section 53077.5, enacted by the Chapter, Statutes of 1986. On an annual basis, the city council shall review this fee to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the impacts of developments and whether the described public facilities are still needed. 
(Ord. 482 § 2, 1993) 
13.24.030 - Limited use of fees. 
The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to: 
A.	Pay for the city's future construction of facilities described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.24.020, or to reimburse the city for those described or listed facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources. 
B.	Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted by Section 13.24.040, to install such listed facilities which are oversized with supplemental size, length, or capacity. 
(Ord. 482 § 3, 1993) 
13.24.040 - Developer construction of facilities. 
Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct a public facility described in a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.24.020 where such facility is determined by the city to have supplemental size, length or capacity over that needed for the impacts of that development, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely development of the facilities network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer and a credit against the fee, which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this chapter on the development project, shall be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not include the portion of the improvement needed to provide services or mitigate the need for the facility or the burdens created by the development. 
(Ord. 482 § 4, 1993) 
13.24.050 - Fee adjustments. 
A developer of any project subject to the fee described in Section 13.24.020 may apply to the city council for a reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the sewer system impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk not later than ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or, if no development permit is required, at the time of filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate hearing held within fifty (50) days after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment, or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter was adopted at a noticed public hearing, at which time the council also considered the initial development impact fee resolution, which resolution and associated studies were available to the general public for a period of at least fourteen days prior to the public hearing. 
This fee shall apply to the issuance of any building permit, for any residential development and for all other types of development issued thirty (30) days following said ordinance's passage. 
(Ord. 482 § 5, 1993) 
Chapter 13.28 - PRORATION OF WATER AND SEWER CONSTRUCTION COSTS 
Sections: 
 
13.28.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an expedient method of financing water and sewer construction in cases where all benefitted property owners do not wish to participate in such construction and will not benefit therefrom until connecting to such water or sewer construction. The method shall provide for equal proration of costs within a reasonable period of time among the parcels to be benefitted. 
(Ord. 258 § 1, 1973) 
13.28.020 - Petition for extension. 
Owners of real property within the city desiring to have the city water and/or sewer system extended in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall make written application wherefore to the city, stating the location and limits of the requested public water and/or sewer extension, together with a description of their property. The city shall evaluate the feasibility and practicability of the proposed water and/or sewer extension and shall estimate the cost of the project including all costs normally charged by the city to persons extending public sewers or water systems and shall submit to the city council a map showing the area to be served and benefitted by said sewer and/or water extension, All such water and/or sewer extensions shall be within the boundary lines of a public street or a public easement. 
The water and/or sewer extensions shall extend to a point on the parcel being served to properly serve the property. The city shall withhold such amount of the refund due under Section 13.28.080, to insure the payment to the city. 
In those instances where the cost of extension is less than the amount due the city, the owner may pay the difference or sign a consent to a future assessment. 
The city manager shall report to the city council regarding the proposed water and/or sewer extension and if the council determines the extension to be in the public interest, it may grant the request for initiation of the water and/or sewer extension project. 
(Ord. 258 § 2, 1973) 
13.28.030 - Deposit of funds for construction and costs. 
Whenever the application of property owners for public water and/or sewer extensions has been granted by the city council, the applicant shall deposit with the city, in cash, an amount equal to the total cost estimate of the project. No work shall be started upon the project until the specified deposit has been made, except as provided in Section 13.28.050. 
(Ord. 258 § 3, 1973) 
13.28.040 - Performance by city. 
The city shall prepare plans, specifications and proposal agreements for the construction of the proposed public water and/or sewer extension. The city shall advertise for sealed proposals, and contracts will be let to the lowest responsible bidder by the city council, except as provided in Section 13.28.050. 
Upon completion and acceptance of the work by the city, the city will prepare a statement of the final cost of the public water and/or sewer extension. If it shall be found that the actual cost upon completion of the project is less than the estimated cost, the excess of the money paid to the city shall be refunded to the applicants in the same proportion that it was paid to the city. When the actual cost exceeds the estimated cost, the applicants upon notice and demand shall forthwith pay the prorated deficiency in cash. No connection to the constructed water system and/or sewer shall be permitted by the city until such additional payment, if necessary, is made. 
(Ord. 258 § 4, 1973) 
13.28.050 - Work done at applicant's expense—Regulations. 
The applicant may if he, she or it desires, construct and install the proposed public water and/or sewer extensions at his, her or its expense according to the plans and specifications prepared by the city. If the applicant chooses to proceed under this section, then the applicant shall pay to the city the cost of preparing the plans and specifications before final acceptance by the city of the extension. 
Upon completion and acceptance of the work by the city, the city will prepare a statement of the final cost of the public water and/or sewer extension from the documents relating to the cost of the project furnished to the city by the applicant. The city's determination of the final cost of the project shall be binding upon the applicant. 
(Ord. 258 § 5, 1973) 
13.28.060 - Cost of distribution. 
The city shall prepare or use the statement of the final cost of the public water and/or sewer extension project to prorate that the cost to the various parcels of property benefitted. The cost proration shall be made on either an area or frontage basis or a combination of both, as may determined by the city to be most equitable. Final cost proration and the map showing the cost proration and properties benefitted, after approval of the city council, shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 258 § 6, 1973) 
13.28.070 - Connection requirements. 
Whenever the water system and/or sewer system of the city has been extended in accord with the provisions of this chapter, those owners of property benefitted, or their successors in interest who have not heretofore contributed their proportionate share of the cost of the public water system and/or sewer extension in the amount set up in the city's final cost sheet, shall not be permitted to connect with the public water system and/or sewer extension unless, and until they shall have paid to the city the amount in cash stated on the city's final cost sheet. All such payments shall be in addition to any other fees required by other city ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. 258 § 7, 1973) 
13.28.080 - Private sewers. 
Any property owner in the public water and/or sewer extension district who has, prior to the water and/or sewer extension, constructed a private water and/or sewer line to or for his property at his own expense, shall not be required to contribute to the cost of the public water and/or sewer extension except where such property derives increased benefits therefrom as determined by the city and as approved by the council. Such property owner shall pay only the amount so approved before connecting his property to the public water and/or sewer extension. 
(Ord. 258 § 8, 1973) 
13.28.090 - Refunds. 
Periodically upon demand, but not more often than July 1st each fiscal year, the city will refund to the persons originally paying for a water and/or sewer extension proportionate amounts paid to the city by property owners who did not participate in the original cost and who have paid for the connection as provided for herein. 
(Ord. 258 § 9, 1973) 
13.28.100 - Termination of refunds. 
Any claim by a contributing property owner for a refund which is available due to payment by benefitted property owners, shall be made within a period of ten years of the original contribution. All money paid after the lapse of ten years shall be retained by the city. 
(Ord. 258 § 10, 1973) 
Chapter 13.32 - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES 
Sections: 
 
13.32.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
"Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. 
"Person" means and include individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees. 
"Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above-ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
"Underground utility district" or "district" shall mean that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.32.030. 
"Utility" includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Ord. 219 § 1, 1968) 
13.32.020 - Public hearing by council. 
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 219 § 2, 1968) 
13.32.030 - Council may designate underground utility districts by resolution. 
If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Ord. 219 § 3, 1968) 
13.32.040 - Unlawful acts. 
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.32.030, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.32.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 219 § 4, 1968) 
13.32.050 - Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the superintendent of public works in order to provide emergency service. The superintendent of Public Works may grant special permission, on such terms as the superintendent of public works may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
(Ord. 219 § 5, 1968) 
13.32.060 - Other exceptions. 
In any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.32.030, the city may authorize any or all of the following exceptions: 
A.	Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
B.	Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;
C.	Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
D.	Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts; 
E.	Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
F.	Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
G.	Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; 
H.	Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Ord. 219 § 6, 1968) 
13.32.070 - Notice to property owners and utility companies. 
Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.32.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location. 
Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.32.030, together with a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Ord. 219 § 7, 1968) 
13.32.080 - Responsibility of utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.32.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Ord. 219 § 8, 1968) 
13.32.090 - Responsibility of property owners. 
A.	Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.32.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.32.030, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice. 
B.	The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Woodlake. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
C.	The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon such property. 
D.	If upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which the time shall not be less than ten days thereafter. 
E.	The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
F.	Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
G.	If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which said assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. 
(Ord. 219 § 9, 1968) 
13.32.100 - Responsibility of city. 
City shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.32.030. 
(Ord. 219 § 10, 1968) 
13.32.110 - Extension of time. 
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.32.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Ord. 219 § 11, 1968) 
13.32.120 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 219 § 12, 1968) 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 15.04 - CONSTRUCTION CODES 
Sections: 
 
15.04.010 - Adoption of building codes. 
The following codes Titled: Title 24 California Building Standards Codes 2013, published by the California Building Standards Commission are referred to and adopted with the same effects as if fully set forth herein. 
A.	Part 1—California Building Standards Administrative Code - 2013;
B.	Part 2—California Building Code - 2013;
C.	Part 2.5—California Residential Code - 2013;
D.	Part 3—California Electrical Code - 2013;
E.	Part 4—California Mechanical Code - 2013;
F.	Part 5—California Plumbing Code - 2013;
G.	Part 6—California Energy Code - 2013;
H.	Part 7—California Elevator Safety Construction Code - 2007;
I.	Part 8—California Historical Building Code - 2007;
J.	Part 9—California Fire Code - 2013;
K.	Part 10—California Department of Community Development Code - 2010;
L.	Part 11—California Green Building Standards Code - 2013;
M.	Part 12—California Referenced Standards Code - 2013.
N.	California Plumbing Code - 2001;
O.	California Mechanical Code - 2001.
(Ord. No. 587, § 1, 9-23-2013; Ord. 554 § 1 (part), 2004)  
15.04.020 - Fees. 
Any person desiring a permit required by any of these codes shall, at the time of filing application therefore pay a fee set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 554 § 1 (part), 2004) 
15.04.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to erect construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction. Maximum five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine and six months in jail. 
(Ord. 554 § 1 (part), 2004) 
Chapter 15.08 - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION FEES 
Sections: 
 
15.08.010 - Applicability. 
A construction fee in the amount of two percent of the estimated cost of any required public improvements shall be paid to the city as a part of the development agreement or as a condition of building permit issuance where no development agreement is required. Such development agreements include, but are not limited to, those requiring public improvements for subdivisions, parcel maps, conditional use permits, planned unit developments and commercial and industrial developments. 
(Ord. 278 § 1, 1974) 
15.08.020 - Time of payment. 
The required fees shall be paid to the city clerk prior to city approval of final subdivision maps or parcel maps, final action by the city council on conditional use permits or planned unit developments, or building permit issuance on commercial or industrial developments. 
(Ord. 278 § 2, 1974) 
15.08.030 - Services to be provided by city. 
The city in return for such fee payment, provide such construction inspection as the city deems necessary to insure compliance with development agreements and/or applicable city regulations and specifications. Such inspection shall not, however, relieve the owner, developer, builder or contractor from their individual or joint liabilities for compliance with the development agreements and/or applicable city regulations and specifications. 
(Ord. 278 § 3, 1974) 
Chapter 15.12 - HOUSE MOVING PERMITS 
Sections: 
 
15.12.010 - Definition. 
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires: 
"Permit" means the written authorization of the public works department; "Structure" is a stationary object constructed of building material. 
(Ord. 289 § 1, 1975) 
15.12.020 - Permit required to move structure. 
No person may remove a structure from a location inside or outside the city to another location in the city without a permit to do so. No person may move a structure through the city without a permit to do so. 
(Ord. 289 § 2, 1975) 
15.12.030 - Application for permit. 
A person who desires a permit shall apply to the director of public works on a form prescribed by the city. The applicant shall also file plans indicating the lot, block and parcel number or other description of the proposed location, together with colored photos of the building for which the permit is requested. 
(Ord. 289 § 3, 1975) 
15.12.040 - Application fee. 
The applicant shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The fee is due at the time of the application for a moving permit. 
(Ord. 289 § 4, 1975) 
15.12.050 - Procedure upon application. 
When the application is filed, the public works director shall determine whether the proposed use complies with the zoning ordinance and, if he determines that it will, the following actions shall be taken: 
A.	Posting. When a relocation permit application is filed and the relocation permit fee paid to the director of public works, a public notice shall be given of the proposed building relocation by posting in front of the property under consideration and adjacent thereto, notice of intention to move, printed in plain type with letters of not less than one inch in height, followed by a statement in six or eight point type setting forth the fact that a relocation permit has been requested to move a building to the subject property, stating the present location of the building to be moved thereto and indicating the closing date by which protests must be filed with the public works director in writing by adjacent property owners, if they desire to protest the relocation and have the planning commission hold a hearing pertaining to the relocation. The moving notice shall also be posted on the front of the building to be moved and notices shall be posted not more than one hundred (100) feet apart upon the street that the subject property fronts for a distance of three hundred (300) feet in each direction. The time of posting shall be seven continuous days within which period written protests may be filed. 
B.	Protest Procedure. Protests against the moving of the building or structure shall be signed by two or more individual property owners from the surrounding area and filed with the director of public works within the dates prescribed by this chapter and indicate on the notice of intention to move. 
Upon filing of a protest, the planning commission shall conduct a hearing at its next regular meeting at which time the applicants for relocation and the protestants against such relocation shall be heard. The planning commission shall approve or deny such relocation based upon testimony given at the public hearing and upon making the findings described in subsection C of this section below shall establish conditions as outlined in this chapter. The public works director shall thereafter issue or deny a relocation permit in accordance with conditions set forth by the planning commission. 
C.	Alternate Procedure. If no written protests are filed, the director of public works shall inspect the structure and examine the plans and specifications to determine if the building will upon completion conform to all applicable city ordinance. The director of public works shall also determine the cost of placing the building and finishing it according to plans and specifications and the amount determined shall be the amount required for the performance bond hereafter required. 
D.	Action by Planning Commission. The planning commission shall examine the plans and specifications, consider the recommendations of the public works director and all other evidence submitted to it. The commission may approve the permit only it finds that the following standards will be met: 
1.	Upon completion, the structure will be in architectural harmony with other properties in the vicinity. 
2.	The exterior design and appearance of the structure is not of an inferior quality such as to cause the nature of the neighborhood to depreciate in appearance or value, or both. 
3.	The building materials and the workmanship are of a quality equal to or greater than other structures in the vicinity. 
4.	The structure will be finished and the property landscaped in a manner which will not make the surrounding properties less desirable. 
5.	The applicant provides adequate and reasonable assurances that it will comply with ordinances and regulations of the city. 
If the commission approves the application, it shall return it to the public works director. If the commission disapproves the application, the applicant may appeal the decision first to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the public works director ten days after the date the applicant is notified of the planning commission's action. 
(Ord. 289 § 5, 1975) 
15.12.060 - Performance bond. 
The applicant shall file with the city a performance bond in the amount determined by the director of public works to be the cost of placing and completing the building in accordance with the plans and specifications, as set forth in Section 15.12.050(A). The director of public works may require all or a portion of the bond to be in cash or guaranteed by approved sureties. The condition of the bond shall be that the applicant must place and complete the finishing of the building in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the city within the time prescribed by the city. 
(Ord. 289 § 6, 1975) 
15.12.070 - Issuance of permit. 
The director of public works shall issue the permit when: 
A.	The planning department and the director of public works have approved the application as provided in Section 15.12.050; 
B.	The applicant has posted the bond prescribed by Section 15.12.060. 
(Ord. 289 § 7, 1975) 
15.12.080 - Denial of application and appeal. 
The director of public works may not issue a permit if the structure fails to conform with all applicable ordinances and regulations or if upon completion the structure will not be in architectural harmony with other properties in the vicinity, or if the applicant fails to comply with any ordinance or regulation of the city. If the city denies the application, it shall promptly notify the applicant of the denial. The applicant may appeal the denial to the city council by filing a notice of appeal setting forth the reasons for appeal within ten days from the date of receipt of notice of the denial of the application in the same manner as is prescribed in the zoning ordinance for the conduct of appeals in connection with zoning matters. 
(Ord. 289 § 8, 1975) 
15.12.090 - City may impose conditions. 
The city may impose conditions to the granting of the permit which it finds necessary to assure compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and any other ordinance or regulation of the city. 
(Ord. 289 § 9, 1975) 
15.12.100 - Time limit on structures moved through city. 
A permit which authorizes an applicant to move a structure through the city is good for a period of three working days from the date the structure enters the city limits. The applicant shall move the structure through the city within that three-day period. For good cause shown, the council may extend the period for moving the structure through the city. 
(Ord. 289 § 10, 1975) 
15.12.110 - Notifications. 
The applicant shall be responsible for notifying the police department and all affected public utilities not less than forty-eight hours prior to beginning a move within the city. Failure to make such notifications shall constitute grounds for revocation of a permit. 
(Ord. 289 § 11, 1975) 
15.12.120 - Completion of alterations and improvements. 
The applicant shall complete all of the required alterations and improvements within ninety (90) days from the date the permit is issued. The director of public works may extend the time upon request of the applicant and proof that failure to complete the improvements or alterations way beyond applicant's control. If the applicant fails to complete the alterations or improvements within the time fixed by the city, the city may proceed against the sureties upon the performance bond or may complete the work using the cash bond furnished by the applicant. 
(Ord. 289 § 12, 1975) 
15.12.130 - Failure of applicant for one-year period to complete improvements. 
If the applicant of his surety fails to complete the alterations or improvements according to the terms of the permit for a period of one year from the date of the permit, the city may without further process summarily proceed to either complete the alteration and improvement or demolish the building. Any cost in excess of the amount provided by the surety is a charge against the applicant. 
(Ord. 289 § 13, 1975) 
15.12.140 - Insurance. 
The applicant will save, indemnify and hold harmless the city against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses which may in any way accrue against the city in consequence of such structure moving. 
(Ord. 289 § 14, 1975) 
15.12.150 - Violation—Penalty. 
A person who violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 289 § 15, 1975) 
Chapter 15.16 - BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
15.16.010 - Purpose. 
In order to establish an orderly and uniform system of numbering for houses, business establishments and other buildings and places in the city, and to facilitate the location of the same and the persons, firms or corporations occupying them, this council determines that an assignment of numbers for such house, business establishments, and other buildings and places shall be made by the city clerk in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 75 § 1, 1948) 
15.16.020 - Numbering system. 
All numbering shall commence from the intersection of Naranjo and Valencia Boulevards. 
A.	One hundred numbers shall be assigned to each block.
B.	Even numbers shall be on the east and north sides of the streets, and the odd numbers on the south and west sides of the streets. 
C.	The first block on each street running north and south and north of Naranjo Boulevard shall bear numbers from 100 to 199 north, and the first block on each street running north and south and south of Naranjo Boulevard shall bear numbers from 100 to 199 south. 
D.	The second blocks will bear numbers from 200 to 299, and the remaining blocks similarly numbered with the two right hand digits representing the order in the block and the remainder of the digits on the left representing the numerical order of the block from Naranjo Boulevard. 
E.	The first block on each street running east and west and west of Valencia Boulevard shall bear numbers from 100 to 199 west, and the first block on each street running east and west and east of Valencia Boulevard shall bear numbers from 100 to 199 east. 
F.	The second blocks will bear numbers from 200 to 299, and the remaining blocks similarly numbered with the two right hand digits representing the order in the block and remainder of the digits on the left representing the numerical order of the block from Valencia Boulevard. 
G.	Rear buildings shall be numbered the same as the front buildings with the addition of a letter, or letters, in alphabetical order. 
(Ord. 75 § 2, 1948) 
15.16.030 - Display of numbers. 
Every owner and/or occupant of property in the city shall display in a conspicuous place, near the entrance to the building, the number assigned to it by the city clerk. 
(Ord. 75 § 3, 1948) 
15.16.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation displaying, erecting or maintaining any number on his or its house, business establishment, or building, other than the one assigned to it by the city clerk, in accordance with this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 75 § 4, 1948) 
Chapter 15.20 - AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEMS 
Sections: 
 
15.20.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to restrict the flow of pure water from evaporative coolers and air conditioning systems to the sanitary sewer system in order to reduce the cost of maintenance and operation and capital investment in sewer system and sewage treatment facilities, and to conserve the limited water supply of the city. 
(Ord. 152 § 1, 1961) 
15.20.020 - Permits. 
All installations of air conditioning systems shall hereafter be made only after issuance of a permit therefor by the city and payment of the customary building and/or plumbing permit fees to the city. 
(Ord. 152 § 2, 1961) 
15.20.030 - Requirement of use of re-circulation pumps. 
A.	All new installations of evaporative coolers shall be furnished with a circulating pump. 
B.	All new installations of air conditioning units, industrial, commercial or residential, shall have cooling water discharge re-circulated, or shall be of such type as not to require cooling water discharge. In no case shall discharge be permitted to be connected to the sanitary sewer system except that condensation only from re-circulation units or from heat pump units, (or bleed-off water from cooling towers,) may be discharged to the sanitary sewer system, or otherwise disposed of. 
C.	Whenever replacements or reinstallations of existing evaporative coolers are made, the installation shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter governing new installations of evaporative coolers. 
D.	Whenever replacements or reinstallations of air conditioning units are made, such replacements or reinstallations shall conform in all respects to the requirements for new installations of this chapter and shall be disconnected from the sanitary sewer. 
E.	After July 15, 1961, it is unlawful for any person to use, maintain or operate any evaporative cooler or air conditioning unit in the city which allows the escape or discharge of water either to the sewer system, any catchment basin or to the ground except as hereinabove provided. 
(Ord. 152 § 3, 1961) 
15.20.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 152 § 4, 1961) 
Chapter 15.24 - TRAVEL TRAILERS AND MOTOR HOMES 
Sections: 
 
15.24.010 - Definitions. 
"Motor home" means any motor vehicle which is designed for human habitation. Included are trucks on which a camping facility has been installed, either permanently or temporarily. 
"Travel trailer" means any vehicle which at no time exceeds eight feet in width at its widest point and is less than forty (40) feet in length at its longest point, and is designed for human habitation whether self propelled or drawn by a motor vehicle, which is intended for permanent or semi-permanent use and which has no foundation other than wheels and temporary stabilizing units. 
"Travel trailer park" means any area or tract of land where lots are rented for relatively short term occupancy to owners of travel trailers or motor homes. 
(Ord. 256 § 1, 1972) 
15.24.020 - Supplemental regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be considered supplemental to applicable state regulations and other pertinent city ordinances. 
(Ord. 256 § 2, 1972) 
15.24.030 - Prohibitions. 
A.	Travel trailers and motor homes, when occupied, shall be located only within approved travel trailer parks, unless a travel trailer or motor home is to be used as a temporary office for a construction project, or to provide temporary living quarters for circus or carnival personnel in accordance with the provisions of the conditional permit granted for such use. 
B.	Commercial activities that shall be allowed within a travel trailer park are:
1.	Coin operated laundry facilities;
2.	Coin operated food vending facilities.
C.	Commercial activity areas shall be designated on the tentative map prior to approval by the planning commission. 
D.	The dimensions of signs in conjunction with a travel trailer park shall be regulated by the planning commission. 
E.	No more than one travel trailer or motor home shall be allowed on each travel trailer site. 
F.	It is unlawful for any person to use a travel trailer or motor home for living purposes in the city except in a licensed trailer park unless he has a permit therefore. 
G.	Upon written application to the planning commission a person may obtain a permit to occupy a travel trailer, motor home or mobilehome on a lot in the city during the course of construction of a dwelling on the same lot. The application shall be accompanied by a building permit for the proposed dwelling. The occupancy permit shall be issued for a six-month period only and shall terminate at that time or when the dwelling is completed, whichever comes first. 
H.	No travel trailer or motor home shall be parked on any street or alley in the city for a period of time longer than twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. 256 § 3, 1972) 
15.24.040 - Conditional use permits. 
A.	A conditional use permit shall be granted prior to the commencement of construction of any travel trailer park. 
B.	Application for a conditional use permit under the zoning regulations of the city, shall be accompanied by the following information: 
1.	A plot plan showing all physical features of the proposed travel trailer park site and adjacent public streets and areas; 
2.	A complete storm drainage plan providing for the ultimate disposal of stormwater, showing on site facilities and off site storm lines; 
3.	A complete sanitary sewer plan for the entire site, and individual travel trailer sites, including off site lines and, where necessary, lift stations adequate to serve the proposed development; 
4.	A complete water source and distribution plan for the entire travel trailer park;
5.	A complete plot plan of sites, landscaping, parking areas, access and storage areas.
C.	While the travel trailer park plan is still in sketch form, the developer may consult with the planning commission to determine the plan's conformity to the Woodlake general plan, major street plan, the zoning ordinance and other applicable city ordinances. 
(Ord. 256 § 4, 1972) 
15.24.050 - Travel trailer park development standards. 
A.	Site Area. A travel trailer park shall have a minimum of two gross acres.
B.	Site Density. The density of a travel trailer park shall be compatible with the general plan density for the areas proposed for travel trailer park development as determined by the planning commission. The maximum shall be sixteen (16) travel trailer sites per gross acre. 
C.	Minimum Yard Requirements. There shall be maintained a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet along the exterior boundaries of the travel trailer park site, except for fences up to six feet in height which may be setback a minimum of ten feet. The areas between the fences and the street property line shall be well landscaped and maintained. Any fence and landscaping matter shall be limited in height at intersections of public streets, driveways and pedestrian walkways to that deemed compatible with pedestrian and traffic safety. 
D.	Vehicular Circulation.
1.	Entrance driveways shall be located not less than one hundred and fifty (150) feet from public street intersections and the location and design of such entrance driveways shall be approved by the city planning commission. 
2.	Driveways giving access to individual sites shall be no less than twenty-five (25) feet in width. 
3.	Driveways giving access to individual sites and having parking on one side shall be no less than thirty-six (36) feet in width. 
4.	Driveways shall be designed in accordance with the current structural cross-section requirements for city subdivision streets, except that widths shall conform to this code section and concrete roll type curbs and gutters no less than twenty-four inches in width may be substituted for standard curb and gutter. 
(Ord. 256 § 5, 1972) 
15.24.060 - Sanitary sewers. 
A.	All travel trailer parks shall be connected to the city sanitary sewer system.
B.	All sanitary sewers in travel trailer park streets shall be designed in full accord with current city public sewer standards. 
C.	All sewer laterals to individual sites shall comply with applicable city codes.
(Ord. 256 § 6, 1972) 
15.24.070 - Water systems. 
A.	All travel trailer parks shall be served by the city water system or by a central water supply system approved by the city. 
(Ord. 256 § 7, 1972) 
15.24.080 - Undergrounding. 
All public utilities shall be installed underground including electrical supply, telephone and street lighting cable. Usage of individual television antenna will be permitted. 
(Ord. 256 § 8, 1972) 
15.24.090 - Trailer site development standards. 
A.	Size. Each travel trailer site shall be not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in area. The minimum width of an individual site shall be thirty (30) feet. 
B.	Travel trailers shall be no less than five feet from any lot line nor less than ten feet from any other travel trailer. 
(Ord. 256 § 9, 1972) 
15.24.100 - Parking. 
A.	There shall be one off-street parking space for every travel trailer site.
B.	Supplemental parking for pleasure boats, non-occupied travel trailers and motor homes, and other uses shall be provided at a minimum ratio of one space to each five travel trailer sites. This parking area shall be clustered and shall be screened from view by means of solid fencing and/or suitable landscaping. 
(Ord. 256 § 10, 1972) 
15.24.110 - Lighting. 
Interior park lighting, with underground service shall provide for all interior streets. 
(Ord. 256 § 11, 1972) 
15.24.120 - Landscaping. 
The following provisions shall apply to all travel trailer parks: 
A.	All open areas except driveways, parking areas, walkways, utility areas, patios or porches shall be well landscaped and maintained. 
B.	Subject to planning commission recommendations, substantial trees shall be planted throughout the development, in all common areas, and at least one tree provided for every two travel trailer sites. Specimen trees of no less than ten-gallon container size shall be required at least every thirty (30) feet along any set back adjacent to public streets. 
(Ord. 256 § 12, 1972) 
15.24.130 - Other regulations applicable. 
Travel trailer park development within the city shall comply with applicable provisions of the California Health and Safety Code, as well as the regulations set forth in Title 25, Chapter 5 of the California Administrative Code, except where provisions of this chapter call for more restrictive regulations. 
(Ord. 256 § 13, 1972) 
15.24.140 - Variance. 
The regulations specified in this chapter may be varied when such variance will result in the improved design of the development and will permit desirable arrangement of structures in relation to parking areas, parkways, setbacks and street frontage. 
(Ord. 256 § 14, 1972) 
15.24.150 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months in the county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 256 § 15, 1972) 
Chapter 15.28 - FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION REGULATIONS* 
Sections: 
 
15.28.010 - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council does adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. 493 § 1.1, 1994) 
15.28.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.	The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.	These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. 493 § 1.2, 1994) 
15.28.030 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
A.	Protect human life and health;
B.	Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C.	Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.	Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E.	Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.	Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
G.	Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
H.	Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. 493 § 1.3, 1994) 
15.28.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to: 
A.	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
B.	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
D.	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 493 § 1.4, 1994) 
15.28.050 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
"Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
"Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
"Apex" means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front. 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
"Area of Special Flood Hazard." See "Special flood hazard area." 
"Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). "Base flood" is the term used throughout this chapter. 
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
Building. See "Structure." 
"Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
"Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
"Flood, flooding or floodwater" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
"Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
"Flood Hazard Boundary Map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Flood Insurance Study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
"Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "Flooding." 
"Floodplain administrator" is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
"Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
"Floodway encroachment lines" means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps. 
"Floodway fringe" is that area of the floodplain on either side of the "regulatory floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
"Fraud and victimization" as related to Section 15.28.220 through 15.28.240, Variances, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City of Woodlake will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
"Governing body" is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
"Hardship" as related to Sections 15.28.220 through 15.28.240, Variances, means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
"Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U. S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
4.	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs. 
"Levee" means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
"Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area (see "Basement") is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter. (Note: This definition allows attached garages to be built at grade. Below grade garages are not allowed as they are considered to be basements.) 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
"New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulation improvements to such structures. 
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community. 
"Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or is likely to be carried downstream. 
One-Hundred-Year Flood or 100-Year Flood. See "Base flood." 
"Principal structure" means a structure used for the principal use of the property as distinguished from an accessory use. 
"Public safety and nuisance" as related to Sections 15.28.220 through 15.28.240, Variances, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community, neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, river, bay, stream, canal or basin. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.	Built on a single chassis;
2.	Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
3.	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
4.	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
"Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Sheet Flow Area. See "Area of shallow flooding." 
"Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area having special flood hazard and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, E or M. 
"Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or manufactured home. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.	Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.	Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
"Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
"Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. 493 § 2.0, 1994) 
15.28.060 - Land to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. 493 § 3.1, 1994) 
15.28.070 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated December 1, 1992 and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated June 1, 1983, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at the city of Woodlake Administrative Office, 350 North Valencia Blvd., Woodlake, CA. 93286. 
(Ord. 493 § 3.2, 1994) 
15.28.080 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 493 § 3.3, 1994) 
15.28.090 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another chapter, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 493 § 3.4, 1994) 
15.28.100 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.	Considered as minimum requirements;
B.	Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C.	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. 493 § 3.5, 1994) 
15.28.110 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. 493 § 3.6, 1994) 
15.28.120 - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.28.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
A.	Proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; in zone AO, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; or 
B.	Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed, if required in Section 15.28.160(C)(3); and 
C.	All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.28.140(D); and 
D.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Ord. 493 § 4.1, 1994) 
15.28.130 - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The city administrator is appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. 
(Ord. 493 § 4.2, 1994) 
15.28.140 - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.	Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:
1.	Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
2.	All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
3.	The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and
4.	The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
B.	Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.28.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source in order to administer Sections 15.28.160 through 15.28.210. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption. 
C.	Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
1.	Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
2.	Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
3.	Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
D.	Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
1.	Certification required by Section 15.28.160(C)(1) (floor elevations); 
2.	Certification required by Section 15.128.160(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
3.	Certification required by Sections 15.28.160(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard); 
4.	Certification of elevation required by Section 15.28.180(B) (subdivision standards); and 
5.	Certification required by Section 15.28.210 (Floodway encroachments). 
E.	Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.28.220 through 15.28.240. 
F.	Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this ordinance as specified in Section 15.28.080. 
(Ord. 493 § 4.3, 1994) 
15.28.150 - Appeals. 
The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 493 § 4.4, 1994) 
15.28.160 - Provisions for flood hazard reduction—Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
A.	Anchoring.
1.	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
2.	All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.28.190. 
B.	Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed: 
1.	With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
2.	Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
3.	With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
4.	If within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
C.	Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Section 15.28.050, Definitions, for "new construction," "substantial damage" and "substantial improvement.") 
1.	Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
a.	In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. (The state of California recommends that the lowest floor be elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height exceeding the depth specified in feet on the FIRM by at least one foot, or elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified); 
b.	In an A zone, elevated to or above the base flood elevation, as determined by this community. (The state of California recommends the lowest floor be elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation, as determined by the community); 
c.	In all other zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. (The state of California recommends the lowest floor be elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation.) 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
2.	Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated to conform with subsection C(1) of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
a.	Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under subsection C(1) of this section so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.	Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.	Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection C(2) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.	All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.	Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
b.	Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; or 
c.	Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
4.	Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 15.28.190. 
(Ord. 493 § 5.1, 1994) 
15.28.170 - Provisions for flood hazard reduction—Standards for utilities. 
A.	All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate; 
1.	Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and
2.	Discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
B.	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding. 
(Ord. 493 § 5.2, 1994) 
15.28.180 - Provisions for flood hazard reduction—Standards for subdivisions. 
A.	All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
B.	All subdivision proposals will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final first floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator. 
C.	All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
D.	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
E.	All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(Ord. 493 § 5.3, 1994) 
15.28.190 - Provisions for flood hazard reduction—Standards for manufactured homes. 
All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located: 
1.	Outside of manufactured home park or subdivision;
2.	In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
3.	In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
4.	In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood; shall be elevated on permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation (the state of California recommends at least one foot above the base flood elevation) and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
B.	All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section will be elevated so that either the: 
1.	Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation (the state of California recommends at least one foot above the base flood elevation); or 
2.	Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(Ord. 493 § 5.4, 1994) 
15.28.200 - Provisions for flood hazard reduction—Standards for recreational vehicles. 
All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zone A1-30, AH and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map will either: 
A.	Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;
B.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
C.	Meet the permit requirements of Sections 15.28.120 through 15.28.150 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.28.190(A). 
(Ord. 493 § 5.5, 1994) 
15.28.210 - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.28.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.	Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in (the base) flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.	If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 15.28.160 through 15.28.210. 
(Ord. 493 § 5.6, 1994) 
15.28.220 - Variance procedure—Nature of variances. 
The variance criteria set forth in this section of this chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
It is the duty of the city to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood chapter are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this ordinance are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. 493 § 6.1, 1994) 
15.28.230 - Variance procedure—Appeal board. 
A.	In passing upon requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter and: 
1.	Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
2.	Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
3.	Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
4.	Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
5.	Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
6.	Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.	Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
8.	Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.	Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
10.	Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
11.	Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
B.	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
1.	The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and 
2.	Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the county recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
C.	The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. 493 § 6.2, 1994) 
15.28.240 - Conditions for variances. 
A.	Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with less existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 15.28.120 through 15.28.210 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Section 15.28.050) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.	Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
E.	Variances shall only be issued upon:
1.	Showing of good and sufficient cause;
2.	Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" (as defined in Section 15.28.050) to the applicant; and 
3.	Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; create a nuisance (see "public safety or nuisance" as defined in Section 15.28.050), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 15.28.050) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
F.	Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections A through E of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
G.	Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.28.230(C) and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 493 § 6.3, 1994) 
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.04.010 - Scope. 
The provisions of this title shall be supplemental to those of the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California and shall apply to all subdivisions within the city. 
(Ord. 307 § 1, 1976) 
16.04.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows: 
"Alley" means a public way permanently reserved primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
"Arterial street" means a street designated as an arterial street on the general plan or an element thereof which, because of its design and location with respect to other streets and other sources of traffic, is used or designed to carry relatively heavy volumes of traffic through an urban area or between urban areas, which serves as an approach to a highway or freeway. 
"Bicycle path" means a strip or parcel of land permanently reserved and designed for use by bicyclists, not located within a street right-of-way. 
"Block" means the distance, measured along a street centerline between the centerlines of intersecting streets, between the centerline of an intersecting street and the end of the street. 
"Collector street" means a street designated as a collector street on the general plan or an element thereof which, because of its location with respect to other streets and other sources of traffic, is used or designed to carry moderately heavy volumes of traffic between portions of urban areas or between arterial streets. 
"Commission" means the planning commission of the city. 
"Cul-de-sac street" means a street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and which is not intended to be extended or continued to serve future subdivisions on adjacent lands. 
"Frontage street" means a local street which is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street or limited access highway and which provides access to abutting properties while relieving them of the effects of heavy volumes of fast through traffic. 
"Local street" means a street which, because of its design and location with respect to other streets, is used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
"Lot" means a parcel or subdivided land under one ownership used, or susceptible to being used, in accordance with the provisions of this title and in accordance with the zoning regulations applicable to the district in which the parcel is located. 
"Non-access strip" means a strip adjoining the property line, within a street right-of-way, which is intended to prevent access to abutting properties from the street. 
"Pedestrian way" means a public way designed and intended for use by pedestrians and which is not located within a street right-of-way. 
"Planting strip" means a strip adjoining the sidewalk within a street right-of-way or between the pavement of a frontage street and the arterial street or limited access highway it parallels, which is intended to be planted with trees or otherwise landscaped. 
"Sidewalk" means a way designed for use by pedestrians, which is located within a street right-of-way. 
"Standard specifications" means the specifications of the city pertaining to subdivision design and improvements. 
"Stubbed street" means a street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and which is intended to be extended or continued to serve future subdivisions on adjacent lands. 
"Subdivisions" means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units for the purpose of sale, lease, financing, gift or judicially ordered partition whether immediate or future except for leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. Subdivision includes a condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperation, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code. As used in this section, "agricultural purposes" means the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock. 
"Subdivision Map Act" means the applicable provisions of the Government Code, state of California, governing the subdivision and/or re-subdivision of land in the state. 
"Subdivision Map Act terms" means all terms, unless defined in this section, which are defined in the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California shall have the same meaning as ascribed thereto in the Act and as the Act may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. 415 § 1, 1987; Ord. 307 § 2, 1976) 
16.04.030 - Advisory agency— Subdivision review board. 
A.	Advisory Agency. The commission is designated as the advisory agency referred to in this Subdivision Map Act of the state of California and is charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvements of proposed subdivisions and is authorized to recommend to the city council that the council approve, conditionally approve or disapprove tentative maps of subdivisions prepared and filed with the city according to the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act. The city clerk is designated as clerk to the advisory agency with the authority to receive preliminary and tentative maps of subdivisions according to the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.	There is established a subdivision review board consisting of the city planner, the director of public works, city engineer, city clerk (or their representatives), and such other members as may be prescribed by the city planner. The subdivision review board shall have the powers and duties specified by this title and shall function in an advisory capacity to the planning commission and city council. 
(Ord. 307 § 3, 1976) 
16.04.040 - Exceptions. 
A.	Petition. The planning commission may recommend that the city council authorize conditional exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this title. Application for any such exception shall be made by a petition of the subdivider stating fully the grounds of the application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner. Such petition shall be filed with the tentative map of the subdivision. 
B.	Findings.
1.	In order for the property referred to in the petition to come within the provisions of this section, it shall be necessary that the planning commission find the following facts: 
a.	That there are special circumstances and conditions affecting the property;
b.	That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner; 
c.	That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which said property is situated. 
2.	In recommending such exceptions the planning commission shall secure substantially the objectives of the regulations to which exceptions are requested, and shall act to protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. 
3.	In recommending the authorization of any exception under the provisions of this section, the planning commission shall report to the city council its findings with respect thereto and all facts in connection therewith, and shall specifically and fully set forth the exception recommended and conditions designated. 
4.	Upon receipt of such report, the city council may approve the tentative map with or without exceptions and conditions recommended by the planning commission and with such other exceptions, if any, as the city council deems necessary to substantially secure the objectives of this title. 
(Ord. 307 § 11, 1976) 
16.04.050 - Merger and reversion to acreage. 
Subdivided real property may be merged or reverted to acreage pursuant to provisions of Chapter 6, Article 1 of the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 331 § 3, 1978: Ord. 307 § 10.3, 1976) 
16.04.060 - Certificate of compliance. 
Any eligible person may apply for a certificate of compliance pursuant to provisions of Chapter 6, Article 1 of the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 331 § 4, 1978: Ord. 307 § 10.4, 1976) 
16.04.070 - Merger of contiguous parcels. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, two or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been subdivided under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or any prior law regulating the division of land or any ordinance enacted pursuant thereto shall not merge by virtue of the fact that such contiguous parcels or units are held by the same owner, and no further proceedings under the Subdivision Map Act of this section, shall be required for the purpose of sale, lease or financing of such contiguous parcels or units or any of them. Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 66424.2 of the Government Code of the state of California, contiguous parcels or units that would otherwise merge under said Section 66424.2 shall be exempt from merger unless proceedings are taken pursuant to this section to merge such parcels or units. 
B.	Proceedings for Merger of Parcels or Units of Land. The city council, either on its own motion, or upon request by a landowner, may institute proceedings to merge parcels or units of land subject to merger under Section 66424.2 of the Government Code of the state of California by giving at least thirty (30) days written notice to the owner of the parcels or units affected by the proposed merger of its intent to record a notice of merger and of the time, date and place of a hearing on the proposed merger. The owner and other interested parties may present evidence to the city council at the hearing why such notice should or should not be recorded. 
C.	Grounds for Merger—Conditions in Lieu of Merger. If the city council, after a hearing, determines that the parcels or units of land in question are subject to merger under Section 66424.2 of the Government Code of the state of California, and that under the circumstances of the particular case, it would be contrary to the purposes for the regulation of the subdivision of land set forth in the ordinances of the city if the parcels or units of land were not merged, the city council may impose such conditions as will insure the nonmerger will not be contrary to the purposes set forth in the ordinances of the city. If such conditions are not met within the time provided, the city council shall cause a notice of merger to be recorded as set forth in subsection D of this section. 
D.	Effective Date of Merger. If the city council, after a hearing, orders parcels or units of land merged, or if conditions for nonmerger are not met within the time provided, it shall cause a notice of merger to be filed for record with the Tulare County Recorder. The merger shall be effective from the time of recording such notice. 
E.	Effect of Merger. If contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner are merged pursuant to the provisions of this section, such contiguous parcels or units may not thereafter be sold, leased or financed, except as a unit, without compliance with the provisions of this section, the city zoning ordinance, and all other applicable city ordinances. 
(Ord. 313 §§ 1—5, 1977) 
16.04.080 - Planned unit developments. 
Where, in accordance with provisions of the zoning ordinances, a use permit has been granted authorizing a planned unit development on the land or a portion of the land proposed to be subdivided, the plan of the subdivision shall conform with the plan of the planned unit development as approved by the planning commission and city council. Exceptions to the subdivision regulations which are necessary to execute the planned unit development as approved by the planning commission and city council may be authorized by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.04.040. 
(Ord. 307 § 9, 1976) 
16.04.090 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of Title. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or co-partnership who wilfully violates any of the provisions or fails to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days in the county jail, or both fine and imprisonment, except that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy for which the city or other corporation, partnership, or copartnership may file a suit in the superior court of the county of Tulare, to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision, or act, in violation of this title. 
(Ord. 307 § 13, 1976) 
Chapter 16.08 - PRELIMINARY PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
16.08.010 - Letter of intention to subdivide. 
A.	Prior to the filing of a tentative map, a subdivider shall submit a letter to the city clerk indicating his intention to subdivide. Such letter of intention is required to alert city officials and interested public and private agencies of the intention to subdivide so that such interested parties may have the opportunity to inform the subdivider of physical conditions, facts and policies of the respective agencies which are or may be pertinent to the preparation of the tentative map. 
B.	The subdivider shall submit twenty (20) copies of the letter of intention to the city clerk. The city clerk shall transmit one copy to each member of the planning commission and city council, and one copy to the city engineer, together with requests for recommendations thereon. Additional copies of the letter of intention shall be transmitted by the city clerk to school districts, water districts, irrigation districts, the State Division of Highways, utility companies and other public and agencies when affected by the proposed subdivision, together with requests for recommendations thereon. 
C.	A preliminary map or sketch shall be submitted by the subdivider as an aid to the review and discussion of his design proposals. The number of copies and method of distribution required under subsection B of this section shall apply. 
(Ord. 352 § 1, 1980; Ord. 307 § 5(A), 1976) 
16.08.020 - Information in letter of intention. 
The letter of intention shall contain the following information: 
A.	Location of the proposed subdivision with reference to section, township and range, and with reference to the names of any streets which bound the property; 
B.	Names and addresses of record owner and subdivider;
C.	The area of the parcel, range of lot sizes, and uses contemplated for the subdivision;
D.	Proposed methods of utility service;
E.	Such other information as will be helpful to indicate the intent of the subdivider.
(Ord. 307 § 5(B), 1976) 
16.08.030 - Subdivision conference. 
Within twenty (20) days after the date of receipt of the letter of intention by the city clerk, the city clerk shall schedule a subdivision conference with the subdivider and/or his engineer. The subdivision review board shall attend the conference. Representatives of other public and private agencies affected by the proposed subdivision may attend and shall be encouraged by the city clerk to attend the subdivision conference. Representatives of the city and other public and private agencies may transmit such information and make such recommendations to the subdivider as they deem desirable for the benefit of the subdivider in preparing the tentative map. As a result of the discussion conducted during the subdivision conference the subdivider may request such additional meetings with participants in the subdivision conference or with the city council as may be necessary to clarify policies of the city or other public or private agencies which may have an effect on the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. 307 § 5(C), 1976) 
Chapter 16.12 - TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.12.010 - General regulations. 
A.	The tentative map shall be prepared in accord with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title and shall be filed with the city clerk. Such filing shall be prior to the completion of final surveys of streets and lots and before the start of any grading or construction work within the proposed subdivision. 
A minimum of twenty-five (25) copies of the tentative map, plus one sepia, and accompanying reports and statements shall be submitted to the city clerk at the time of filing. Filing of required documents will be deemed official upon written receipt notice from the city clerk. 
B.	Review by Subdivision Review Board.
1.	All tentative maps of subdivisions shall be reviewed by the subdivision review board prior to the submission of such tentative map to the planning commission. 
2.	The subdivision review board shall examine and review the following:
a.	The completeness and accuracy of the tentative map and the suitability of the land for purposes of subdivision; 
b.	Conformity of the overall design of the subdivision to the general plan and all pertinent requirements of this title and other laws and plans of the city; 
c.	The provisions for, and suitability of street improvements, underground utilities, fire hydrants, street lights, storm drains, streets, trees and sidewalks. The adequacy of the water supply, sewage disposal and easements for utilities and drainage; 
d.	Provisions for public area, including parks, schools, public utilities facilities, etc. 
3.	If any portion of the subdivision is in conflict with any of the requirements of this title, other ordinances, or state law, the subdivision review board shall, to the best of its ability, advise the subdivider of such conflicts. 
4.	The subdivision review board may deem it advisable to recommend additional improvements, easements, dedications, etc., to be included, in which case the subdivider shall be duly informed of the nature of the recommendations following the subdivision review board meeting. 
5.	The subdivision review board shall make a report of its recommendations to the planning commission, and shall furnish a copy of that report to the subdivider, in writing, no less than three days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the tentative map is to be considered by the commission. 
C.	Fees. Filing fees to cover the costs of processing and checking shall be paid for each tentative map at the time of filing thereof in amounts as may be adopted by the city council from time to time by resolution. If, after approval of a tentative map, revisions of the initial map are filed or a new tentative map is filed covering the same or additional land, each filing shall be considered as a new subdivision, and the subdivider shall pay in the manner above stated a fee in the amount of fifty (50) percent of the original filing fee; provided, however, there shall be no charge for filing of changes in tentative maps to meet the requirements of the city. 
D.	Size of Map. The tentative map shall show the entire subdivision on one or more eighteen (18) inch by twenty-six (26) inch sheets at a scale of not less than two hundred (200) feet to the inch. 
E.	Information Required. Each tentative map shall contain the following information:
1.	The name of the proposed subdivision, and designation as a tentative map;
2.	The name and address of the owner of the property proposed to be subdivided;
3.	The name and address of the subdivider;
4.	The name of the person or firm who prepared the map;
5.	The approximate acreage;
6.	The north point;
7.	The scale;
8.	The date;
9.	The boundary line;
10.	The location and width of all streets within the boundaries of the proposed subdivision;
11.	The proposed name of all streets within the boundaries of the proposed subdivision; proposed streets which are obviously in line with others already named and existing should be given the same name; 
12.	The name, location and width of adjacent streets;
13.	The width and location of alleys;
14.	The lot lines and approximate dimensions; lots shall be numbered consecutively;
15.	The approximate location and width of watercourses or areas subject to inundation from floods, including floodplain boundaries, and the location of structures, irrigation ditches, and other permanent physical features; 
16.	An accurate description of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision or legal description of the property comprising the subdivision, a vicinity map indicating the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to the surrounding area or region; 
17.	The width and location of all existing or proposed public or private easements;
18.	The proposed use of lots as to desired residential, commercial, industrial or other uses; 
19.	Any railroads;
20.	The approximate radius of curves;
21.	Approximate contours drawn to one foot contour intervals;
22.	The zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is located;
23.	The general plan land use designated for the area of the proposed subdivision;
24.	Any public areas proposed;
25.	The dimensions and locations of any existing buildings which are to remain in place on the property; the variety, size and location of all existing trees have a diameter of four inches or greater, except orchard trees, which shall be shown by general area, location and spacing of rows; 
26.	The locations of any existing wells, pipelines or septic tanks;
27.	Any of the foregoing information as may not be practicably shown on the map shall be contained in a written statement accompanying the map. 
F.	Accompanying Reports and Statements. The tentative map shall contain or be accompanied by reports and/or written statements from the subdivider giving essential information regarding the following matters: 
1.	The source of water supply;
2.	The type of street improvements and utilities which the subdivider proposed to install;
3.	The proposed method of sewage disposal;
4.	The proposed stormwater sewer or other means of drainage;
5.	The proposed tree planting and related landscaping;
6.	Preliminary title reports of entire property. The information required in the written reports and statements may be shown on the tentative map itself if feasible; 
7.	A drawing of the site and the surrounding area for a distance of at least three hundred (300) feet from each boundary of the site, showing locations of streets and property lines and the names and last known addresses of the recorded legal owners of all properties as shown on the latest adopted tax role of the county of Tulare. 
G.	If a subdivision is to be developed as consecutive individual units, it shall be so stated on the tentative map and the order and approximate dates of completion of each unit shall be given at the time of filing of the tentative map. 
H.	Distribution of Filed Maps. When the tentative maps, accompanying reports and statements are filed, the city clerk shall immediately forward copies of each to the following agencies: 
1.	The city engineer, two (plus one sepia);
2.	The county health officer, one;
3.	The State Division of Forestry, Tulare County Headquarters;
4.	All applicable school districts (one each);
5.	All utility companies involved, (two each);
6.	The irrigation or drainage district, if any, one;
7.	The city planner, (one copy);
8.	The city building inspector one; and
9.	The California Regional Water Quality Control Board one;
10.	Other agencies as required. Such agencies shall respond within fifteen (15) days after date of submission of tentative map for their comments to be considered by the commission. 
I.	Staff Reports. Any report or recommendation on a tentative map by the staff of the commission or council shall be in writing and a copy thereof served on the subdivider at least three days prior to any hearing or action on such map by the commission or council. 
J.	Public Hearing—Notice.
1.	The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each tentative subdivision map. The city manager or his designated representative shall have the authority to set the date of the public hearing for each tentative map. 
2.	Notice of a public hearing shall be given not less than ten days nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the date of the public hearing by: (1) publication of a notice of the time and place of the hearing and a general explanation of the matter to be considered in a newspaper of general circulation published and circulated within the city; (2) mailing, postage prepaid, a notice of the time and place of the hearing to all persons whose names appear on the property owners list submitted under the provisions of subsection F(7) of this section. 
3.	At the public hearing, the planning commission shall review the tentative map and may receive pertinent evidence and testimony as to why and how the proposed tentative map achieves the objectives of the subdivision ordinance, the State Subdivision Map Act and the California Environmental Quality Act. 
K.	Commission Approval. Within fifty (50) days after the tentative map has been filed with the city clerk or at such later date as may be required to concurrently process the appurtenant environmental impact review documents required by state law and local ordinances, the commission shall report in writing to the subdivider and to the council their recommendations regarding approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the map and the conditions on which such action is based. On the official filed copy of the tentative map, or attached thereto, a statement shall be made covering such action. Such report shall be transmitted to the city council at its next succeeding meeting. 
L.	Council Action. The city council may overrule or modify any ruling or determination of the Commission in regard to a tentative map and may make conditional exceptions if special circumstances pertaining to the property involved justify a variance from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 352 § 2, 1980; Ord. 345 §§ 1—4, 1979; Ord. 307 § 6, 1976) 
16.12.020 - Citation and authority. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1 ) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California (hereinafter referred to as the Vesting Tentative Map Statute), and may be cited as the vesting tentative map ordinance. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 307 § 6.10, 1976) 
16.12.030 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the subdivision ordinance. Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the subdivision ordinance shall apply to the vesting tentative map ordinance. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 307 § 6.11, 1976) 
16.12.040 - Consistency. 
No land shall be divided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan or not permitted by the zoning ordinance or other applicable provisions of the municipal code. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 307 § 6.12, 1976) 
16.12.050 - Definitions. 
A.	A "vesting tentative map" means a "tentative map" for a residential subdivision, as defined in the city subdivision ordinance, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map" at the time it is filed, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
B.	All other definitions set forth in the Farmersville subdivision ordinance are applicable.
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 307 § 6.13, 1976) 
16.12.060 - Application. 
A.	This chapter shall apply only to residential developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by the Farmersville subdivision ordinance, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
B.	If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 307 § 6.14, 1976) 
16.12.070 - Filing and processing. 
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in the Woodlake subdivision ordinance for a tentative map except as hereinafter provided: 
A.	At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map." 
B.	At the time a vesting tentative map is filed a subdivider shall supply the same information as is required for a tentative map. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 307 § 6.15, 1976) 
16.12.080 - Fees. 
Upon filing a vesting map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required by the method determining fees for the filing and processing of a tentative map. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 307 § 6.16, 1976) 
16.12.090 - Expiration. 
The approval of conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by the subdivision ordinance for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 307 § 6.17, 1976) 
16.12.100 - Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map. 
A.	The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2. 
However, if Section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
B.	Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined: 
1.	A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both. 
2.	The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law.
C.	The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 16.12.090. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time: 
1.	An initial time period of one and one-half years. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded; 
2.	The initial time period set forth in subsection C(1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days, from the date a complete application is filed. 
3.	A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection C(1) of this section expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council within fifteen (15) days. 
4.	If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subdivisions 1 through 3 of this subsection, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 307 § 6.18, 1976) 
16.12.110 - Development inconsistent with zoning—Conditional approval. 
A.	Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding Section 16.12.100(A), confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance and the map, as approved. 
B.	The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 16.12.100(C). 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 307 § 6.19, 1976) 
16.12.120 - Applications inconsistent with current policies. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Sections 16.12.100(A) and 16.12.110, and local agencies may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that departures are authorized under applicable law. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 307 § 6.20, 1976) 
Chapter 16.16 - FINAL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.16.010 - Filing. 
Within twenty-four (24) months after receipt of the council action approving or conditionally approving the map, the subdivider may file with the city clerk the original final map and three prints of the final map, completed in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. Such final map shall be accompanied by: 
A.	Plans, profiles and specifications of the proposed public improvements, designed in accord with the requirements of the city engineer; 
B.	A filing fee to cover the expense of checking in an amount to be established by the city council from time to time by resolution; 
C.	A preliminary title report issued by a title insurance company, in the name of the owner of the land, issued to or for the benefit and protection of the city, showing all parties whose consent is necessary and their interest therein, except where the land included in such subdivision is registered under the Land Registration Act. If the land is so registered, a copy of the certificate of title shall be furnished, certified; 
D.	Calculation and traverse sheets, used in computing the distances, angles and courses shown on the final map and ties to existing and proposed monuments, and showing closures, within the allowable limits of error specified in the ordinance codified in this title, for exterior boundaries of the subdivision and for each irregular block or lot of the subdivision; 
5.	Two copies of the proposed deed restrictions.
(Ord. 511 § 1 (part), 1995; Ord. 307 § 7(A), 1976) 
16.16.020 - Size, format and materials. 
The final map which is filed shall be in full accord with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 307 § 7(B), 1976) 
16.16.030 - Information required. 
Each final map shall contain the following information: 
A.	If more than three sheets are used, an index map shall show the entire subdivision;
B.	The tract name, date, north arrow and scale;
C.	A general description of the land included;
D.	The location and names, without abbreviations of all:
1.	Proposed streets,
2.	Proposed public areas and easements, and
3.	Adjoining streets;
E.	Their dimensions, in feet and decimals of a foot;
F.	The dimensions of all lots, and a lot number for each lot;
G.	The centerline data for streets including bearings and distances;
H.	The radius, tangent, arc length and central angle of curves;
I.	Suitable primary survey control points;
J.	The location and description of permanent monuments;
K.	Ties to any city or county boundary lines involved;
L.	All required certificates;
M.	Any other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act.
(Ord. 307 § 7(C), 1976) 
16.16.040 - Lot data. 
Sufficient data shall be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of each line. Dimensions of lots shall be the net dimensions. No ditto marks shall be used. Lots containing one acre or more shall show net acreage to the nearest hundredth. 
(Ord. 307 § 7(D), 1976) 
16.16.050 - Surveying data. 
The final map shall show the centerlines of all streets; the lengths, tangents, radii and central angle or radial bearings of all curves; the bearings of radial lines to each beginning and end of a curve; the total width of each street; the width of the portion being dedicated, the width of the existing dedication, and the width each side of the centerline; and the width of rights-of-way of railroads, flood control or drainage channels and any other easements appearing on the map. 
Surveys in connection with the preparation of subdivision maps shall be made in accordance with standard practices and principles for land surveying. A traverse of the boundaries of the subdivision and all lots and blocks shall close within a limit of error of 0.005 feet. 
(Ord. 307 § 7(E), 1976) 
16.16.060 - Record of easements. 
The final map shall show the location, width and side lines of all easements to which the lots are subject. If an existing easement is not definitely located of record, a statement as to the easement shall appear on the title sheet. Easements for storm drains, sewers, utilities and other purposes shall be denoted by broken lines. Distance and bearings on the side lines of the lots which are cut by an easement shall be so shown as to indicate clearly the actual lengths of the lot lines. The width of the easement, the lengths and bearings of the lines thereof, and sufficient ties to locate the easement shall be clearly labeled and identified, and, if already of record, proper reference to the records shall be given. Easements being dedicated shall be so indicated in the certificate of dedication. 
(Ord. 307 § 7(F), 1976) 
16.16.070 - Monuments. 
The final map shall show clearly what stakes, monuments or other evidence were found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the tract. The corners of adjoining subdivisions, or portions thereof, shall be identified, and ties thereto shall be shown. 
(Ord. 307 § 7(G), 1976) 
16.16.080 - City boundaries. 
The final map shall show city boundaries adjoining the subdivision. 
(Ord. 307 § 7(H), 1976) 
16.16.090 - Lot and block numbers. 
The lots shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the number one, with no omissions or duplications; provided, however, where the subdivision is a continuation of, or an addition to, an existing subdivision, the lot numbers may commence with the number immediately following the last or highest number of such existing subdivision and, in all other respects, shall conform with the preceding requirements. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet. Blocks may be used. They shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in the manner required for numbering lots. Lots within each block shall be numbered as provided for subdivisions where block numbers are not used. 
(Ord. 307 § 7(I), 1976) 
16.16.100 - Dedications. 
All streets, alleys, access rights, drainage and/or sewer easements, and other easements and parcels of land shown on the final map as intended for public use shall be offered for dedication for public use. 
(Ord. 307 § 7(J), 1976) 
16.16.110 - Waiver of direct access rights. 
The council, at its discretion, may require that offers of dedication of streets include a waiver of direct access rights from any property shown on the final map as abutting thereon. 
(Ord. 307 § 7(K), 1976) 
16.16.120 - Reservations. 
At the discretion of the council, areas of real property within the subdivision may be reserved for future need for schools, fire stations, libraries, recreational facilities, or other public uses, pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 307 § 7(L), 1976) 
16.16.130 - Approval of the city engineer. 
After the issuance of a receipt by the city clerk for the final map and improvement drawings, the city engineer shall examine them as to conformity with the tentative map, as to the sufficiency of affidavits and acknowledgements, correctness of surveying data, mathematical data and computations, and such other matters as require checking to insure compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and of this chapter. The city engineer shall return one copy of the map to the subdivider or his engineer, showing necessary corrections. If the final map is found to be in correct form and the matters shown thereon are sufficient, the city engineer shall endorse his approval thereon and transmit it to the city council for approval. 
(Ord. 307 § 7(M), 1976) 
16.16.140 - Approval by the council. 
At its first regular meeting following the filing of the final map, or within ten days following the filing thereof, the council shall consider the final map, the plan of subdivision improvements, and the offers of dedication in accord with the requirements of this title. The council may reject any or all offers of dedication and the city clerk shall certify on the final map such action by the council. If the council determines that the map is in conformity with the requirements of this title, it shall approve the final map. 
(Ord. 307 § 7(N), 1976) 
16.16.150 - Transmittal to county. 
When the subdivider shall have filed with the city clerk the agreement and bond or other security and shall have made the deposits and cost payments required by the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act and when such agreement, deposits and/or security shall have been approved by the city attorney as to form and by the city engineer as to sufficiency, the final map shall be transmitted by the city clerk to the clerk of the county board of supervisors for ultimate transmittal to the county recorder. 
(Ord. 307 § 7(O), 1976) 
16.16.160 - Disapproval by the council. 
If the council shall determine that the final map is not in conformity with the requirements of this title or the tentative map, it shall disapprove the map, specifying its reason or reasons therefore and the city clerk shall advise the subdivider in writing of such disapproval and the reason or reasons for such disapproval. If the council has disapproved any map, the subdivider may file with the city clerk a map altered to meet the approval of the council. In such case the subdivider shall conform to all the requirements imposed upon him by this ordinance when filing the first final map with the city, and the same proceedings shall be required as are prescribed by this chapter upon the filing of the first final map with the city. 
(Ord. 307 § 7(P), 1976) 
Chapter 16.20 - PARCEL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.20.010 - Purpose. 
The council incorporates this chapter in its subdivision ordinance in order to adopt rules, regulations and specifications for the division, either by lease, sale or financing, of any land, including land divided into four parcels or less, which is a subdivision regulated by the Subdivision Map Act and/or the preceding sections of this title. 
(Ord. 307 § 10(A), 1976) 
16.20.020 - Advisory agency. 
The commission is designated as the advisory agency referred to in Chapter 2 of the Subdivision Map Act and is charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed divisions of land under this chapter. The city clerk is designated as the clerk to the advisory agency with authority to receive parcel maps. 
(Ord. 307 § 10(B), 1976) 
16.20.030 - Tentative parcel maps. 
The person or agency dividing land under this chapter shall file a tentative parcel map with the city clerk not less than thirty (30) days before the date of the commission meeting at which such map is to be considered. Such filing shall be prior to the start of any grading or construction work within the proposed division of land. The tentative parcel map shall be submitted in the same manner as provided for subdivisions as to area improvement and design, flood and water drainage control, and as to required public improvements. 
(Ord. 307 § 10(C), 1976) 
16.20.040 - Tentative parcel map procedures. 
A person desiring to divide land subject to the provisions of this chapter shall submit the tentative parcel map, therefor in accord with the following requirements: 
A.	Filing.
1.	Twenty (20) copies of the tentative parcel map shall be legibly drawn, on eighteen (18) inch by twenty-six (26) inch tracing paper suitable for reproduction, to a scale and in a manner to best illustrate the proposed division. The scale shall be not less than two hundred (200) feet to the inch. 
2.	The map shall be accompanied by a drawing of the site and the surrounding area for a distance of at least three hundred (300) feet from each boundary of the site, showing location of streets and property lines and the names and last known addresses of the recorded legal owners of all properties as shown on the latest adopted tax role of the county of Tulare. 
B.	Fees. At the time of filing the tentative parcel map, a fee shall be paid to the city in such amount as may be established by the city council from time to time by resolution. 
C.	Acceptance. The city engineer shall examine any such tentative parcel map within five working days of presentation and shall not accept such map unless the map is in full compliance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California as to form, data, information and other matters required to be shown on or furnished therewith. 
D.	Distribution. The city clerk shall immediately forward copies of the tentative parcel map to each of the following: 
a.	The city administrator, one copy;
b.	The city engineer, two copies;
c.	The State Division of Forestry, Tulare County Headquarters;
d.	The appropriate utility companies, two copies each;
e.	The city planner, one copy;
f.	Others as required.
E.	Agency or Department Action. The department or agency receiving a copy of the tentative parcel map shall file a report within fifteen (15) days after the receipt thereof. If a reply is not received prior to the meeting at which consideration of the map is made, it will be assumed that the map conforms to the requirements of the particular agency or department concerned. 
(Ord. 352 § 5, 1980; Ord. 345 § 5, 1979; Ord. 307 § 10(D), 1976) 
16.20.050 - Information on tentative parcel maps. 
The tentative parcel map shall contain the following information: 
A.	The name and address of the person preparing the map and the legal owner of record of the land, and the applicant if different from the legal owner of record; 
B.	The boundary line of the entire parcel, including the area to be divided, with dimensions based on existing survey data or property descriptions; 
C.	The proposed division lines, approximate dimensions and approximate acreage or square footage of each proposed parcel; 
D.	The identification of each parcel with a letter designation;
E.	All existing surface and underground structures and improvements located on the original parcel, together with their dimensions, the distances between them, the distances to division and property lines, and the number of stories or the height of each structure; 
F.	The names, widths and locations of all existing and proposed streets abutting or traversing the original parcel, and a statement if the street is private and/or a statement if the street does not actually exist on the ground; 
G.	The location, purposes, width and recorded owners of all existing and proposed easements or private rights-of-ways abutting or traversing any part of the original parcel easement boundaries shall be shown by means of dotted lines; 
H.	An accurate description of the original parcel;
I.	The data of preparation, north arrow, and scale of the drawing;
J.	The existing and proposed uses of the property;
K.	The proposed method of sewage disposal;
L.	The proposed domestic water supply;
M.	The assessor's parcel numbers;
N.	The new street names;
O.	The approximate location and width of watercourses or areas subject to inundation from floods, and the location of structures, irrigation ditches and other permanent fixtures; 
P.	Any railroads;
Q.	The approximate radius of curves;
R.	A location map showing the original parcels and the surrounding area;
S.	The existing zone district designation of the original parcels.
(Ord. 307 § 10(E), 1976) 
16.20.060 - Public hearing—Notice— Planning commission review. 
A.	The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each tentative parcel map. The city manager or his designated representative shall have the authority to set the date of the public hearing for each tentative map. 
B.	Notice of a public hearing shall be given not less than ten days nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the date of the public hearing by: (1) publication of a notice of the time and place of the hearing and a general explanation of the matter to be considered in a newspaper of general circulation published and circulated within the city: (2) mailing, postage prepaid, a notice of the time and place of the hearing to all persons whose names appear on the property owners list submitted under the provisions of Section 16.20.040(A)(2). 
C.	At the public hearing, the planning commission shall review the tentative map and may receive pertinent evidence and testimony as to why and how the proposed tentative map achieves the objectives of the Subdivision Ordinance, the State Subdivision Map Act and the California Environmental Quality Act. 
D.	The commission shall review the tentative parcel map and approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the map within thirty (30) days after the receipt of such map, or at such later date as may be required to concurrently process the appurtenant environmental impact review documents required by state law and local regulations adopted in implementation thereof. 
E.	The commission may approve the map only if all of the following conditions are met:
1.	The division shall conform to all applicable zoning regulations, the provisions of this title, and the requirements of the improvement standards of the city and the Subdivision Map Act. 
2.	All parcels proposed shall have road and public utility easement access in accordance with improvement standards, allowing access to each parcel, and such roads shall be dedicated in the city. 
3.	Such tentative map shall expire twenty- four (24) months after it has been approved or conditionally approved by the commission, or by the council in the case of an appeal. The commission may, at its discretion, grant extensions of time not to exceed twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. 511 § 1 (part), 1995; Ord. 345 § 6, 1979: Ord. 307 § 10(F), 1976) 
16.20.070 - Appeals procedure. 
If the applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the commission, he may, within fifteen (15) days after the decision of the commission, appeal in writing to the council for a hearing thereon. Such hearing need not be concluded on the day thus set but may be continued. 
(Ord. 307 § 10(G), 1976) 
16.20.080 - Exemptions. 
Any division of land not made subject to a parcel map procedure by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. 307 § 10(H), 1976) 
16.20.090 - Improvements. 
Pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, the subdivider shall install, construct, and/or provide all on or off-site improvements as recommended by the city engineer and as required by the commission, and the nature, extent and design of such improvements and the guaranteeing of completion thereof shall be in full conformance with the provisions of Chapter 16.28. 
(Ord. 307 § 10(I), 1976) 
16.20.100 - Right-of-way dedications. 
Pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, the subdivider shall provide such dedication of right-of-way and/or easements as may be required by the commission. 
(Ord. 307 § 10(J), 1976) 
16.20.110 - Waiver of direct access rights. 
The commission may, at its discretion, require that offers of dedication or dedication of streets include a waiver of direct access rights to any such streets from any property shown on the final parcel map as abutting thereon, in accord with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 307 § 10(K), 1976) 
16.20.120 - Final parcel maps. 
Within twenty-four (24) months from approval by the commission, or by the council in the case of an appeal of the tentative parcel map, and upon the accomplishment of all dedications by certification on the map and required construction of all public improvements, or the execution of an agreement and provision of sure providing therefor, and the payment of all applicable fees and charges, the applicant may file a final parcel map with the city engineer, who shall approve a final parcel map if it substantially conforms to the approved tentative parcel map and all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. The appropriate certificates, as provided by the applicant in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, shall be signed by the city engineer upon the parcel map, and the final parcel map shall be transmitted by the city clerk to the clerk of the county board of supervisors for ultimate transmittal to the county recorder. 
(Ord. 511 § 1 (part), 1995: Ord. 307 § 10 (L), 1976) 
16.20.130 - Waiver of final parcel map. 
The planning commission or city council may, at its discretion, waive the final parcel map when the division is solely for the purpose of conveyance to an adjacent property owner. 
(Ord. 307 § 10(M), 1976) 
Chapter 16.24 - DESIGN STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
16.24.010 - Conformance to plans. 
All subdivision maps shall conform to any specific plans of streets, public areas, or other projects adopted by the council. There shall be conformance to the principles and standards of the general plan or elements thereof, and to the city's zoning regulations. In the absence of a master or general plan, the street system in a proposed subdivision shall relate to the existing streets in the area adjoining the subdivision. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(A), 1976) 
16.24.020 - Arterial streets. 
Arterial streets shall conform to the standard specifications adopted by the council for subdivision improvements. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(B), 1976) 
16.24.030 - Collector streets. 
Collector streets shall conform to the standard specifications adopted by the council for subdivision improvements. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(C), 1976) 
16.24.040 - Local streets and cul-de-sacs. 
Local streets shall conform to the standard specifications adopted by the council for subdivision improvements. Cul-de-sac streets shall be not more than six hundred (600) feet in length, measured from the centerline of the intersecting through street to the center of the cul-de-sac, and shall be terminated by a turn-around of not less than fifty (50) feet radius. Local streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(D), 1976) 
16.24.050 - Frontage streets. 
Along arterial streets or highways, a frontage street separated from the arterial street or highway by an adequate separation, when indicated by a master or precise plan, may be required for access to abutting private property and local streets. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(E), 1976) 
16.24.060 - Street curves and tangents. 
A minimum centerline radius of at least five hundred (500) feet shall be used on all arterial streets. Curves on local streets shall have minimum radii of two hundred thirty-five (235) feet. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(F), 1976) 
16.24.070 - Street corner property line radii. 
Street corner radii shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(G), 1976) 
16.24.080 - Street intersections. 
Street intersections shall be as near right angles as practicable. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(H), 1976) 
16.24.090 - Alignment of continuation of streets. 
Streets which are a continuation of streets in contiguous territory shall be so aligned as to assure that their centerlines will coincide. In cases where straight line continuations are not physically possible, such centerlines shall be continued by curves. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(I), 1976) 
16.24.100 - Alleys. 
Alleys twenty (20) feet wide will be required at the rear of all lots zoned for, or to be used for, commercial or industrial purposes. Where two alleys intersect, the corner shall be cut on a straight line connecting points on both lot lines fifteen (15) feet from the projected intersection of the alleys. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(J), 1976) 
16.24.110 - Lot frontage. 
All lots shall have a frontage on a public street. Lots having double frontage should be avoided but where unavoidable should have depths of not less than two hundred (200) feet, except where access is limited to one street frontage only or such double frontage is necessitated by topographical or other physical conditions. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(K), 1976) 
16.24.120 - Lot boundary lines. 
No lot shall be divided by the boundary line of the city, a school district or any other taxing district. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(L), 1976) 
16.24.130 - Size of blocks. 
Blocks less than four hundred (400) feet in length or more than eight hundred eighty (880) feet in length may be cause for disapproval of the tentative map, but in no case shall blocks be longer than one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet in residential subdivisions. Block length is measured along the street centerline on which lots front; blocks which have no lots fronting thereon may be of lesser length. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(M), 1976) 
16.24.140 - Size of blocks adjacent to arterial streets. 
Long blocks shall be desirable adjacent to arterial streets in order to reduce the number of intersections. The dimensions of such blocks measured at right angles to such arterial streets shall be sufficient to allow for two tiers of lots except when access from lots is limited to one street frontage only. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(N), 1976) 
16.24.150 - Commercial and industrial areas. 
When property is designated for commercial or industrial use either in the general plan, an element thereof, or the zoning regulations, the plan of the subdivision shall be appropriate for such uses. Streets shall have adequate capacity to handle the anticipated traffic which will utilize them. As far as practicable, streets shall be laid out so that there will be direct access to the commercial or industrial area from arterial or collector streets without utilizing local streets traversing residential area. Lot areas and dimensions shall be adequate to accommodate the yard spaces, off-street parking facilities, and off-street loading facilities required by the zoning regulations. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(O), 1976) 
16.24.160 - Undergrounding of utilities in new subdivisions. 
Utility distribution facilities and lines, including, but not limited to, electric, communications, street lighting and cable television, shall be placed underground in any residential, commercial or industrial subdivision. The subdivider shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of this chapter, and the subdivider shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the installation of and access to such facilities. For the purposes of this chapter, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets may be placed above ground. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to utility distribution facilities and lines which do not provide services to the area being subdivided. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(P), 1976) 
16.24.170 - Streets in subdivisions adjoining unsubdivided land (acreage.) 
Where a subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land, streets which may be necessary to assure the proper subdivision of the adjoining land shall be provided to the boundary line of the subdivision. A temporary turn-a-round of a fifty (50) foot radius shall be provided at the end of a stubbed street where it is determined by the planning commission to be necessary for the movement of emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(Q), 1976) 
16.24.180 - Reserve strips. 
A.	A one-foot reserve strip shall be provided at the dead-end of a stubbed street or at the edge of a partial width street and shall be offered for dedication to the city for future street purposes. 
B.	Reserve strips shall be designated on the final map of the subdivision and shall be specifically referred to in the dedication certificate. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(R), 1976) 
16.24.190 - Private streets. 
Private streets shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(S), 1976) 
16.24.200 - Walkways. 
The subdivider may be required to dedicate and improve walkways through long blocks or to provide access to schools, parks or other public areas. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(T), 1976) 
16.24.210 - Flood hazards. 
The city engineer shall review all subdivision proposals to assure that: (a) all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; (b) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage, and (c) adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(U), 1976) 
16.24.220 - Water courses, drainage, flood control. 
The subdivider shall, subject to riparian rights, dedicate right-of-way as may be approved by the city engineer for storm drainage purposes conforming substantially with the lines of any natural water course or channel, stream or creek that traverses the subdivision, or provide by dedication further and sufficient easements or construction or both, as approved by the city engineer, to dispose of surface and stormwater. All flood control works to be constructed within selected flood lines shall be subject to approval by the Tulare County flood control district. In those cases where all or a portion of a subdivision is located within a flood plain, and the subdivider is required to construct flood control works which will be dedicated to the city, the city may require that the subdivider enter into an agreement with the city for the construction of such flood control works. The city may require the subdivider to provide security to carry out his obligations under such an agreement, and the type and amount of such security and provisions for release of such security shall be set forth in the agreement. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(V), 1976) 
Chapter 16.28 - IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.28.010 - General requirements. 
The subdivider shall install improvements in accord with the general requirements set forth in this section; provided, however, the city engineer may require changes in typical sections and details if unusual conditions appertain to the subdivision or arise during the construction to warrant such change. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(A), 1976) 
16.28.020 - Standard specifications. 
All improvements shall conform to the standard specifications adopted by the city of which three copies are on file for use and examination by the public in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(B), 1976) 
16.28.030 - Improvement plans and profiles. 
Improvement work shall not be commenced until plans and profiles for such work have been submitted to, and approved by, the city engineer. Such plans will be required before approval of the final map. All such plans and profiles shall be drawn on twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36) inch tracing cloth or paper, in ink or pencil capable of producing a legible print and shall be filed with the city engineer. An estimate of the quantities of improvement work for purposes of determining security agreement requirements, shall accompany the plans. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(C), 1976) 
16.28.040 - Improvement work—Notice. 
Improvement work shall not be commenced until the city engineer or public works director has been notified in advance, and, if work has been discontinued for any reason, it shall not be begun again until the city engineer or public works director has been notified. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(D), 1976) 
16.28.050 - Improvement work— Inspections. 
All required improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of, and to the approval of, the city engineer and/or the city public works director. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(E), 1976) 
16.28.060 - Underground utilities. 
All underground utilities, sanitary sewers and storm drains installed in streets, service roads, alleys or highways shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of such street, service road, alley or highway. Service connections for all underground utilities and sanitary sewers shall be placed to such length as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the street or alley improvements when connections thereto are made. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(F), 1976) 
16.28.070 - Streets and highways. 
All streets and highways shall be graded and surfaced to cross sections and grades approved by the city engineer. The subdivider shall improve the extension of all subdivision streets, highways, or public ways to the intercepting paving line of any county road, city street or state highway. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(G), 1976) 
16.28.080 - Structures. 
Structures shall be installed as required for drainage, access and/or public safety. Such structures shall be placed to grades and shall be of a design approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(H), 1976) 
16.28.090 - Sidewalks, curbs, gutters and driveway approaches. 
Vertical curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be installed to grades and at locations approved by the city engineer prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit on building construction on any site within the subdivision. Sidewalks shall be required on all street frontages. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(I), 1976) 
16.28.100 - Sanitary sewers. 
Sanitary sewer facilities connecting with the existing city sewer system shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades, locations, design and size approved by the city engineer. No septic tanks or cesspools shall be permitted. Location of house sewer laterals shall be marked on curb or sidewalk with a letter "S." 
(Ord. 307 § 8(J), 1976) 
16.28.110 - Storm drains. 
Storm drains shall be installed as required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(K), 1976) 
16.28.120 - Water mains and fire hydrants. 
Water mains and fire hydrants of design and layout and in locations approved by the city engineer and the public works director, shall be installed by the subdivider. Location of water services shall be marked on curb or sidewalk with a letter "W." The water system shall be installed and in operation and all required fire hydrants connected thereto prior to the commencement of building construction on any site within the subdivision. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accord with the following: 
A.	Hydrants shall be of a type approved by the public works director of the city.
B.	One fire hydrant shall be installed for each one hundred eighty thousand (180,000) square feet (including streets), of single family residential development, or major portion thereof. In areas of strip development, one hydrant shall be installed for each six hundred (600) lineal feet of residential frontage. In isolated single family residential areas, no development shall have less than two hydrants located not more than six hundred (600) feet, one from the other. 
C.	One fire hydrant shall be installed for each one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) square feet (including streets), of multiple-family or mobilehome park residential development, or major portion thereof. In areas of strip multiple-family development, one hydrant shall be installed for each four hundred fifty (450) lineal feet of residential area. In isolated areas, no development shall have less than two hydrants located not more than four hundred fifty (450) feet, one from the other. 
D.	One fire hydrant shall be installed for each ninety thousand (90,000) square feet (including streets), of commercial or industrial development, or major portion thereof. In areas of strip development, one hydrant shall be installed for each three hundred (300) lineal feet of commercial or industrial frontage. In isolated area, no development shall have less than two hydrants located not more than three hundred (300) feet, one from the other. 
E.	Combined use areas shall have fire protection installed in accord with the above criteria as approved by the city engineer. 
F.	Areas of strip development shall be as defined by the planning commission.
G.	The exact location of fire hydrants within or adjacent to subdivisions and final decision as to the number of fire hydrants to be installed for adequate fire protection shall be determined by the city engineer. 
H.	In areas where fire hydrant installation has taken place at the expense of the city, the developer shall pay a proportional share of hydrant installation. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(L), 1976) 
16.28.130 - Street signs and access barricades. 
Street signs of a type approved by the city shall be installed by the subdivider, in locations approved by the city engineer, or shall, at the subdivider's option, be installed by the city at the subdivider's expense. Two street name signs shall be installed at each four-way intersection within the subdivision and one street name sign shall be installed at each two-way or three-way intersection. Any required barricades to prevent traffic access at dead-end streets shall be provided by the subdivider. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(M), 1976) 
16.28.140 - Street lights. 
Ornamental street lights shall be installed by the subdivider, at locations approved by the city engineer, at each four-way intersection, at each three-way intersection, at each two-way intersection, at the end of each cul-de-sac, and at such other locations as necessary to provide that no point along any street within the subdivision shall be more than two hundred fifty (250) feet from a street light. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(N), 1976) 
16.28.150 - Railroad crossings. 
Provisions shall be made for any and all railroad crossings necessary to provide access to, or circulation with, the proposed subdivision including the preparation of all documents necessary for application to the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California for the establishment and improvement of such crossing. Costs for each establishment and improvement shall be the responsibility of the subdivider. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(O), 1976) 
16.28.160 - Monuments. 
Permanent monuments in accord with the standard specifications shall be set at all angle and curve points on the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, at all street intersections, at all angle points of street lines, and at all curve points, both simple and compound, of street lines. Monuments in street intersections and at angle and curve points of street lines shall be set on street centerlines unless otherwise directed by the city engineer; provided, however, such permanent monuments need not be set at angle and curve points on the exterior boundaries of the subdivision when such points on the exterior boundaries of the subdivision have been previously monumented and accepted by the city. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(P), 1976) 
16.28.170 - Lot markers. 
The engineer or surveyor shall set at all lot corners a marker not less substantial and enduring than a one-half inch iron pipe eighteen (18) inches long with a noncorroding material registered engineer's or licensed land surveyor marker on the head thereof. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(Q), 1976) 
16.28.180 - Permanent elevation benchmarks. 
Permanent elevation benchmarks of a type approved by the city engineer and referred to the city datum shall be set at locations approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(R), 1976) 
16.28.190 - Replacement of monuments and benchmarks. 
Any monument or benchmark, as required by the provisions of this chapter, which is disturbed or destroyed before acceptance of all improvements shall be replaced by the subdivider. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(S), 1976) 
16.28.200 - Setting of monuments and benchmarks. 
Monuments and benchmarks shall be set before acceptance of the improvements by the council. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(T), 1976) 
16.28.210 - Cost of improvements. 
All improvements necessary to conform the proposed subdivision to the standards and policies of the city existing at the time of filing the tentative map shall be installed at the cost of the subdivider. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(U), 1976) 
16.28.220 - Agreement. 
Prior to the approval by the council of the final map, the subdivider shall execute and file an agreement between himself and the city specifying a period (not to exceed twelve (12) months), within which he, or his agent or contractor, shall complete all improvement work, with the exception of sidewalks. Sidewalks may be installed and completed no later than one year following the completion and acceptance of all other improvements required in the subdivision; provided, however, should a dwelling be constructed on any lot in an approved subdivision before this date, the sidewalk shall be installed across the lot prior to the issuance of the occupancy permit. The subdivision agreement shall also provide that if the subdivider fails to complete such work within such periods, the city may complete the same and recover the full cost and expense thereof from the subdivider. The agreement shall provide for the inspection of all improvements by the city engineer. Such agreement shall include such stipulations as may be required to assure completion of the subdivision in accord with the requirements of the city. 
(Ord. 352 § 3, 1980: Ord. 307 § 8(V), 1976) 
16.28.230 - Security. 
The subdivider shall file with the agreement required by the provisions of Section 16.28.220, to assure his full and faithful performance thereof, a bond or security for such sum as the city engineer deems sufficient to cover the cost of the improvements. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(W), 1976) 
16.28.240 - Security—Form—Amount. 
Such security shall be in the manner, form and kind provided by the Subdivision Map Act. The security shall be in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the estimated cost of the improvements, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his agreement by the subdivider, and in the additional amount of fifty (50) percent of such sum securing the payment by the subdivider to his contractor, his subcontractors, and to persons renting equipment or furnishing labor or materials to them for improvements. 
The security provided shall guarantee maintenance and/or repair of all defects in required public improvements for a period of one year following acceptance of the improvements by the city. 
In lieu of a one hundred (100) percent performance bond and fifty (50) percent labor and materials bond, surety may be assured by the filing of an instrument of credit, cash deposit, or deposit of negotiable bonds, which creates a trust fund in an amount equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the cost of the work estimated by the city engineer. The trust fund shall be maintained in a financial institution subject to regulation by the state and federal government with the trust fund limited to the following conditions: 
A.	Faithful performance sureties, not in excess of ninety (90) percent of the estimated costs of the individual items of public improvements, may be released, or the required surety amounts may be reduced, as work is satisfactorily completed and tentatively accepted by the city. 
B.	Six months after the notice of completion for the subdivision public improvements have been recorded, the sureties securing the payment to contractors and subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment, may be released if claims have not been filed. 
C.	Ten percent of the total faithful performance surety, retained as the public improvement warranty, may be released one year after the notice of completion has been recorded. 
(Ord. 352 § 4, 1980; Ord. 307 § 8(X), 1976) 
16.28.250 - Completion of work by city. 
In the event the subdivider shall fail to complete all improvement work in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the city shall have completed the same, or if the subdivider shall fail to reimburse the city for the cost of incidental expenses or to cover the cost of replacement and the repair of existing streets or other improvements damaged in the development of the subdivision or requiring repair or replacement during the one-year guarantee period, the city shall demand performance of the agreement by the bonding company, or use the cash or other security deposit placed with the city by the subdivider to do such work and reimburse itself for the cost of work agreed to be performed by the subdivider. If the amount of the surety bond or cash deposit exceeds all costs and expenses incurred by the city, the city shall release the remainder of such bond or certification less the cost and expense incurred by the city. The subdivider shall be liable to the city for any costs additional to those secured, in an action to be brought therefore by the city. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(Y), 1976) 
16.28.260 - Cash payments. 
In addition to the required securities the subdivider shall file with the agreement required by the provisions of Section 16.28.220 a cash payment in an amount deemed sufficient by the city engineer to pay all city improvement costs, or city fees required by this title and/or other city ordinances and resulting from or required with the approval and/or construction of the subdivision. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(Z), 1976) 
16.28.270 - Assessment act financing of improvements. 
The city will require that the completion of all improvements be secured under the provisions of Sections 16.28.220 through 16.28.260 and will not permit completion of such improvements by assessment act financing. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(AA), 1976) 
16.28.280 - Improvements inspection. 
All required improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of the director of public works and/or the city engineer. The cost of inspection of work shall be paid by the subdivider in an amount, as determined by the city engineer, sufficient to pay for the inspection, and in no case less than two percent of the estimated cost of the improvements. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(BB), 1976) 
16.28.290 - Approval. 
No extension of time, progress payments from cash deposits, or releases of surety bond or cash deposit shall be made except upon the certification by the city engineer that work covered thereby has been satisfactorily completed, and upon approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(CC), 1976) 
16.28.300 - Storm drainage agreements and bonds. 
In the event the immediate construction of storm drains to serve the subdivision is not required by the city engineer, the subdivider shall execute and file an agreement between himself and the city providing that he shall contribute to the future construction of storm sewers which will be of benefit to the subdivision whether the construction is performed or required by the city or any other public district or body. The agreement shall specify the termination date of same and shall provide that the city may call for the contribution at any time during the period of the agreement; provided, however, that the city shall not have the right to call for the contribution unless plans have been made and a resolution passed to advertise for bids. The agreement shall also specify the amount of the contribution, which amount shall be determined by the city engineer. In event that the agreement described above is executed, the subdivider shall also file, to assure his full and faithful performance of the agreement, a bond sufficient to cover the amount of the contribution. The term of the bond shall cover the full term of the agreement. Such bond shall be executed by a surety company authorized to transact a surety business in the state of California and must be approved by the city attorney as to form and by the City Engineer as to sufficiency. In lieu of said bond, the subdivider may deposit cash or a certified check with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(DD), 1976) 
16.28.310 - Alternate—Storm drainage disposal fees. 
A.	When it is not possible for the developer to provide for the ultimate disposal of storm drainage into a natural channel deemed adequate by the city engineer to carry the provided flow without artificial channel or bridge construction, and a connection is made to an existing storm drain line which has been previously installed by the city, county or other governmental agency or by private parties regulated by such agency, a fee shall be paid in such amount as may be established by the city council. 
B.	Retention or detention basins for storage of stormwater may be permitted if other means of disposal are not reasonably available. Such basins may be required when necessary to reduce downstream flooding. A deep fenced basin will be avoided when possible, with shallow landscaped lakes or parks preferred. 
If all on-site drainage is retained, the disposal fee will be waived. 
If the on-site water is detained until the downstream conditions allow discharge, the fee may be reduced to an amount necessary to install a smaller storm drainage system and/or to maintain the system. 
C.	The maximum distance permitted for surface drainage in developments within the city is one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet. Storm drainage disposal fees shall be paid if surface drainage to other than an approved point of ultimate disposal is permitted. 
(Ord. 365 § 1, 1981: Ord. 307 § 8(EE), 1976) 
16.28.320 - Lot grading. 
The subdivider of any proposed subdivision shall grade the entire area thereof so that all lots drain to street grades approved by the city. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(FF), 1976) 
16.28.330 - Irrigation ditches. 
All irrigation ditches traversing, abutting or adjoining property to be subdivided under this ordinance, shall be permanently abandoned, permanently pipelined or otherwise totally enclosed in a manner satisfactory to the city, or shall be fenced with chain link fencing of minimum five feet height, or other fencing acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(GG), 1976) 
16.28.340 - Street trees. 
Street trees shall be planted in the parkway area as a part of the required subdivision development. The required trees shall be planted in accordance with the standard specifications governing spacing, size and allowable varieties. 
The subdivider shall mark on his initial plot map the variety, size and location of all native or ornamental trees having a diameter of four inches or greater. No such trees may be destroyed until the applicant has satisfied the planning commission that such tree either has no landscaping value or is so badly located that it cannot reasonably be integrated into the plan of development. The subdivider shall remove all fruit trees which may be on the property unless a responsible party posts a bond satisfactory in form to the city attorney and satisfactory in amount to the planning commission assuring adequate pruning, spraying and other cultural practice to protect neighborhood agricultural uses from diseases or pests which might be harbored or spread because of inadequately tended fruit trees in the parkway. 
(Ord. 307 § 8(HH), 1976) 
16.28.350 - CATV system—Installation of facilities. 
Whereas the cable TV licensee is authorized and permitted by the city council to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system within the city the following regulations shall apply: 
A.	Subdivider shall:
1.	Notify the cable TV licensee in writing of the schedule for trenching and installation of underground utilities; 
2.	Give the cable TV licensee an opportunity to install their facilities by guaranteeing that the trench to be utilized for cable TV facilities will be open and available for a specified reasonable period of time; 
3.	Cooperate with the cable TV licensee by scheduling other development work so that it does not conflict or interfere with the installation of cable TV. 
B.	After receiving the notice specified in subsection (A)(1) of this section, and if the cable TV licensee desires to install CATV facilities in conjunction with other underground utilities, the licensee shall: 
1.	Contact the developer, work out a mutually acceptable installation schedule and complete installation of cable television facilities within the specified time so as not to interfere with or prolong other scheduled development work. 
C.	If cable TV licensee fails to install their facilities within the specified time period and there were no adverse weather conditions or other reasons acceptable to the developer, then the developer shall have the right to close the trenches and proceed with the development. 
(Ord. 331 § 5, 1978: Ord. 307 § 8.1, 1976) 
Chapter 16.32 - LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS* 
Sections: 
 
16.32.010 - Purpose. 
To provide a mechanism that allows lot lines to be adjusted between two or more existing adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels is not created. 
(Ord. 432 § 1(A), 1989) 
16.32.020 - Procedure. 
Prior to recording the lot line adjustment with the Tulare County recorder's office, the property owner shall submit a lot line adjustment application for review and approval by the city administrator or a representative of the administrator. 
(Ord. 432 § 1(B), 1989) 
16.32.030 - Determination. 
The city administrator shall review the lot line adjustment to determine if the adjustment will create parcels which are consistent with local zoning and building ordinances. 
(Ord. 432 § 1(C), 1989) 
16.32.040 - Filing. 
The property owner shall submit the following for review. 
A.	A completed lot line adjustment application;
B.	A record of survey; and
C.	A map which reflects the information contained in the record of survey.
(Ord. 432 § 1(D), 1989) 
16.32.050 - Fee. 
At the time of filing the lot line adjustment application, a fee shall be paid to the city in such amount as may be established by the city council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. 432 § 1(E), 1989) 
16.32.060 - Recordable. 
After the approval of the lot line adjustment by the city administrator or a representative the property owner(s) shall file with the Tulare County recorder's office a record of survey for the lot line adjustment. 
(Ord. 432 § 1(F), 1989) 
Chapter 16.36 - PARK AND RECREATION FACILITIES* 
Sections: 
 
16.36.010 - General. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California. The park and recreation facilities for which dedicated land and/or payment of fees is required by this chapter are in accordance with the recreation and land use elements of the general plan of Woodlake. 
(Ord. 421 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 307 § 10.1(A), 1976) 
16.36.020 - Purpose. 
The continuing increase in the development of dwelling units and other new construction in the city, with the attendant increase in the population of the city, has the effect of diminishing the available supply of open space in the city. This has created an urgent need for the planning, acquisition, improvement and expansion of public parks, playground and recreation facilities and the means of providing additional revenues with which to finance such facilities. Therefore, the city council finds that in order to preserve, enhance and improve the quality of the physical environment of the city, to the citizens of the city the social and physical advantages resulting from the provision of orderly park, recreation and open space facilities, and to ensure that adequate park and recreational facilities will be provided in the future, it is necessary for the city to establish a procedure for the dedication of land and/or the payment of fees for park and recreation facilities. 
(Ord. 421 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 307 § 10.1(B), 1976) 
16.36.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Dwelling unit" means each single-family dwelling in each unit, an apartment, duplex, multiple-dwelling structure, condominium, cooperative or planned development, as defined in Section 11003 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California, or each stall, space or site, or location for a mobilehome or trailer in a mobilehome park or mobile home subdivision. 
"Park and recreation facilities" means parks or other such improvements, equipment or capital facilities which serve to directly meet the park and recreation needs of residents of the city. 
(Ord. 421 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 307 § 10.1(C), 1976) 
16.36.040 - General standards. 
It is found and determined that to provide for the public interest, convenience, health and welfare that five acres of city park and recreation facilities be provided for each one thousand (1,000) residents. This standard has been established based on the city's recreation and land use elements of the Woodlake general plan. 
The amount of land required for each type of dwelling shall be based on the average number of persons per household each dwelling unit type which has been estimated by the most federal census or a state census taken pursuant to Section 40200 et seq. of the Government Code. The amount of land required for park and recreation facilities for each dwelling unit type are established as follows: 
Dwelling
Type	Zone
District	Persons per
Household 	Acres/
Dwelling
Single family 	R-1-7 	3.4 	.017
Multiple family 	R-2, R-3 	3.5 	.0175
Mobilehome 	1.79 	.009	
source: 1980 U.S. Census
 
(Ord. 421 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 307 § 10.1, 1976) 
16.36.050 - Requirements. 
Prior to issuance of a building permit for construction of a new dwelling unit, as defined herein, or recordation of a final map or parcel map, where applicable, or approval of a conditional use permit, a park and recreation fee shall be paid and/or land dedicated to the city for the purpose of constructing park and recreation facilities. The fee, land dedication or dedication of land and fee payment shall be achieved in one of the following manners. 
A.	A park and recreation fee shall be paid to the city at the time of issuance of a building permit. The fee shall be established by resolution, and shall be reviewed annually. 
B.	Dedication of land shall be consistent with the acreage per dwelling unit standard contained in Section 16.36.040. The land dedication shall be made a condition of approval of a parcel map, final subdivision map or conditional use permit. 
C.	When only a portion of the land required for dedication is suitable for park and recreation, or when the general plan of the city indicates a park location and only a portion of the land is in the project's boundary, the developer shall both dedicate land and pay a fee. A fee shall be paid for that portion of land that the developer would have otherwise been required to dedicate. 
(Ord. 421 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 307 § 10.1(E), 1976) 
16.36.060 - Procedure. 
At the time of approval of the tentative parcel map, tentative subdivision map, or conditional use permit, the city council shall determine, after a report and recommendation from the planning commission, whether land will be dedicated or fees will be paid by the developer. 
(Ord. 421 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 307 § 10.1(F), 1976) 
16.36.070 - Park and recreation fee credit. 
A credit against the park and recreation fee, not to exceed fifty (50) percent of the required fee, may be given subject to the following standards. 
A.	That yards, court areas, and other open space areas required by the city zoning ordinance and the Uniform Building Code, shall not be included in the computation of park and recreation area; 
B.	Ongoing maintenance of the area is provided;
C.	That the use of the private area is restricted for park and recreation purposes and an easement or condition to that effect is recorded which will run with the land; 
D.	That the private area is reasonably adequate for park and recreation purposes;
E.	That the private area contains at least four of the following improvements:
1.	Children's play area with apparatus,
2.	Passive play area with landscaping,
3.	Family picnic area,
4.	Court game area,
5.	Turfed play area,
6.	Swimming pool,
7.	Recreation room, or
8.	Tennis courts.
The amount of the park and recreation fee credit for private park and recreation facilities shall be determined by comparing the value of the land dedication and improvements to the total required park and recreation fee and/or land dedication and subtracting the difference not to exceed fifty (50) percent of the required fee. 
(Ord. 421 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 307 § 10.1(G), 1976) 
16.36.080 - Low and moderate income housing. 
The city council may reduce, waive or supplement the park and recreation fee and/or land dedication where it finds that such waiver or reduction will promote the construction of housing for low- and moderate-income households and where it makes a finding that other monies are available to construct the necessary park and recreation facilities. 
(Ord. 421 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 307 § 10.1(H), 1976) 
16.36.090 - Limitations on the use of fees and land. 
The land and fees received under this chapter shall only be used for the purpose of providing park and recreation facilities. 
(Ord. 421 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 307 § 10.1(I), 1976) 
Chapter 16.40 - INTERIM SCHOOL FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
16.40.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted to supplement and implement Sections 65970 through 65978 of the Government Code of the state of California in order to establish a method of providing interim classrooms and related facilities for school districts having conditions of overcrowding within one or more attendance areas. All of the requirements of said Sections 65970 through 65978 of the Government Code are incorporated by reference and shall apply to school districts and the city as though expressly set forth herein. 
(Ord. 339 § 1, 1979) 
16.40.020 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to all land proposed for residential development which is owned by any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate or trust. In addition, it applies to any land proposed for residential development which is owned by the United States and any agency of the United States, the state of California and any agency of the state, a city, and any public district or political subdivision of the state of California insofar as it is legally possible to enforce this chapter, or any portion thereof, against such entities. 
(Ord. 339 § 2, 1979) 
16.40.030 - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in Section 65973 of the Government Code of the state of California shall apply throughout this chapter. In addition, the following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings: 
"Attendance area" means that portion of a school district, within the city with identifiable boundaries determined by the governing board of a school district, from which children residing therein would normally be assigned to attend a specified school in the district. 
"Developer" means any person, or any of the other entities mentioned in Section 16.40.020, who applies to have property rezoned to a residential use, applies for a discretionary permit for residential use, or files a tentative subdivision or parcel map for residential purposes. 
"Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms in a building, mobilehome or portion thereof, designed, intended to be used, or used for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping quarters. 
"Mobilehome space" means any space, including each space within a mobilehome park, designed for parking a mobilehome on a temporary, semi-permanent or permanent bases. 
"Reasonable methods for mitigating conditions of overcrowding" include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.	Agreements between a developer and the affected school district whereby temporary-use buildings will be leased to the school district for an interim period, or whereby temporary-use buildings owned by the school district will be used; 
2.	The availability of funds, the use of which would not impair the normal functioning of educational programs; 
3.	The use of funds which could be made available from the sale of surplus school district real property and/or personal property; 
4.	The use of school district property for temporary-use buildings;
5.	The use of other schools in the district not having overcrowded conditions.
(Ord. 339 § 3, 1979) 
16.40.040 - School facilities— Findings—Notification. 
Before a developer may be required to dedicate land or pay a fee in lieu thereof, pursuant to Sections 65970 through 65978 of the Government Code of the state of California and this chapter, the governing board of a school district which operates an elementary or high school within the city shall make the written findings, supported by clear and convincing evidence, required by Section 65971 of the Government Code of the state of California and notify the city council of its findings. The notice to the city council shall contain all of the following: 
A.	The findings required by Section 65971 of the Government Code of the state of California;
B.	A summary of the evidence upon which the findings are based;
C.	The reasonable methods of mitigating conditions of overcrowding which have been considered by the school district and any determination made concerning them by the district; 
D.	The precise geographic boundaries of the overcrowded attendance area or areas;
E.	Sufficient evidence on the interim classroom and related facilities needed by the school district and the costs of providing the same so that the city council can set the fees to be charged to the developer or the applicant for the building permit. 
(Ord. 339 § 4, 1979) 
16.40.050 - Action by city council. 
Upon receipt of such notice from a school district, the city council shall, by resolution, concur in the findings of the school district or state why it does not concur in such findings. 
(Ord. 339 § 5, 1979) 
16.40.060 - School facilities—General requirements. 
A.	When the city council has concurred in such findings under Section 16.40.050, the council shall not approve an ordinance rezoning property to a residential use, nor shall the city council, planning commission or city manager grant a discretionary permit for residential use, nor shall the planning commission or city council approve a tentative subdivision or parcel map for residential purposes within such area until the city council has determined whether the developer shall dedicate real property, pay fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, as a condition of the approval. Such dedications and fees shall comply fully with all of the requirements of this chapter and section 65974 of the Government Code of the state of California. 
B.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the city council may find that there are specific overriding fiscal, economic, social or environmental factors which in the judgment of the council would benefit the city and justify issuing such an approval without requiring such a dedication or payment of fees. 
(Ord. 339 § 6, 1979) 
16.40.070 - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the following types of projects: 
A.	Senior citizen housing approved, financed and/or subsidized by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and residential development restricted to adults only; provided, the developer enters into a written agreement with the affected school district that the developer will dedicate land or pay fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, when and if such restrictions cease during a period the school district has overcrowded conditions within the attendance area in which the development is located. 
B.	Conversion of existing apartment buildings to condominiums or a community apartment project, except where such apartment buildings were restricted to "adults only" and said restrictions are removed when the conversion takes place. 
C.	Alterations, remodeling, renovations or reconstruction of existing residences which do not result in additional dwelling units. 
(Ord. 339 § 7, 1979) 
16.40.080 - Fees. 
The fees payable by a developer to a school district shall be determined by the city council at or after the time that the council concurs in the findings of the school district pursuant to Section 16.40.050. No dedication of land may be required in subdivisions containing fifty (50) parcels or less. 
(Ord. 339 § 8, 1979) 
16.40.090 - Building permits. 
When the city council has determined pursuant to Section 16.40.060 of this ordinance that the developer shall dedicate real property, pay fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, a copy of the determination of the council shall be sent to the city building inspector. The city building inspector shall not issue any building permit for construction of a mobilehome park or a residence, nor any permit to relocate a residence, nor any permit to move in a mobilehome, or other such residential dwelling unit which is subject to the determination by the council unless the applicant provides proof that the required dedication of land and/or payment of fees to the school district has been made. 
(Ord. 339 § 9, 1979) 
16.40.100 - Tentative map review— Notification. 
A.	For those tentative maps on which the planning commission takes final action, the city manager shall notify the city council of the fact that the map is under consideration if a school district in which the proposed subdivision is located has made the findings specified in Section 16.40.040 and the city council has concurred in such findings in accordance with Section 16.40.050. Prior to the approval of the tentative map, the city council shall make the findings required in section 65972 of the Government Code of the state of California and make such other findings and decisions concerning imposing fees or dedications of land to school districts as may be required by Sections 16.40.010 et seq. 
B.	For those tentative maps on which the city council takes final action, the city manager shall, when the conditions set forth in subsection A of this section are applicable, so notify the city council in order that the council can make the findings and decisions referred to in subsection A prior to approval of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 339 § 10, 1979) 
16.40.110 - Tentative parcel map review—Notification. 
The city manager shall notify the city council of the fact that the tentative parcel map is under consideration if a school district in which the proposed subdivision is located has made the findings specified in Section 16.40.040 and the city council has concurred in such findings in accordance with Section 16.40.050. Prior to the approval of the tentative parcel map, the city council shall make the findings required in Section 65972 of the Government Code of the state of California and make such other findings and decisions concerning imposing fees or dedications of land to school districts as may be required by Sections 16.40.010 et seq. 
(Ord. 339 § 11, 1979) 
Chapter 16.44 - STORM DRAINAGE DESIGN STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
16.44.010 - Scope. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all subdivisions, resubdivisions, and parcel maps wholly or partially within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. 452 § 1, 1990) 
16.44.020 - Standards. 
A.	The subdivider of any proposed subdivision shall grade the entire area thereof so that all lots drain to street grades, unless otherwise stipulated by the city engineer. 
B.	Subdivided areas within the city shall be required to provide the necessary storm drainage system and conduct the stormwater to a point designated by the city engineer. 
C.	Subdivided areas within the city shall be required to pay acreage fees to cover the costs of storm drainage improvements in the various drainage areas within the city except as otherwise stated in this chapter. The acreage fees for the various drainage areas will be set and amended from time to time by resolution. 
D.	All fees collected by the city pursuant to this section shall be used for the construction and maintenance of storm drainage systems and such payments shall not relieve the subdivider of the responsibility for installing adequate storm drainage on land being subdivided. The storm drainage improvements shall be consistent with this chapter or Ordinance No. 307 of the city. 
E.	Fees for storm drainage improvements may be waived if the city engineer finds that a specific drainage area within the city does not require off-site storm drainage improvements or that storm drainage can properly be handled on-site. 
(Ord. 452 § 2, 1990) 
Title 17 - ZONING[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 579, § 1, adopted April 25, 2011, in effect repealed former tit. 17, chs. 17.04—17.104, and enacted a new tit. 17, chs. 17.01—17.72 as set out herein. Former tit. 17 pertained to zoning. Please see ordinance list for derivation.
 
Chapter 17.01 - THE ZONING ORDINANCE 
Sections: 
 
17.01.01 - Adoption. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 65000 et. seq., a zoning ordinance is hereby adopted by the city of Woodlake. The zoning ordinance, hereinafter referred to as the ordinance or the title, is a document that regulates the use of land in the city limits of Woodlake. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.01.02 - Purpose and objectives. 
The ordinance is enacted to protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to facilitate the planning of the city in a precise and orderly manner consistent with the Woodlake general plan. In support of this purpose, the ordinance is adopted in order to implement the following objectives: 
A.	Provide standards for the orderly development of the city;
B.	Conserve natural resources;
C.	Maintain and protect the value of property;
D.	Ensure the provision of adequate open space for light, air, and recreation;
E.	Promote the economic stability of existing land uses that conform to the general plan and protect them from intrusions by inharmonious or harmful land uses; 
F.	Permit the development of residential, office, commercial and industrial land uses in accordance with the general plan in order to strengthen the city's economic base; 
G.	Protect the character of the city's downtown and its residential neighborhoods;
H.	Provide the private sector with a document upon which it can base investment decisions;
I.	Inform the public where certain types of development will occur in the community as well as the development standards to which they will develop; and 
J.	Coordinate with the county of Tulare in regards to the use of land within the city's general plan planning area, and the standards to which development will conform if it occurs outside the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.01.03 - Authority and general plan consistency. 
This ordinance, consistent with Government Code Section 65860, is the primary document by which the city implements the goals, policies and actions of the general plan. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.01.04 - Components. 
The zoning ordinance shall be composed of zoning and planning regulations and the official zoning map, hereinafter referred to as the zoning map. The zoning and planning regulations will control the use of land, the density and intensity of development, the uses and locations of structures, the height and size of structures, the yard areas around structures, and development standards for land uses. The zoning map will delineate the location of zone districts within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.01.05 - Application. 
This ordinance shall apply to all property within the Woodlake city limits whether owned by private persons or by public entities, including the federal government, the State of California or any of its agencies or political subdivisions; by school districts or special districts, by any city or county, or by any authority or district organized under the laws of the state. Lands that are exempt from these regulations are: public streets and alleys, and railroad rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.02.01 - Review authority. 
The planning director shall resolve any questions that involve the interpretation or application of this ordinance. The director may seek the advice of the city attorney before rendering a decision on a matter of interpretation. The director's opinion may be appealed to the planning commission. The planning commission shall review the section of the ordinance in question and shall set forth its finding as a resolution. This finding shall stand unless appealed to the city council. 
Periodically, a party may wish to use property for purposes, that, while consistent with the regulations of the district in which the property is located, is inconsistent with the purpose of the district in the opinion of the planning director. When such findings are made by the director, they shall be forwarded to the party whose proposed use of property is in question, and to the planning commission. The planning commission shall review the director's findings and shall set forth their decision as a resolution. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.02.02 - Minimum requirements. 
The provisions set forth in this ordinance are the minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. This ordinance shall not interfere with any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties; however, where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use or land within the city limits or on development standards or regulations that apply to these land uses, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.02.03 - Language. 
The word "shall" will mean a mandatory action and not an action that is discretionary. The word "may" will be deemed permissive. The present tense includes past and future tenses; the future tense includes the present tense. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter gender. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular. The word "includes" shall not limit a term to specific examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like, kind or character. 
The word "city" shall mean the City of Woodlake. The words "city council" and "planning commission" shall mean the City Council and Planning Commission of the City of Woodlake. 
The word "district" shall have the same meaning as the word "zone," and the word "classification" shall have the same meaning as "zoning." 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.02.04 - Interpretation. 
Where there is a difference in meaning between the text of this ordinance and any caption, illustration, table or appendix within this ordinance, the text of the ordinance shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.02.05 - Classification of uses. 
Persons may wish to use property for purposes that are not specifically listed in the permitted or conditional use lists of a district. To accommodate such uses, the planning director is authorized to make the necessary findings to add the use to the permitted or conditional use list of the district the property is located. 
The planning director shall determine if the use is substantially similar in character, intensity and compatibility to the uses listed on the permitted or conditional use lists of the applicable district. These findings shall be set forth in an administrative resolution. Based on these findings, the use shall be processed in the same manner as the use listed on the permitted or conditional use list of the district. Where the applicant disputes the finding of the planning director, the decision may be appealed to the planning commission. 
Where a use has been added to the permitted or conditional use list of a district by the planning director or planning commission, the ordinance shall be updated to reflect the addition. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.02.06 - Nonconforming lots. 
A lot or parcel that is shown on an approved and recorded subdivision or parcel map for and which a deed or valid contract of sale was recorded prior to the adoption of this ordinance, and having an area, frontage or depth less than the standard for the district in which the lot or parcel is located, may be used for any permitted or conditional use listed in the applicable district. 
Two or more adjoining vacant lots with continuous frontage, each with an area or frontage less than the standard for the district in which the lots are located, and under a single ownership as of the date of the adoption of this ordinance, shall be subject to all regulations for the district in which the lots are located. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.02.07 - Validity. 
If any chapter, section or subsection of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the remaining chapters or sections of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.02.08 - Continuity of provisions. 
The provisions of this ordinance, insofar as they are substantially the same as previously existing ordinance provisions relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not new enactments. Any actions or proceedings commenced, or permits issued pursuant to any previously existing ordinance shall not be affected by the enactment of this ordinance; but such actions, proceedings and permits shall hereafter conform to this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.02.09 - Fees and charges. 
Fees and charges called for by this ordinance shall be set forth in a resolution of the city council establishing a comprehensive schedule of fees and charges relating to zoning and planning applications. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.03 - ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
17.03.01 - Authority. 
This ordinance is the primary tool for implementing the goals, policies and action programs of the Woodlake general plan and the Subdivision Ordinance. The authority to execute this ordinance shall be vested with the city council, planning commission and other named city officials and public bodies. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.03.02 - City council. 
The city council shall be the final authority on zoning ordinance amendments, appeals, general plan and specific plans and their amendments, development agreements, and other permit procedures that may be included in or added to the ordinance. 
The city council shall also be responsible for appointing persons to the planning commission and other decision-making bodies that may be named in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.03.03 - Planning commission. 
The planning commission shall be the final authority on classification of uses, site plan review permits, and other permits that may be included in or added to this ordinance. In addition, the commission shall provide recommendations to the city council by means of a resolution that details findings on zoning ordinance amendments, conditional use permits, general and specific plans and amendments thereto, development agreements, and other permits procedures that may be added to the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.03.04 - Planning director. 
The planning director, or assigned representative, shall be the authority on the interpretation, administration and enforcement of the ordinance. Further, the planning director shall be the final authority on minor deviations and administrative planning permits. Other duties of the director shall include preparation of reports, resolutions and ordinances that come before the planning commission and city council. 
The director shall serve as a member of the site plan and design review committees, shall prepare administrative resolutions on decisions made by the site plan or design review committees, shall provide notification to persons who are in violation of any provision of this ordinance, and shall undertake any other responsibilities that may be included in or added to this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.03.05 - Head building official. 
The head building official, or assigned representative, shall be the authority on the interpretation, administration and enforcement of the Uniform Building Code. Other duties of the building official shall include enforcement of specified provisions of this ordinance, securing ordinance clearance prior to issuing a building permit, serving as a member of the Site plan review committee, notification of persons who are in violation of specified provisions of this ordinance and other responsibilities that may be included in or added to this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.03.06 - City engineer. 
The city engineer, or assigned representative, shall be the authority on the interpretation, administration and enforcement of the Subdivision Ordinance, the city of Woodlake Improvement Standards Manual, and other responsibilities that may be included in or added to this ordinance. Other duties of the city engineer shall include preparation of reports and recommendations on all engineering matters that come before the planning commission and city council, membership on the site plan review committee, and notification of persons who are in violation of specified provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.03.07 - Site plan review committee. 
The site plan review committee shall provide findings and recommendations to the planning commission on site plan review and conditional use permits. The committee shall ensure that developments shall be designed and constructed consistent with the development and design standards contained in this ordinance. 
At a minimum, the site plan review committee shall include the planning director, head building official, city engineer, city public works director, fire marshall, and other persons who may possess expertise in fields that would benefit the site plan review process. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.03.08 - Design review committee. 
The design review committee shall provide findings and recommendations to the planning commission on architectural elevations and drawings for projects that are prepared for new or existing buildings within a planned development or downtown combining district. The committee shall ensure that developments shall be designed and constructed consistent with the development and design standards contained in these combining districts. 
The design review committee shall be composed of persons appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.04 - PUBLIC HEARINGS 
Sections: 
 
17.04.01 - Notice requirements. 
Prior to the planning commission or city council holding a public hearing on a permit, amendment, agreement, variance, use permit or other application specified by this ordinance, a public hearing notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation not less than ten days prior to said hearing. If there is no such paper of general circulation, the pubic hearing notice shall be posted at least ten days prior to the hearing in at least three public places within the city. 
Where this ordinance requires a public hearing notice, notice shall be given in all of the following ways: 
A notice shall be mailed or delivered not less than ten days prior to the hearing to the owner of the subject property or the owner's authorized agent, the project applicant, and to owners of properties within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property as shown on the latest equalized tax assessment role. If the number of properties exceeds one thousand (1,000), the city, in lieu of a notice that is mailed or delivered, may provide a notice by placing a display notice of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation at least ten days prior to the public hearing. 
A notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered not less than ten days prior to the hearing to each local agency expected to provide water, waste water collection and treatment, streets, schools and other essential services or facilities, and whose ability to provide these services and facilities may be significantly affected. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.04.02 - Contents. 
The public hearing notice, whether published in a newspaper of general circulation or posted at a public place within the city, shall include the following information: date, time and place of the public hearing; the hearing body or officer that will consider the public hearing item; and a general description of the project and its location. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.04.03 - Failure to receive notice. 
Failure of any person or entity to receive a public hearing notice shall not invalidate any proceedings or applications authorized by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.04.04 - Continuation. 
Any public hearing conducted under this ordinance may be continued. The commission or council shall announce the time and place to which the hearing is to be continued. No further public hearing notice shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.06 - APPEALS 
Sections: 
 
17.06.01 - Who may appeal. 
Any person dissatisfied with a decision of the planning director or planning commission on a planning application may appeal the decision. The decision of the planning director can be appealed to the planning commission, and the planning commission's decision to the city council, unless otherwise not allowed by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.06.02 - Appeal requirements. 
An appeal of a decision by the planning director or planning commission shall be completed by filing a letter with the city clerk no later than ten calendar days after the day on which the decision was made. The appeal shall state the name of the person appealing the decision, the decision that is being appealed and the reasons for the appeal, including an error, abuse or discretion or a decision that is not supported by the findings in the record. 
In the case of an appeal of a planning commission decision, the commission will be notified of the appeal at their next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.06.03 - Effect of appeal. 
The filing of an appeal shall have the effect of staying the issuance of any permit or procedure until such time as the matter on appeal is resolved. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.06.04 - Public notice and hearing. 
Upon receipt of an appeal by the city clerk, a public hearing shall be held within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of the appeal. The public hearing notice for said appeal shall comply with the notice requirements detailed in Chapter 17.04.  
17.06.05 - Decision on appeal. 
The planning commission or city council shall hold a public hearing on the matter that is under appeal. The appellate body shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision under appeal. At the discretion of the appellate body, the public hearing may be continued. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.06.06 - Appeals by the planning director. 
The planning director may appeal a decision of the planning commission to the city council if the director finds that: 
A.	The action of the planning commission constitutes new policies for the city;
B.	The action is contrary to established city policy;
C.	The action will have a significant fiscal impact on the city;
D.	The action is not in compliance with city zoning or subdivision ordinances; or
E.	The action is inconsistent with the Woodlake general plan.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.06.07 - New appeal. 
When an appeal has been denied by an appellate body, no new application for the same or substantially same application shall be filed with the city for twelve (12) months following the final decision on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.08 - ZONING DISTRICTS 
Sections: 
 
17.08.01 - Purpose. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 65800 et. seq., the State of California grants to the city the power to apply zoning to lands within its city limits. The purpose of zoning is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. The constitutionality of zoning has been upheld by the United States Supreme Court since 1926, Euclid v. Amber Realty Company (272 US 365). 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.08.02 - Definition. 
Zoning is the division of a city into districts, and the regulation within those districts of the height, appearance and bulk of buildings and structures; the area of a lot that may be occupied and the size of required open spaces; the density of development; and the use of buildings and land, including for commercial, agricultural, industrial, residential and other uses. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.08.03 - Districts. 
Districts are areas within the city which certain zoning regulations apply. The districts hereby established and into which the city is divided are as follows: 
District symbol	Zone district
A	Agriculture
UR	Urban reserve
RA	Rural residential
R-1-5	Single-family residential, one unit per 5,000 square feet
R-1-7	Single-family residential, one unit per 7,000 square feet
R-1-10	Single-family residential, one unit per 10,000 square feet
R-2	Multifamily residential, one unit per 3,000 square feet
R-3	Multifamily residential, one unit per 1,500 square feet
C-N	Neighborhood commercial
C-C	Central commercial
C-S	Service commercial
PO	Professional office
MU	Mixed use
ML	Light industrial
O	Open space
AP	Airport
RSC	Resource, school and conservation
 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.08.04 - Combining districts. 
Combining districts are areas in Woodlake that may require special regulations due to unique locational features, architecture, historical significance, resources or hazards. These districts may be combined with any of the districts identified in Section 17.08.03. For purposes of identification on the official zoning map for Woodlake, districts that are joined with a combining district shall be suffixed with the name of the combining district. As an example, the zoning for an area of Woodlake that is classified central commercial (CC) and contains the historic downtown, which demands unique design regulations, would read as CC-DD, central commercial, downtown design district. Woodlake combining districts are as follows: 
PD	Planned development
CD	Cottage development
DD	Downtown design
 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.08.05 - Official zoning map. 
The zoning boundaries of the aforementioned districts and combining districts shall be shown on the official zoning map of Woodlake. The official zoning map shall be a part of this ordinance and shall remain on file with the Woodlake planning and building department and displayed on the city's website. 
The Woodlake planning and building department shall be responsible for amending the official zoning map when land is annexed into the city or when property is reclassified from one zone to another. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.08.06 - District boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any district shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply. 
District boundaries shall coincide with either streets, alleys, property lines or railroad rights-of-way unless otherwise shown on the official zoning map. Where doubt exists as to the location of a district boundary within a block, the boundary line shall be the nearest interior lot line existing at the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.08.07 - District regulations. 
Except as provided for in this ordinance, no structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or enlarged, nor shall any site or structure be used in a manner other than is included among the uses hereinafter listed as permitted or conditionally permitted in the district in which the structure or site is located. In addition, no structure or part thereof shall be erected, reconstructed, enlarged or moved into any district that exceeds the development standards for the district in which the structure is located. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.08.08 - Effect of annexation, vacation or abandonment on district boundaries. 
Where property is annexed into Woodlake or where property is vacated or abandoned, the following zoning rules shall apply: 
A.	Unless pre-zoned, all property annexed into the city shall be classified to the urban reserve (UR) district. 
B.	Woodlake may pre-zone unincorporated territory adjoining the city for the purpose of determining the zoning that will apply to such territory in the event of annexation. Zoning of the subject territory will be conducted consistent with Chapter 17.46 zoning ordinance amendments and will become effective when annexation has been completed. 
C.	All property that lacks zoning because property has be vacated or abandoned shall be zoned to the centerline of the vacated property consistent with the zoning on the adjoining property. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.08.09 - Effect on other regulations. 
Where more restrictive standards, use regulations or rules are established by any other applicable statutes, ordinances or regulations than is established by this ordinance, the provisions of such statutes, ordinances or regulations shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.10 - A ZONE (AGRICULTURE) 
Sections: 
 
17.10.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the agriculture (A) district is to preserve lands for long-term agricultural uses within the city limits of Woodlake. The application of this zone will protect lands utilized for raising of crops, livestock, and horticultural specialties from urban encroachment. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.10.02 - Permitted uses. 
A.	Single-family dwellings;
B.	The raising of crops, livestock and horticultural specialties;
C.	Home occupations subject to the requirements detailed in Chapter 17.64; 
D.	Mobile homes subject to design standards contained in Chapter 17.16; 
E.	Second residential units subject to the requirements contained in Chapter 17.64. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.10.03 - Accessory uses. 
Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as the permitted use including barns, stables, storage tanks, windmills, silos, and other outbuildings; private garages and carports; agricultural storehouses, garden structures, greenhouses; and recreation rooms, hobby shops and swimming pools. Development standards for some of these accessory structures are provided in Chapter 17.64. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.10.04 - Conditional uses. 
A.	Packinghouses and cold storage;
B.	Fruit stands;
C.	Retail plant nurseries; and
D.	Other uses when determined to be similar by the planning director;
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.10.05 - Development standards. 
A.	Site Area. The minimum parcel size shall be twenty (20) acres.
B.	Lot Frontage and Depth. Each parcel shall not have less than one hundred (100) feet of frontage on a public street. There shall be no requirement for parcel depth. 
C.	Building Height. The maximum height of residential structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet; the maximum height of agricultural accessory structures shall be seventy-five (75) feet. 
D.	Lot Coverage. No requirement.
E.	Yards.
1.	Front Yard: Thirty-five (35) feet.
2.	Side Yard: Ten feet.
3.	Rear Yard: Twenty-five (25) feet.
Exhibit 10-1: Selected Zoning Standards
  
F.	Fences, Walls and Hedges.
1.	Front Yards: Fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed three feet in height. A fence or wall may be four feet in height if more than fifty (50) percent of the structure is see-through. 
2.	Rear and Side Yards: Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed seven feet in height along any side or rear property line. 
G.	Off-street Parking and Loading Facilities.
1.	For single-family dwellings, a minimum of two covered parking stalls shall be required. Each space shall have a minimum width of ten feet and a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet. All parking spaces and driveways shall have a concrete or asphalt surface. Where a carport or garage is open to a public street, a driveway of at least twenty (20) feet shall be provided between the face of the garage or carport and the back of sidewalk or property line, whichever distance is greater. 
2.	Non-residential uses in this district shall provide off-street parking consistent with Chapter 17.68 parking and loading. 
H.	Signs. Signs shall be consistent with the requirements detailed in Chapter 17.69 signs. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.12 - UR ZONE (URBAN RESERVE) 
Sections: 
 
17.12.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the urban reserve (UR) district is to preserve undeveloped land, including agricultural lands, within the city as open space until such time as the conversion to an urban use is determined to be appropriate and feasible. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.12.02 - Permitted uses. 
A.	Single-family dwellings;
B.	The raising of crops, livestock and horticultural specialties;
C.	Home occupations subject to the requirements detailed in Chapter 17.64; 
D.	Mobile homes subject to design standards contained in Chapter 17.16; 
E.	Second residential units subject to the requirements contained in Chapter 17.64. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.12.03 - Accessory uses. 
Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as the permitted use including barns, stables, storage tanks, windmills, silos, and other outbuildings; private garages and carports; agricultural storehouses, garden structures, greenhouses; and recreation rooms, hobby shops and swimming pools. Development standards for some of the accessory structures are provided in Chapter 17.64. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.12.04 - Conditional uses. 
A.	Fruit stands;
B.	Retail plant nurseries; and
C.	Other uses when determined to be similar by the planning director.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.12.05 - Development standards. 
See Exhibit 12-1 for illustration of selected standards. 
A.	Site Area. The minimum parcel size shall be twenty (20) acres.
B.	Lot Frontage and Depth. Each parcel shall not have less than one hundred (100) feet of frontage on a public street. There shall be no requirement for parcel depth. 
C.	Building Height. The maximum height of residential structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet; the maximum height of agricultural accessory structures shall be seventy-five (75) feet. 
D.	Lot Coverage. No requirement.
E.	Yards.
1.	Front Yard: Thirty-five (35) feet.
2.	Side Yard: Ten feet.
3.	Rear Yard: Twenty-five (25) feet.
Exhibit 12-1: Selected Zoning Standards 
Exhibit 12-1: Selected Zoning Standards
  
F.	Fences, Walls and Hedges.
1.	Front Yards: Fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed three feet in height. A fence or wall may be four feet in height if more than fifty (50) percent of the structure is see-through. 
2.	Rear and Side Yards: Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed seven feet in height along any side or rear property line. 
G.	Off-street Parking and Loading Facilities.
1.	For single-family dwellings, a minimum of two covered parking stalls shall be required. Each space shall have a minimum width of ten feet and a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet. All parking spaces and driveways shall have a concrete or asphalt surface. Where a carport or garage is open to a public street, a driveway of at least twenty (20) feet shall be provided between the face of the garage and the back of sidewalk or property line, whichever distance is greater. 
2.	Non-residential uses in this district shall provide off-street parking consistent with Chapter 17.68 parking and loading. 
H.	Signs. Signs shall be consistent with the requirements detailed in Chapter 17.69 Signs. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.14 - RA RURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.14.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the rural residential (RA) district is to provide residential living areas which combine certain advantages of both urban and rural locations at very low residential densities. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.14.02 - Permitted uses. 
A.	Single-family dwellings;
B.	The raising of crops, livestock and horticultural specialties. Livestock shall not exceed two animal units per acre; 
C.	Home occupations subject to the requirements detailed in Chapter 17.64; 
D.	Second residential units consistent with Chapter 17.64; 
E.	Small day care homes (eight of fewer children) consistent with Chapter 17.64; 
F.	Manufactured homes subject to design standards contained in Chapter 17.16. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.14.03 - Accessory uses. 
A.	Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as the permitted use including barns, stables, storage tanks, windmills, silos, and other outbuildings; private garages and carports; agricultural storehouses, garden structures, greenhouses; and recreation rooms, hobby shops and swimming pools. Development standards for some of these accessory structures are provided in Chapter 17.64. 
B.	Temporary subdivision sales office and signs consistent with Chapter 17.69. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.14.04 - Conditional uses. 
A.	Public and quasi-public uses of an educational or religious type including public and parochial elementary schools, junior high schools, high schools and colleges; nursery schools, nonprofit schools and colleges; churches and other religious institutions; 
B.	Public and private charitable institutions, hospitals, convalescent homes, sanitariums, or rest homes for mental, drug or alcoholic cases; 
C.	Public uses of an administrative, recreational, public service or cultural type including city, county, state or federal administrative centers and courts, libraries, museums, art galleries, police and fire stations and other public buildings; and public playgrounds, parks, and community centers; 
D.	Private noncommercial clubs and lodges;
E.	Large day care homes consistent with Chapter 17.64; 
F.	Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products grown on the premises; and
G.	Other uses when determined to be similar by the planning director.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.14.05 - Development standards. 
A.	Site Area. The minimum parcel size shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
B.	Lot Frontage and Depth. Each parcel shall not have less than one hundred (100) feet of frontage on a public street. The minimum depth of each parcel shall be one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
C.	Building Height. The maximum height of residential structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet; the maximum height of agricultural accessory structures shall be seventy-five (75) feet. 
D.	Lot Coverage. The maximum site area covered by structures shall be forty (40) percent.
E.	Yards.
1.	Front Yard: Thirty (30) feet.
2.	Side Yard: Ten feet. For corner and reverse corner lots, the side yard adjoining the street shall be one-half of the required front yard. 
3.	Rear Yard: Twenty-five (25) feet.
4.	Garage/carport Setback: A garage or carport that faces a public street shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the back of sidewalk or property line, which ever distance is greater. 
5.	Exceptions:
a.	Architectural features, including eaves, sills, chimneys, cornices, and bay windows may extend up to thirty (30) inches into a required side yard. 
b.	Uncovered, unenclosed porches, platforms or landings that do not extend above the first floor elevation may extend a maximum of six feet into a front or rear yard setback area. Railings up to thirty (30) inches in height may be installed on any of these features. 
F.	Distances between structures. The minimum distance between a residential dwelling and another structure on the same lot shall be ten feet. 
Figure 14-1: R-A Zone Development Standards
  
G.	Fences, walls and hedges.
1.	Front yards: Fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed three feet in height. A fence or wall may be four feet in height if more than fifty (50) percent of the structure is see-through. 
2.	Rear and side yards: Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed seven feet in height along any side or rear property line. 
H.	Off-street parking and loading facilities.
1.	For single-family dwellings, a minimum of two covered parking stalls shall be required. Each space shall have a minimum width of ten feet and a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet. All parking spaces and driveways shall have a concrete or asphalt surface. Where a carport or garage is open to a public street, a driveway of at least twenty (20) feet shall be provided between the face of the garage and the back of sidewalk or property line, whichever distance is greater. 
2.	Non-residential uses in this district shall provide off-street parking consistent with Chapter 17.68. 
I.	Signs. Signs shall be consistent with the requirements detailed in Chapter 17.69. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.14.06 - Design Standards. 
The following standards shall apply to all single-family dwellings, including manufactured and mobile homes, that are constructed in the RA district. 
A.	The minimum width of a single-family dwelling or a manufactured or mobile home shall be twenty (20) feet. 
B.	Mobile homes must be certified under the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974. 
C.	All residential dwellings shall be attached to a permanent foundation.
D.	The roofs of all residential dwellings shall be composed of composition shingles, ceramic tiles, metal or wood shakes or shingles. The pitch of the roof shall not be less than three inches of vertical rise over twelve (12) inches of horizontal run. The roof overhang shall not be less than twelve (12) inches around the building perimeter. 
E.	The exterior siding of all residential dwellings shall be composed of wood, masonry, plaster, or metal sheathing. 
F.	Siding shall extend to the ground, except when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation or retaining wall is used in which case the siding material need only extend to the top of the foundation or wall. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.16 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) 
Sections: 
 
17.16.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the R-1 districts is to provide living areas within Woodlake where development is consistent with the Woodlake General Plan and is limited to low density concentrations of single-family dwellings, and where regulations are designed to promote the following: 
1.	Encourage a suitable environment for family life;
2.	Provide space for community facilities, including parks, schools, churches and other facilities that will complement the residential environment; 
3.	A circulation system that is pedestrian-friendly, is properly connected to the community at-large and adjacent residential developments, and provides for alternative forms of transportation; 
4.	An attractive and unique neighborhood design that ranges from streetscape to the residential dwellings themselves; and 
5.	The conservation of valuable resources ranging from water to energy.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.16.02 - Subdistricts. 
In order to adequately plan for single-family development at various densities, the R-1 district is further divided into the following subdistricts: R-1-7 (single-family residential, one unit per seven thousand (7,000) square feet) and R-1-10 (single-family residential, one unit per ten thousand (10,000) square feet). 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.16.03 - Permitted uses. 
A.	Single-family dwellings;
B.	The raising of crops and horticultural specialties;
C.	Home occupations subject to the requirements detailed in Chapter 17.64; 
D.	Second residential units consistent with Chapter 17.64; 
E.	Small day care homes consistent with Chapter 17.64; 
F.	Mobile homes subject to design standards contained in Section 17.16.11 of this chapter; 
G.	Licensed group care homes (six or fewer persons) consistent with Chapter 17.64; 
H.	Transitional and supportive housing (six or fewer persons);
I.	Drainage basins;
J.	Water well sites;
K.	Utility facilities, including electrical substations, elevated pressure tanks, and communication equipment buildings; 
L.	Model homes and subdivision sales offices associated with the development of a residential subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.16.04 - Accessory uses. 
A.	Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as the permitted use including private garages and carports; storage buildings; garden structures, greenhouses; and recreation rooms, hobby shops and swimming pools. Development standards for some of these accessory structures are provided in Chapter 17.64. 
B.	Temporary subdivision sales office and signs consistent with Chapter 17.69; 
C.	Enclosed temporary construction materials storage yards associated with the development of a residential subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.16.05 - Prohibited uses. 
The outside placement, parking, storage or stockpiling of equipment, materials, vehicles, furnishings or commodities, not associated with the normal use, maintenance or repair of a residential dwelling or its accessory structures, and including but not limited to farm equipment, porta-potties, picking ladders, agricultural produces, produce boxes and bins, trucks larger than one ton, scrap materials, inoperable vehicles and appliances or furniture. 
Outside storage restrictions shall be exempt for persons conducting yard or garage sales that have an appropriate city permit. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.16.06 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted upon the granting of a use permit consistent with Chapter 17.48: 
A.	Public and quasi-public uses of an educational or religious type including public and parochial elementary schools, junior high schools, high schools and colleges; nursery schools, nonprofit schools and colleges; churches and other religious institutions; 
B.	Public and private charitable institutions, hospitals, convalescent homes, sanitariums, or rest homes for mental, drug or alcoholic cases; 
C.	Public uses of an administrative, recreational, pubic service or cultural types including city, county, state or federal administrative centers and courts, libraries, museums, art galleries, police and fire stations and other public buildings, structures and facilities; 
D.	Senior citizen housing project; and
E.	Large family day care facility.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.16.07 - Development standards. 
A.	Site Area. The minimum site area for Woodlake's single-family residential districts are as follows: 
District	Minimum Site Area
R-1-7	7,000 square feet
R-1-10	10,000 square feet
 
B.	Lot Frontage and Depth.
1.	The minimum lot frontage for each of Woodlake's single-family residential districts are as follows: 
District	Corner Lot	Interior Lot
R-1-7	75 feet	70 feet
R-1-10	85 feet	80 feet
 
2.	The minimum lot depth for each of Woodlake's single-family residential districts are as follows: 
District	Corner Lot	Interior Lot
R-1-7	100 feet	100 feet
R-1-10	120 feet	120 feet
 
Figure 16-1: R-1 Zone - Lot Width and Depth
  
C.	Building Height. The maximum height of residential structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet; the maximum height of accessory structures shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
D.	Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage by structures shall be forty (40) percent.
E.	Yard requirements.
1.	Front Yard:
District	Minimum Front Yard
R-1-7	20 feet
R-1-10	25 feet
 
On a lot situated between residential lots with buildings that are set back less than the minimum distance required by this section, the minimum front yard set back shall be the average of the front yard set backs of the adjoining lots. 
2.	Side Yard:
District	Minimum Side Yard
R-1-7	5 feet
R-1-10	10 feet
 
On the street side of a corner lot, the side yard setback shall be one-half the required front yard setback. Where an interior lot is less than fifty feet in width, each side yard shall be a minimum of ten percent of the lot width, or three feet, whichever is greater. 
3.	Garage/carport setback: A garage or carport that faces a public street shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the back of sidewalk or property line, whichever is greater. 
4.	Exceptions:
a.	Architectural features, including eaves, sills, chimneys, cornices, and bay windows may extend up to thirty (30) inches into a required side yard. 
b.	Uncovered, unenclosed porches, platforms or landings that do not extend above the first floor elevation may extend a maximum of six feet into a front or rear yard setback area. Railings up to thirty (30) inches in height may be installed on any of these features. 
5.	Rear Yard:
District	Minimum Rear Yard
R-1-7	20 feet
R-1-10	25 feet
 
Figure 16-2: R-1 Zone - Yard Setbacks (Shown on various lot types)
  
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.16.08 - Fences, walls and hedges. 
A.	Front Yards: Fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed three feet in height. A fence or wall may be four feet in height if more than fifty (50) percent of the structure is see-through. 
B.	Rear and Side Yards: Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed seven feet in height along any side or rear property line. 
Figure 16-3: R-1 Zone - Fencing Standards 
  
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.16.09 - Off-street parking and loading facilities. 
A.	For single-family dwellings, a minimum of two covered parking stalls shall be required. Each space shall have a minimum width of ten feet and a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet. All parking spaces and driveways shall have a concrete or asphalt surface. Where a carport or garage is open to a public street, a driveway of at least twenty (20) feet shall be provided between the face of the garage and the back of sidewalk or property line, whichever distance is greater. 
B.	Non-residential uses in this district shall provide off-street parking consistent with Chapter 17.68. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.16.10 - Signs. 
Signs shall be consistent with the requirements detailed in Chapter 17.769. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.16.11 - Design standards. 
The following standards shall apply to all single-family dwellings, including manufactured and mobile homes, which are constructed in the R-1 district. 
A.	The minimum width of a single-family dwelling or a manufactured or mobile home shall be twenty (20) feet. 
B.	Mobile homes must be certified under the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974. 
C.	All residential dwellings shall be attached to a permanent foundation.
D.	The roofs of all residential dwellings shall be composed of composition shingles, ceramic tiles, metal or wood shakes or shingles. The pitch of the roof shall be less than three inches of vertical rise over twelve (12) inches of horizontal run. 
E.	The exterior siding of all residential dwellings shall be composed of wood, masonry, plaster, or metal sheathing. 
F.	Siding shall extend to the ground, except when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation or retaining wall is used in which case the siding material need only extend to the top of the foundation or wall. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.16.12 - Energy conservation. 
A.	Seventy-five (75) percent of all garages shall be located on the west side of a home that fronts onto an east/west roadway, and on the north side of a home that fronts onto a north/south roadway (this location feature will conserve energy). 
B.	All ground-mounted heating/cooling units shall be located on the east side of a home that fronts onto an east/west roadway, and on the north side of a home that fronts onto a north/south roadway (this location feature will conserve energy). 
C.	Residents are encouraged to plant deciduous trees on the south and west sides of their home (this design feature will conserve energy). 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.16.13 - Water conservation. 
A.	All residential projects that contain more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of landscaped area shall comply with the regulations contained in Chapter 17.66. 
B.	All residential subdivisions containing more than ten lots shall comply with the regulations contained in Chapter 17.66. 
C.	Not more than fifty (50) percent of the front yard landscaping shall be devoted to turf. Shrubs planted in the front yard shall be drought-tolerant species (these design features will conserve water). 
D.	All parkways shall be five feet wide, shall be depressed and shall be provided with a drip irrigation line that runs from the adjoining home to the parkway. Parkways will be planted with a deciduous street tree. The parkway will be covered with mulch; turf will not be permitted. 
E.	All front yard landscaping shall be provided with an automated irrigation system that employs water-conserving irrigation features. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.18 - RM ZONE MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
Sections: 
 
17.18.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the RM districts is to provide living areas within Woodlake where development is consistent with the Woodlake general plan and is limited to medium and high density concentrations of multi-family dwellings, and where regulations are designed to promote the following: 
1.	Encourage a suitable environment for family life, recognizing that a significant part of the multi-family population is adult, including senior citizens; 
2.	Provide space for community facilities, including parks, schools, churches and other facilities that will complement the residential environment; 
3.	An attractive and unique project that encompasses well-designed buildings with ample landscape and off-street parking; 
4.	The conservation of valuable resources ranging from water to energy; and
5.	Housing that is affordable to low- and moderate-income households and to households that have special housing needs. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.18.02 - Subdistricts. 
In order to adequately plan for multi-family development at various densities, the RM district is divided into the following subdistricts: RM-2 (multi-family residential, one unit per three thousand (3,000) square feet) and RM-3 (multi-family residential, one unit per one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet). 
The RM-2 district is consistent with the "medium density" residential designation in Woodlake's land use element; the RM-3 district is consistent with the Element's "high density" residential designation. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.18.03 - Permitted uses. 
A.	Single-family dwellings, duplexes and tri-plexes;
B.	Multi-family complexes;
C.	Senior citizen apartments;
D.	Transitional and supportive housing (six or fewer persons);
E.	Home occupations subject to the requirements detailed in Chapter 17.64; 
F.	Small day care homes consistent with Chapter 17.64; 
G.	Mobile homes subject to design standards contained in Chapter 17.16; 
H.	Licensed group care homes (six or fewer persons) consistent with Chapter 17.64; 
I.	Drainage basins;
J.	Water well sites;
K.	Utility facilities, including electrical substations, elevated pressure tanks, and communication equipment buildings; and 
L.	Model apartments and rental offices associated with the development of a multi-family development. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.18.04 - Accessory uses. 
A.	Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as the permitted use including private garages and carports; storage buildings; garden structures, greenhouses; and recreation rooms, hobby shops and swimming pools. Development standards for some of these accessory structures are provided in Chapter 17.64. 
B.	Temporary apartment rental office and signs consistent with Chapter 17.69. 
C.	Enclosed temporary construction materials storage yards associated with the development of an apartment complex. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.18.05 - Prohibited uses. 
The outside placement, parking, storage or stockpiling of equipment, materials, vehicles, furnishings or commodities, not associated with the normal use, maintenance or repair of a residential dwelling or its accessory structures, and including but not limited to farm equipment, porta-potties, picking ladders, agricultural produces, produce boxes and bins, trucks larger than one ton, scrap materials, inoperable vehicles and appliances or furniture. 
Outside storage restrictions shall be exempt for persons conducting yard or garage sales that have an appropriate city permit. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.18.06 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted upon the granting of a use permit consistent with Chapter 17.48: 
A.	Public and quasi-public uses of an educational or religious type including public and parochial elementary schools, junior high schools, high schools and colleges; nursery schools, nonprofit schools and colleges; churches and other religious institutions; 
B.	Public and private charitable institutions, hospitals, convalescent homes, sanitariums, or rest homes for mental, drug or alcoholic cases; 
C.	Public uses of an administrative, recreational, pubic service or cultural types including city, county, state or federal administrative centers and courts, libraries, museums, art galleries, police and fire stations and other public buildings, structures and facilities; public playgrounds, parks and community centers; 
D.	Rest homes and nursing homes; boardinghouses and rooming houses;
E.	Labor camps;
F.	Emergency shelters; and
G.	Bed and breakfast.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.18.07 - Site plan review. 
No multi-family uses may be established on any lot or site in this district until a site plan has been submitted and approved consistent with Chapter 17.54. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.18.08 - Development standards. 
Also illustrated in Exhibit 18-1: RM Zone Development Standards. 
A.	Unit Density. The maximum unit density for Woodlake's multi-family residential districts are as follows: 
District	Maximum Unit Density
RM-2	3,000 square feet per dwelling unit
RM-3	1,500 square feet per dwelling unit
 
B.	Lot Frontage, Depth and Area.
1.	The minimum lot frontage for each of Woodlake's multi-family residential districts are as follows: 
District	Corner Lot	Interior Lot
RM-2	60 feet	60 feet
RM-3	50 feet	50 feet
 
2.	The minimum lot depth for each of Woodlake's multi-family residential districts are as follows: 
District	Corner Lot	Interior Lot
RM-2	100 feet	100 feet
RM-3	100 feet	100 feet
 
Figure 18-1: RM Zone Development Standards
  
3.	The minimum area of all newly-created lots for each of Woodlake's multi-family residential districts are as follows: 
District	Minimum Lot Area
RM-2	6,000 square feet
RM-3	5,000 square feet
 
C.	Building Height. The maximum height of residential structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet; the maximum height of accessory structures shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
D.	Lot Coverage.
District	Coverage
RM-2	50 percent
RM-3	80 percent
 
E.	Yard Requirements.
1.	Front Yard:
District	Minimum Front Yard
RM-2	15 feet
RM-3	15 feet
 
On a lot situated between residential lots with buildings that are set back less than the minimum distance required by this section, the minimum front yard set back shall be the average of the front yard set backs of the adjoining lots. 
2.	Side Yard:
District	Minimum Side Yard
RM-2	5 feet
RM-3	5 feet
 
On the street side of a corner lot, the side yard setback shall be one-half the required front yard set back. 
Where an interior lot is less than fifty (50) feet in width, each side yard shall be a minimum of ten percent of the lot width, or three feet, whichever is greater. 
3.	Rear Yard:
District	Minimum Rear Yard
RM-2	Ten feet, however, where construction in the rear yard involves more than one story, the rear yard shall be increased by five feet. 
RM-3:	Ten feet, however, where construction in the rear yard involves more than one story, the rear yard shall be increased by five feet. 
 
4.	Garage/Carport Setback: A garage or carport that faces a public street shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the back of sidewalk or property line, whichever distance is greater. 
5.	Minimum distance between buildings on the same lot: The minimum distance between a structure used for human habitation and another structure (such as another dwelling, detached garage, carport, or storage shed, etc.) shall be ten feet. 
6.	Exceptions:
a.	Architectural features, including eaves, sills, chimneys, cornices, and bay windows may extend up to thirty (30) inches into a required side yard. 
b.	Uncovered, unenclosed porches, platforms or landings that do not extend above the first floor elevation may extend a maximum of six feet into a front or rear yard setback area. Railings up to thirty (30) inches in height may be installed on any of these features. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.18.09 - Fences, walls and hedges. 
A.	Front Yards: Fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed three feet in height. A fence or wall may be four feet in height if more than fifty (50) percent of the structure is see-through. 
B.	Rear and Side Yards: Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed seven feet in height along any side or rear property line. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.18.10 - Off-street parking and loading facilities. 
A.	For multi-family dwellings, a minimum of 1.5 parking stalls shall be required. Half of these stalls shall be covered. All parking spaces, driveways and parking lots shall have a concrete or asphalt surface. 
Where a carport or garage is open to a public street, a driveway of at least twenty (20) feet shall be provided between the face of the garage and the back of sidewalk or property line, whichever distance is greater. 
B.	Non-residential uses in this district shall provide off-street parking consistent with Chapter 17.68. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.18.11 - Signs. 
Signs shall be consistent with the requirements detailed in Chapter 17.69. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.18.12 - Special conditions. 
All multi-family projects that contain sixteen (16) or more units shall be required to provide an on-site manager. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.18.13 - Design standards. 
The following standards shall apply to all multi-family developments, excluding duplexes. 
A.	The architectural design of multi-family developments to the best extent possible should be compatible with adjacent residential neighborhoods. Compatibility may involve the use of materials, color, scale, roof pitch, and other physical features that would assist in blending the new multi-family development with surrounding residential uses. 
B.	The architectural design of multi-family developments that are not adjacent to or within existing residential neighborhood shall consider the following design standards: 
1.	Long, unbroken building facades and box-like building forms should be discouraged. Building facades should be varied by alternating building planes, building material, color and building heights (see Figure 18-2). Other approaches to providing interesting multi-family structures could involve alternating the patterns of window and door opening; the use of projections such as balconies, porches and awnings; and changing setbacks and softening the building facade with tree plantings. 
2.	Setbacks should be varied with individual structures.
3.	The roof lines of multi-family structures should be altered to provide a more interesting horizontal view. 
4.	There should only be a maximum of two adjacent multi-family units with identical wall and roof line planes. 
5.	It is important that door and window openings be articulated on the face of the multi-family structure. Articulation can include framing, insets or shutters for windows and insets, framing and color for doorways. 
6.	Materials used for multi-family developments should be durable and of low-maintenance. Where possible, exterior siding should provide a distinctive appearance, such as river rock, brick, or flagstone. 
7.	Stairways should be designed as an integral part of the overall multi-family development. Materials used on the building should be incorporated into the stairway design (see Figure 18-3). Stairways should not be a dominant exterior feature on the building but should be sited so that they are not visually prominent. 
Figure 18-2: Architectural Design Concepts
  
Figure 18-3: Stairways
  
C.	Parking lots and carports or garages should be designed to blend in with the overall multi-family project. 
1.	Long, unbroken rows of parking spaces are discouraged. Where possible, these rows should be broken by landscaped islands, buildings, or garages. 
2.	Carports should contain design elements that make the structures visually interesting, such as finished roofs or articulated support beams. 
3.	Parking lots should be screened from adjacent properties with a seven-foot solid block wall that is softened with landscaping. 
D.	Special design treatment should be given to the entryways and street corners of multi-family projects. 
1.	The street corners of multi-family projects should be enhanced visually with features like landscaping, walls, lighting, fountains, trellises, signage, public art, etc. 
2.	Project entryways should be given special treatment such as stamped concrete driveways, metal gates with pilasters or landscaped medians. 
E.	All common areas shall be provided with landscaping and an automated irrigation system. Landscaping shall be consistent with Chapter 17.66. 
F.	All trash enclosures shall be surrounded by a six-foot solid block wall and a metal gate. A trellis or arbor shall be constructed over the trash enclosure. The exterior to the enclosure shall be landscaped. 
G.	All roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view.
H.	Where a multi-family development abuts a single-family use or a commercial use, a seven-foot solid block wall shall be constructed along the property line common to the two land uses. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.18.14 - Energy conservation. 
A.	To the greatest extent possible, the multi-family buildings should run east and west to take advantage of passive solar design opportunities (see Figure 18-4). 
B.	All ground-mounted heating/cooling units shall be located on the east side of a building that fronts onto an east/west roadway, and on the north side of a building that fronts onto a north/south roadway (this location feature will conserve energy). 
C.	The landscaping plan for the multi-family complex should plant deciduous trees on the south and west sides of the residential complex (this location design feature will conserve energy). 
Figure 18-4: Energy Conservation
  
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.18.15 - Water conservation. 
A.	All residential projects that contain more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of landscaped area shall comply with the regulations contained in Chapter 17.66. 
B.	Not more than fifty (50) percent of the front yard landscaping shall be devoted to turf. Shrubs planted in the front yard shall be drought-tolerant species (these design features will conserve water). 
C.	All parkways shall be five feet wide, shall be depressed and shall be provided with a drip irrigation line that runs from the multi-family development to the parkway (see Figure 18-5). Parkways will be planted with deciduous street trees. The parkway will be covered with mulch; turf will not be permitted. 
D.	All front yard landscaping shall be provided with an automated irrigation system that employs water-conserving irrigation features. 
Figure 18-5: Parkway Design
  
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.20 - PO ZONE (PROFESSIONAL OFFICE) 
Sections: 
 
17.20.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the PO district is to provide areas in Woodlake where professional offices can be constructed outside of commercial districts; to provide opportunities for older residential dwellings to be converted to an office use; and to protect offices from noise, disturbances, traffic hazards and other objectionable influences which would adversely affect professional practices from being exercised. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.20.02 - Permitted uses. 
A.	Offices which deal primarily with professional services, in which goods, wares and merchandise are not commercially created, sold or exchanged, including medical offices, engineering, architecture, planning and landscape consulting, law, accounting, bookkeeping, and brokerage offices; 
B.	Prescription pharmacies in connection with a medical office building, medical clinic or hospital; 
C.	Medical and dental laboratories and clinics;
D.	Single and multi-family residential uses in accordance with the RM-3 district;
E.	Utility and infrastructure improvements including water wells, communication equipment buildings, above ground water tanks, and storm drainage basins. 
F.	Public parks; and
G.	Accessory uses.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.20.03 - Accessory uses. 
A.	Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as the permitted use including private garages and carports; storage buildings; garden structures, greenhouses; and recreation rooms, and hobby shops. 
B.	Temporary apartment rental office and signs consistent with Chapter 17.69. 
C.	Enclosed temporary construction materials, storage yards associated with the development of an apartment complex. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.20.04 - Conditional uses. 
A.	Churches, parsonages and other religious institutions;
B.	Public and parochial elementary schools;
C.	Public uses of a cultural type including libraries, museums, art galleries, and other similar structures and facilities; 
D.	Mortuaries;
E.	Antique stores, restoration and sales;
F.	Bed and breakfast establishments.
G.	Restaurants;
H.	Hobby and art supply shops;
I.	Public and private charitable institutions, hospitals (excluding animal hospitals) and sanitariums, rest homes or nursing homes for mental or drug addict or liquor addict facilities; and 
J.	Beauty and barber shops, beauty and hair saloons, and day spas.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.20.05 - Site plan review. 
No office, residential, or other uses listed above may be established on any lot or site in this district until a site plan has been submitted and approved consistent with Chapter 17.54. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.20.06 - Development standards. 
A.	Site Area/Unit Density. The minimum lot area for this district shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet. The maximum unit density for multi-family development shall be one dwelling unit per three thousand (3,000) square feet of lot area. 
B.	Lot Frontage and Depth.
1.	The minimum lot frontage for the PO district is as follows:
District	Corner Lot	Interior Lot
PO	65 feet	60 feet
 
2.	The minimum lot depth for the PO district is as follows:
District	Corner Lot	Interior Lot
PO	80 feet	100 feet
 
C.	Building Height. The maximum height of residential structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet; the maximum height of accessory structures shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
Figure 20-1: PO Zone Development Standards
  
D.	Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage by structures constructed on a lot in this district shall be sixty (60) percent. 
E.	Yard Requirements.
1.	Front Yard:
a.	The minimum front yard shall be fifteen (15) feet.
b.	On a lot situated between residential lots with buildings that are set back more than the minimum distance required by this section, the minimum front yard set back shall be the average of the front yard set backs of the adjoining lots. 
c.	A garage or carport that faces a public street shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the back of sidewalk or property line, whichever distance is greater. 
d.	Uncovered, unenclosed porches, platforms or landings that do not extend above the first floor elevation may extend a maximum of six feet into a front or rear yard setback area. Railings up to thirty (30) inches in height may be installed on any of these features. 
2.	Side Yard:
a.	The minimum side yard shall be five feet.
b.	On the street side of a corner lot, the side yard setback shall be one-half the required front yard set back. 
c.	Where an interior lot is less than fifty (50) feet in width, each side yard shall be a minimum of ten percent of the lot width, or three feet, whichever is more. 
d.	Architectural features, including eaves, sills, chimneys, cornices, and bay windows may extend up to thirty (30) inches into a required side yard. 
3.	Rear Yard:
a.	The minimum rear yard shall be ten feet, however, where construction in the rear yard involves more than one story, the rear yard shall be increased by ten feet. Accessory structures less than seven feet in height may be located within the rear yard setback area. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.20.07 - Fences, walls and hedges. 
A.	Front Yards: Fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed three feet in height. A fence or wall may be four feet in height if more than fifty (50) percent of the structure is see-through. 
B.	Rear and Side Yards: Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed seven feet in height along any side or rear property line. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.20.08 - Off-street parking and loading facilities. 
A.	For multi-family dwellings, a minimum of 1.5 parking stalls shall be required per dwelling unit. Half of these stalls shall be covered. All parking spaces, driveways and parking lots shall have a concrete or asphalt surface. Where a carport or garage is open to a public street, a driveway of at least twenty (20) feet shall be provided between the face of the garage and the back of sidewalk or property line, whichever distance is greater. 
B.	Non-residential uses in this district shall provide off-street parking consistent with Chapter 17.68. 
C.	Where the subject lot has access to an alley, the parking lot should be located off the alley, between the subject building and the alley. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.20.09 - Signs. 
Signs shall be consistent with the requirements detailed in Chapter 17.69. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.20.10 - Distance between structures. 
The minimum distance between structures shall be ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.20.11 - Design standards. 
A.	For single-family dwellings that are being converted to an office use, the redevelopment of the structure should be sensitive to architectural details associated with the original design of the structure including roof pitch, exterior building materials, porch dimensions and design, roof materials, exterior colors, door locations and design, window patterns, materials and treatment; and landscaping. 
B.	Parking for any residential structure being converted to an office use shall be located behind the structure or shall utilize the existing garage or carport and the driveway leading to these structures. 
C.	Handicapped parking and its associated signage, ramps, railings and platforms shall be located at the rear or side of the building. 
D.	Signage for the office use shall be of a scale and design that complements the architectural style of the building. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.21 - MU ZONE (MIXED USE) 
Sections: 
 
17.21.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the mixed use (MU) district is to implement the goals and policies of the Woodlake general plan, land use element. The MU district is intended to allow for a combination of residential, office and commercial uses. The district does not permit service commercial or industrial uses given that these land use categories can create noise, odor, vibration, visual and traffic impacts that would adversely impact adjoining uses in the mixed use project. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.21.02 - Application. 
All projects proposed for the MU district shall be processed through Woodlake's conditional use permit process detailed in Chapter 17.48. All use permit applications shall be accompanied by a project master plan the requirements of which are described in Section 17.21.09 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.21.03 - Conditional uses. 
Any combination of uses listed as a permitted or conditional use in the following zone districts: R-1, RM-2, RM-3, CN, PO or CC. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.21.04 - Site plan review. 
No development shall be constructed on any lot or site in this district until a site plan has been submitted and approved consistent with Chapter 17.54. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.21.05 - Development standards. 
The following development standards together with applicable standards contained in a combining district, if applicable, shall apply to all land and structures within this district. Development standards are illustrated in Exhibit 21-1. 
A.	Site Area. The minimum parcel size shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet.
B.	Lot Frontage and Depth. No requirement.
C.	Building Height. The maximum height of commercial structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
D.	Yards.
1.	Front: No requirement.
2.	Side: No requirement unless the subject property abuts a residential district, wherein the minimum side yard shall be ten feet. 
3.	Rear: No requirement unless the subject property abuts a residential district, wherein the minimum side yard shall be ten feet. 
Exhibit 21-1: MU Zone Standards
  
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.21.06 - Fences, walls and hedges. 
A.	Where a mixed-use development abuts a residential district, a seven-foot solid block wall shall be constructed between the two uses. 
B.	Rear and Side Yards: Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed seven feet in height along any side or rear property line. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.21.07 - Off-street parking and loading facilities. 
A.	Uses in the MU District shall provide off-street parking consistent with Chapter 17.68. 
B.	Parking lots constructed in MU district shall be designed and constructed so that within five years of construction, fifty (50) percent of the parking lot is shaded by trees. 
C.	Parking lots shall be separated from buildings by raised sidewalks or curbing.
D.	Parking lots for uses that require a large number of parking stalls should be divided into a series of connected parking lots. 
E.	Parking lots shall be designed to accommodate solid waste pick-up.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.21.08 - Signs. 
Signs shall be consistent with the requirements detailed in Chapter 17.69. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.21.09 - Landscaping. 
A.	A landscaping and irrigation plan shall be submitted on all neighborhood commercial shopping centers to the planning director for review and approval. If the landscaping area exceeds two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, the landscaping and irrigation plan shall comply with the regulations contained in Chapter 17.66. 
B.	The landscaping and irrigation plan shall show a tree-planting scheme in the parking lot that will result in fifty (50) percent of the parking lot being shaded within five years. 
C.	The landscaping and irrigation plan shall provide for a minimal amount of turf and shall incorporate a variety of xerophytic plants. 
D.	Parking lots should be screened from adjacent public roadways by low walls and/or hedges. 
E.	Vines and climbing plants should be used on buildings, trellises and perimeter garden walls in order to soften the appearance on the buildings. 
F.	All trash enclosures shall be sounded by a six-foot solid block wall and shall be covered by a trellis system. The gate shall be metal. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.21.10 - Design standards. 
A.	Large buildings shall be designed to avoid the appearance of a box-like structure.
B.	Roof lines should not run in a continuous plane for more than fifty (50) feet without offsetting or jogging the roof line. 
C.	Wall planes should not run for more than fifty (50) feet without a change in plane, color or material. 
D.	Where appropriate, the use of awnings is encouraged.
E.	The scale, appearance, architectural style, height, and building materials of surrounding residential neighborhoods should be given consideration when the neighborhood commercial buildings are being designed. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.22 - NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (CN) 
Sections: 
 
17.22.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the neighborhood commercial district is to provide for the development of small scale, low intensity commercial uses that serve the daily needs of residential neighborhoods that are in close proximity to the shopping center. The design of neighborhood commercial centers shall be of a scale and design that is compatible with the surrounding residential neighborhoods. In addition, the design of the center should provide for pedestrian access from surrounding neighborhoods. 
The types of permitted and conditional uses that would be allowed in a neighborhood commercial center would be limited to uses that local residents would require on a daily basis including small scale grocery stores, barber and beauty shops, clothes cleaning establishments, banks, restaurants, etc. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.22.02 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the CN district. 
A.	Professional offices;
B.	Retail stores and service establishments that supply commodities or services that meet the convenience needs of residents from one or more neighborhoods; 
C.	Bakery;
D.	Bank;
E.	Barber and beauty shops;
F.	Drug stores;
G.	Dry cleaning establishments;
H.	Gift shops;
I.	Medical clinics;
J.	Food stores, delicatessens, and convenience stores;
K.	Newsstand and magazine stores;
L.	Restaurants;
M.	Self-service laundry and dry cleaning establishments;
N.	Drainage basins, water well sites, and utility facilities, including electrical substations, elevated pressure tanks, and communication equipment buildings; and 
O.	Other uses that are added to this list by the planning director consistent with Chapter 17.02. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.22.03 - Conditional uses. 
The following conditional uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.48. 
A.	Churches and other religious institutions;
B.	Cafes and restaurants serving alcoholic beverages;
C.	City, county, state or federal administrative offices, libraries, police and fires stations; 
D.	Single-family dwellings; provided, that such dwellings are for the exclusive use of the person or persons owning or operating the commercial use on the same site; and further provided, that each site so used shall be subject to the use, site area, coverage and yard requirements of the RM-2 district; and 
E.	Single family dwellings; provided, that the dwelling is a reconstruction or an addition to an existing dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.22.04 - Site plan review. 
No development shall be constructed on any lot or site in this district until a site plan has been submitted and approved consistent with Chapter 17.54. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.22.05 - Development standards. 
See also Exhibit 22-1: CN Zone Development Standards. 
A.	Site Area. The minimum parcel size shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet and the maximum parcel size shall be three acres. 
B.	Lot Frontage and Depth. No requirement.
C.	Building Height. The maximum height of commercial structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet; the maximum height of accessory structures shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
D.	Yards.
1.	Front: Fifteen (15) feet.
2.	Side: No requirement unless the subject property abuts a residential district, wherein the minimum side yard shall be ten feet. 
3.	Rear: No requirement unless the subject property abuts a residential district, wherein the minimum side yard shall be ten feet. 
Exhibit 22-1: CN Zone Development Standards
  
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.22.06 - Fences, walls and hedges. 
A.	Front Yards: Fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed three feet in height. A fence or wall may be four feet in height if more than fifty (50) percent of the structure is see-through. 
B.	Rear and Side Yards: Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed seven feet in height along any side or rear property line. 
C.	Where the neighborhood shopping center abuts a residential district, a seven-foot solid block wall shall be constructed between the two uses. Where appropriate, openings should be provided to allow pedestrians to travel between the two uses.  
17.22.07 - Off-street parking and loading facilities. 
A.	Uses in the CN District shall provide off-street parking consistent with Chapter 17.68. 
B.	Parking lots constructed in CN district shall be designed and constructed so that within five years of construction, fifty (50) percent of the parking lot is shaded by trees. 
C.	Parking lots shall be separated from buildings by raised sidewalks or curbing.
D.	Parking lots for uses that require a large number of parking stalls should be divided into a series of connected parking lots. 
E.	Parking lots shall be designed to accommodate solid waste pick-up.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.22.08 - Signs. 
Signs shall be consistent with the requirements detailed in Chapter 17.69.  
17.22.09 - Landscaping. 
A.	A landscaping and irrigation plan shall be submitted on all neighborhood commercial shopping centers to the planning director for review and approval. If the landscaping area exceeds two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, the landscaping and irrigation plan shall comply with the regulations contained in Chapter 17.66. 
B.	The landscaping and irrigation plan shall show a tree-planting scheme in the parking lot that will result in fifty (50) percent of the parking lot being shaded within five years. 
C.	The landscaping and irrigation plan shall provide for a minimal amount of turf and shall incorporate a variety of xerophytic plants. 
D.	Parking lots should be screened from adjacent public roadways by low walls and/or hedges. 
E.	Vines and climbing plants should be used on buildings, trellises and perimeter garden walls in order to soften the appearance on the buildings. 
F.	All trash enclosures shall be sounded by a six-foot solid block wall and shall be covered by a trellis system. The gate shall be metal. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.22.10 - Design standards. 
A.	Large buildings shall be designed to avoid the appearance of a box-like structure.
B.	Roof lines should not run in a continuous plane for more than fifty (50) feet without offsetting or jogging the roof line. 
C.	Wall planes should not run for more than fifty (50) feet without a change in plane, color or material. 
D.	Where appropriate, the use of awnings is encouraged.
E.	The scale, appearance, architectural style, height, and building materials of surrounding residential neighborhoods should be given consideration when the neighborhood commercial buildings are being designed. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.24 - CENTRAL COMMERCIAL (CC) 
Sections: 
 
17.24.01 - Purpose. 
The C-C district is intended primarily to serve as the central district of Woodlake. This district permits the accommodation and enhancement of several existing dominant functions within the central business district including shopping, retailing goods of a durable nature and office uses, as well as serving as the financial, government and entertainment center of Woodlake. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.24.02 - Permitted uses. 
A.	Professional offices;
B.	Parking lots;
C.	Retail stores and service establishments;
D.	Apparel, shoe, and jewelry stores;
E.	Art and antique stores;
F.	Automobile sales, new vehicles;
G.	Automobile supply stores;
H.	Bakery, food, and dairy product stores;
I.	Banks and other lending institutions;
J.	Barber and beauty shops;
K.	Coffee, candy, florist, tobacco and health food stores;
L.	Department, drug and appliance stores;
M.	Fire and police stations;
N.	Florists, travel bureaus, printing shops;
O.	Food stores, delicatessens, meat markets, convenience stores, and health stores;
P.	Gift shops, hobby supply stores, toy stores, stationary shops and pet stores;
Q.	Hotels and motels;
R.	Hardware stores, locksmiths and sporting goods stores;
S.	Liquor and tobacco stores, newsstands and magazine stores, and messenger offices;
T.	Medical buildings;
U.	Private clubs, meeting halls, and senior housing;
V.	Restaurants, ice cream parlors, sandwich shops, and outdoor cafes;
W.	Apartments behind or above permitted uses in accordance with the RM-2 zone district;
X.	Incidental and accessory structures located on the same site as a permitted or conditional use; and 
Y.	Other uses added by the planning director consistent with Chapter 17.02. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.24.03 - Conditional uses. 
A.	Bus depots and transit stations;
B.	City, county, state and federal administrative offices and libraries;
C.	Card rooms, pool halls, bars, cocktail lounges and night clubs;
D.	Drive-in restaurants;
E.	Upholstery shops;
F.	Electrical, gas or utility sub-stations; above ground water tanks, or pumping stations;
G.	Service stations;
H.	Pool halls or card rooms;
I.	Second-hand stores;
J.	Auction houses;
K.	Bars, cocktail lounges, and night clubs;
L.	Car washes, automated and self-service; and
M.	Other uses added by the planning director consistent with Chapter 17.02.  
17.24.04 - Prohibited uses. 
A.	Adult book stores;
B.	Marijuana dispensaries;
C.	Sexually-oriented businesses.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.24.05 - Site plan review. 
No development shall be constructed on any lot or site in this district until a site plan has been submitted and approved consistent with Chapter 17.54. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.24.06 - Development standards. 
A.	Site Area: No requirements.
B.	Lot Frontage and Depth.
1.	Lot Frontage: No requirement.
2.	Depth: No requirement.
C.	Building Height: Forty-five (45) feet.
D.	Yards.
1.	Front yard: New buildings shall be placed so that at least one half of the property line along a public street shall adjoin a building wall (see Exhibit 24-1). 
2.	Side wall: None required except that buildings on corner lots shall be placed so that at least half of the side lot line along a public street shall adjoin a building wall (see Exhibit 24-1). 
3.	Rear yard: None required.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.24.07 - Off-street parking and loading facilities. 
A.	Uses in the C-C district shall provide off-street parking consistent with Chapter 17.68. 
B.	Parking lots shall be separated from buildings by raised sidewalks or curbing.
C.	Parking lots shall be designed to accommodate solid waste pick-up.
D.	Parking lots shall be located to the side or rear of new buildings constructed in the C-C district. 
Exhibit 24-1: Yard Requirements
  
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.24.08 - Signs. 
Signs shall be consistent with the requirements detailed in Chapter 17.69. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.24.09 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping can be provided in containers that are located in the front of a store front. A minimum of five feet of sidewalk shall remain open and clear for pedestrian passage. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.24.10 - Design standards. 
Development shall be consistent with the design guidelines in Chapter 17.44. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.24.11 - Special conditions. 
A.	All processes, businesses and services shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-street parking and off-street loading areas, gasoline sales, outdoor dining areas, nurseries, Christmas tree sales lot, bus depots, and public utility stations. 
B.	No use shall be permitted, and no processes, equipment, or materials shall be used which are found to be injurious to persons living or working in the vicinity by reasons of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried waste, noise, vibration, illumination, glare of unsightliness or to involve any hazard of fire or explosion. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.28 - SERVICE COMMERCIAL (CS) 
Sections: 
 
17.28.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the service commercial (C-S) district is to provide locations for wholesale and heavy commercial uses and service establishments that are not suited for other commercial zones. It also provides areas for certain light industrial uses which manufacture, assemble or package products within buildings and which do not emit fumes, odor, dust, smoke or gas. 
The service commercial uses shall be developed in buildings and complexes that exhibit high standards of design, including sites that include generous amounts of landscaping, screens outdoor storage, repair and assembling areas from the public's view and minimizes the impact of noise, vibrations, and light on surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.28.02 - Permitted uses. 
A.	Automobile, truck and motorcycle repair and servicing, including engine repair, brakes and alignment, radiator repair, upholstery shop, tire sales and service, auto body and paint shop, and stereo sales and installation; 
B.	Furniture, warehouses and van services;
C.	Glass shops;
D.	Gun shops;
E.	Heating, air conditioning and sheet metal shops;
F.	Household and office equipment and machinery repair;
G.	Kennels;
H.	Laundries, self-service laundry, and dry cleaning establishments;
I.	Linen supply services;
J.	Locksmiths;
K.	Lumber yards;
L.	Machinery sales and rentals;
M.	Mortuaries;
N.	Motorcycle sales and repair;
O.	New car, sales and service;
P.	Nurseries and garden supply stores;
Q.	Plumbing and sheet metal shops;
R.	Public utility yards;
S.	Refrigeration equipment sales and service;
T.	Rug and carpet cleaning;
U.	Shoe repair shop;
V.	Sign painting shops;
W.	Stone and monument yards;
X.	Storage yards for commercial vehicles;
Y.	Trailer sales, service and rentals;
Z.	Used car, sales and service;
AA.	Warehouses and mini-storage facilities;
BB.	Welding and blacksmith shops;
CC.	Wholesale establishments;
DD.	Utility and water works facilities;
EE.	Parking lots;
FF.	Offices and retail stores incidental to and on the same site with a service commercial establishment; 
GG.	Farm labor housing and emergency shelters; and
HH.	Other uses that are added to this list by the planning director consistent with Chapter 17.02. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.28.03 - Accessory uses. 
Those uses and structures incidental to the commercial use of the landing including, trash storage areas and bins; required loading and unloading facilities; radio and television antennas; the storage and use of fuels for fleet use; showrooms and administration offices; and other uses and structures, which are determined by the planning director to be incidental to the commercial use of the land. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.28.04 - Conditional uses. 
A.	Public buildings and grounds;
B.	Churches and other religious institutions;
C.	Single-family dwellings; provided that such dwellings are for the exclusive use of the person or persons owning or operating the commercial use on the same site; and further provided, that each site so used shall be subject to the use, site area, coverage and yard requirements of the RM-2 district; 
D.	Single-family dwellings; provided, that the dwelling is a reconstruction or an addition to an existing dwellings; and 
E.	Other uses that are added to this list by the planning director consistent with Chapter 17.02. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.28.05 - Site plan review. 
No development shall be constructed on any lot or site in this district until a site plan has been submitted and approved consistent with Chapter 17.54. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.28.06 - Development standards. 
See also Exhibit 28-1: CS Zone Standards. 
A.	Site Area. The minimum site area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
B.	Lot Frontage and Depth. No requirement.
C.	Building Height. The maximum height shall be forty-five (45) feet. The maximum height of accessory structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
Exhibit 28-1: CS Zone Standards
  
D.	Yards.
1.	Front: Fifteen (15) feet.
2.	Side: No requirement, except where the CS district abuts a R district in which case the side yard requirement shall be ten feet. A side yard adjacent to a public street shall have a setback of ten feet. 
3.	Rear: No requirement, except where the CS district abuts a R district in which case the rear yard requirement shall be ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.28.07 - Fences, walls and hedges. 
A.	Where the CS district abuts a R district, a seven-foot solid block wall shall be constructed on the property line that separates the two districts. 
B.	The outdoor storage of equipment or materials shall be screened from the view of any adjoining public right-of-way with a six-foot solid block wall, or six-foot chain-linked fence with slats and landscaping. 
C.	Fencing in the front yard shall be limited to wrought-iron fencing.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.28.08 - Off-street parking and loading facilities. 
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided for each use as required by Chapter 17.68. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.28.09 - Signs. 
Signs shall be consistent with the requirements detailed in Chapter 17.69. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.28.10 - Landscaping. 
A landscaping and irrigation plan shall be submitted to the city planner for review and approval. If the landscaped area exceeds two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in area, the landscaping and irrigation plan shall be prepared consistent with Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.28.11 - Design standards. 
A.	All metal buildings shall be designed with a front facade that is composed of a material other than metal, including stucco, brick, rock or wood. The front facade of these buildings shall contain a recognizable bulk head, cornice and combination of window and door openings. These openings can be accented with awnings. 
B.	All front yard fencing shall be wrought-iron or wrought-iron with columns composed of brick, stucco, concrete or some combination. 
C.	All material stored on-site shall be screened by a six-foot solid wall or chain linked fence that is fitted with slats. No material should be stored to a height that exceeds the height of the screening fence. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.28.12 - Special conditions. 
No use shall be permitted, and no processes, equipment, or materials shall be used which are found to be injurious to persons living or working in the vicinity by reasons of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried waste, noise, vibration, illumination, glare of unsightliness or to involve any hazard of fire or explosion. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.32 - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (ML) 
Sections: 
 
17.32.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the light industrial (ML) district is to provide appropriate locations in the community for light industrial uses and related activities. The development shall be consistent with the Woodlake general plan and is limited to light industrial and service commercial uses, and where regulations are designed to promote the following: 
1.	To protect appropriate areas for industrial uses from intrusion by residences and other inharmonious uses; 
2.	To provide opportunities for certain types of industrial uses to concentrate in mutually beneficial relationships to each other; 
3.	To provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern industrial development, including truck parking, off-street parking and loading; 
4.	To provide industrial employment opportunities for residents of the region; and
5.	Operate in a manner that protects the public health, safety and welfare by insuring that potential harmful impacts such as noise, vibration, noxious fumes, fire, and explosions, are avoided. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.32.02 - Permitted uses. 
A.	All uses permitted in the service commercial district;
B.	Agricultural packing houses, cold storage and box manufacturing;
C.	Agriculturally-related uses, including farm equipment sales and repair, retailing of farm goods and equipment, trucking, and farm management companies; 
D.	Assembly of appliances, equipment, and other goods;
E.	Manufacturing of equipment, ceramic products, merchandise, food products, and other chemicals; 
F.	Engine repair, paint and machine shops;
G.	Public utility and public service structures and facilities such as communication equipment buildings, electric distribution substations, electric transmission substations, gas regulator stations, public utility service yards, reservoir and storage tanks; 
H.	Lumber yards, feed and seed stores, general storage yards and cabinet shops;
I.	Food lockers;
J.	Food products manufacturing;
K.	Cogeneration facility;
L.	Gasoline service stations, including dispensing of diesel fuel and truck service;
M.	Offices, retail stores and living quarters incidental to and on the same site as the industrial or service commercial use; 
N.	Sexually oriented businesses subject to provisions contained in Chapter 17.65; and 
O.	Other uses that are added to this list by the planning director consistent with Chapter 17.02. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.32.03 - Accessory uses. 
Those uses and structures incidental to the industrial use of the land including, trash storage areas and bins; required loading and unloading facilities; radio and television antennas; the storage and use of fuels for fleet use; and other uses and structures, which are determined by the planning director to be incidental to the industrial use of the land. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.32.04 - Conditional uses. 
A.	Breweries, distilleries, and wineries;
B.	Building materials manufacturing;
C.	Carpet and rug manufacturing;
D.	Cement plant;
E.	Clay pipe manufacturing;
F.	Agricultural chemicals, storage and distribution;
G.	Heavy equipment and machinery manufacturing;
H.	Meat processing and packing;
I.	Paper, metal and plastic manufacturing;
J.	Recycling operations, including storage, sorting, baling, and crushing;
K.	Hazardous waste facility;
L.	Waste water treatment facility;
M.	Equipment rental yards;
N.	Single-family dwellings;
O.	Rodeo grounds;
P.	Special event facilities;
Q.	Public buildings and grounds; and
R.	Other uses that are added to this list by the planning director consistent with Chapter 17.02. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.32.05 - Site plan review. 
No development shall be constructed on any lot or site in this district until a site plan has been submitted and approved consistent with Chapter 17.54. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.32.06 - Development standards. 
A.	Site Area. The minimum site area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
B.	Lot Frontage and Depth. No requirement.
C.	Building Height. The maximum height shall be forty-five (45) feet. The maximum height of accessory structures shall be fifty-five (55) feet. 
D.	Yards.
1.	Front: Fifteen (15) feet.
2.	Side: No requirement, except where the ML district abuts a R district in which case the side yard requirement shall be ten feet. 
3.	Rear: No requirement, except where the ML district abuts a R district in which case the rear yard requirement shall be ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.32.07 - Fences, walls and hedges. 
A.	Where the ML district abuts a R district, a six-foot solid block wall shall be constructed on the property line that separates the two districts. 
B.	The outdoor storage of equipment or materials shall be screened from the view of any adjoining public right-of-way with a six-foot solid block wall, or six-foot chain-linked fence with slats and landscaping. 
C.	Fencing in the front yard shall be limited to wrought-iron fencing.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.32.08 - Off-street parking and loading facilities. 
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided for each use as required by Chapter 17.68. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.32.09 - Signs. 
Signs shall be consistent with the requirements detailed in Chapter 17.69. 
Exhibit 32-1: Zoning Standards
  
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.32.10 - Landscaping. 
A landscaping and irrigation plan shall be submitted to the city planner for review and approval. If the landscaped area exceeds two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in area, the landscaping and irrigation plan shall be prepared consistent with Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.32.11 - Design standards. 
A.	All metal buildings shall be designed with a front facade that is composed of a material other than metal, including stucco, brick, rock or wood. The front facade of these buildings shall contain a recognizable bulkhead, cornice and combination of window and door openings. These openings can be accented with awnings. 
B.	All front yard fencing shall be wrought-iron or wrought-iron with columns composed of brick, stucco, concrete or some combination. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.38 - OPEN SPACE (O) 
Sections: 
 
17.38.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the open space (O) district is to provide appropriate locations in the community for a wide range of open space uses, such as parks and playgrounds, cultural and educational facilities, public infrastructure systems, environmentally sensitive areas such as floodplains, and agriculture. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.38.2 - Permitted uses. 
A.	Parks, playgrounds, and botanical gardens;
B.	Cemeteries;
C.	Drainage basins;
D.	Environmentally sensitive lands, including wetlands, reservoirs, and floodplains;
E.	Golf courses;
F.	Growing and harvesting of agricultural crops; and
G.	Livestock grazing.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.38.03 - Accessory uses. 
Those uses and structures incidental to the open space use of the land including, required loading and unloading facilities; parking lots; the storage and use of fuels; agricultural out buildings and other uses and structures, which are determined by the planning director to be incidental to the open space use. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.38.04 - Conditional uses. 
A.	Public and quasi-public uses of an educational or religious type, including public and parochial elementary schools, junior high schools, high schools, nursery schools; private nonprofit schools and colleges; churches, parsonages, parish houses, monasteries, convents and other religious institutions. 
B.	Public uses of an administrative, recreational public service or cultural type including city, county, state or Federal administrative centers, libraries, museums, art galleries, police and fire stations, and other pubic buildings, structures and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.38.05 - Site plan review. 
No development shall be constructed on any lot or site in this district until a site plan has been submitted and approved consistent with Chapter 17.54. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.38.06 - Development standards. 
Also see Exhibit 38-1. 
A.	Site Area. The minimum site area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
B.	Lot Frontage and Depth. No requirement.
C.	Building Height. The maximum height shall be forty-five (45) feet. The maximum height of accessory structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
Exhibit 38-1: Development Standards
  
D.	Yards.
1.	Front: Twenty-five (25) feet.
2.	Side: No requirement, except where the O district abuts a R district in which case the side yard requirement shall be ten feet. 
3.	Rear: No requirement, except where the O district abuts a R district in which case the rear yard requirement shall be ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.38.07 - Fences, walls and hedges. 
A.	Front Yards: Fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed three feet in height. A fence or wall may be four feet in height if more than fifty (50) percent of the structure is see-through. 
B.	Rear and Side Yards: Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed seven feet in height along any side or rear property line. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.38.08 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall comply with the standards contained in Chapter 17.68. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.38.09 - Signs. 
Signage shall comply with the standards contained in Chapter 17.69. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.40 - PUBLIC FACILITIES (PF) 
Sections: 
 
17.40.01 - Purpose 
The purpose of the public facilities (PF) district is to provide appropriate locations in the community for a wide range of public uses that contain open space, public buildings, public grounds or infrastructure improvements. The PF district will be matched with the "open space" designation detailed in the land use element of Woodlake's general plan to ensure consistency between Woodlake's zoning ordinance and general plan. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.40.02 - Permitted uses. 
A.	Recreation areas, parks, public open spaces, and playgrounds;
B.	Flood control channels, water pumping stations, tanks and reservoirs, irrigation ditches and canals; and storm water basins; 
C.	Botanical Gardens; and
D.	School farms. 
17.40.03 - Conditional uses. 
A.	Elementary, junior high and high schools; and colleges;
B.	Fire and police stations;
C.	Post office;
D.	Cemetery; and
E.	Waste water treatment facilities and associated ponds and basins.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.40.04 - Site plan review. 
No development shall be constructed on any lot or site in this district until a site plan has been submitted and approved consistent with Chapter 17.54. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.40.05 - Development standards. 
Also see Exhibit 40-1. 
A.	Site Area. The minimum site area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
B.	Lot Frontage and Depth. No requirement.
C.	Building Height. The maximum height shall be 35 feet. The maximum height of accessory structures shall be 15 feet. 
Exhibit 40-1: Zoning Standards
  
D.	Yards
1.	Front: Twenty-five (25) feet.
2.	Side: Except where the PF district abuts a R district in which case the side yard requirement shall be ten feet. 
3.	Rear: No requirement, except where the PF district abuts a R district in which case the rear yard requirement shall be ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.40.06 - Fences, walls and hedges. 
A.	Front Yards: Fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed three feet in height. A fence or wall may be four feet in height if more than fifty (50) percent of the structure is see-through. 
B.	Rear and Side Yards: Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed seven feet in height along any side or rear property line. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.40.07 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall comply with the standards contained in Chapter 17.68. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.40.08 - Signs. 
Signage shall comply with the standards contained in Chapter 17.69. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.41 - AP ZONE (AIRPORT) 
Sections: 
 
17.41.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the airport (AP) district is to provide an area in the community that is reserved for Woodlake's municipal airport and a range of land uses that are harmonious with airport activities. Within this district, land shall be reserved for land uses that can tolerate a high level of noise exposure while tolerating the level of risk to health and safety resulting from aircraft over flights. 
The AP district will be matched with the "airport" designation detailed in the land use element of Woodlake's general plan to ensure consistency between Woodlake's zoning ordinance and general plan. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.41.02 - Permitted uses. 
A.	Airport and related offices and accessory structures;
B.	Runways, taxiway, aprons and tiedowns;
C.	Facilities for the dispensing of aviation fuels and lubricants;
D.	Restaurants;
E.	Airplane hangers; and
F.	The growing and harvesting of agricultural crops.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.41.03 - Conditional uses. 
A.	Crop dusters;
B.	Agricultural nurseries;
C.	Cold storage plants;
D.	Warehousing, mini-warehouses and storage, storage garages and yards, and freight forwarding terminals; 
E.	Wastewater treatment facilities and associated ponds and basins;
F.	Restaurants selling beer and wine;
G.	Manufacturing, assembling, and packaging of small instruments, tools, equipment, and engines; 
H.	Manufacture, testing, repair and maintenance of airplane and airplane parts. Repair and maintenance may include painting, body work and upholstery. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.41.04 - Prohibited uses. 
Sound sensitive activities such as residential housing of any type, schools, offices, hospitals, churches and similar activities shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.41.05 - Site plan review. 
No development shall be constructed on any lot or site in this district until a site plan has been submitted and approved consistent with Chapter 17.54. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.41.06 - Development standards. 
A.	Site Area. No minimum lot size.
B.	Lot Frontage and Depth. No requirement.
C.	Building Height. Buildings or structures shall not exceed the standards set forth in Ordinance No. 309, airport zoning, contained in this Code. 
D.	Yards.
1.	Front: Twenty-five (25) feet.
2.	Side: Ten feet.
3.	Rear: Ten feet.
E.	Distance Between Structures. The minimum distance between structures shall be ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.41.07 - Screening. 
Open storage of materials and equipment shall be permitted only within an area surrounded and screened by an ornamental wall or fence that is not less than six feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.41.08 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall comply with the standards contained in Chapter 17.68. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.41.09 - Signs. 
Signage shall comply with the standards contained in Chapter 17.69. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.42 - PD ZONE (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT) 
Sections: 
 
17.42.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the planned development (PD-X) overlay district is to promote development designs that respond to significant planning-related issues facing valley cities, including urbanization of agricultural land, air quality, housing affordability, energy and water conservation, traffic, aesthetics and neighborhood deterioration. This new approach to development design has been popularized by the termed "smart growth." The basis for this type of growth is reveled in the following documents: Ahwanee Principals, Landscaping of Choice and Ten Planning Principals for the Next 10 Million. 
The planned development overlay district is structured to produce a comprehensive development that is superior to traditional development of the recent past. In addition to better design strategies, a development constructed in an overlay zone will have less of an impact on the environment, which translates into a smaller carbon footprint and consistency with recent State legislation, AB 32 and SB 375. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.42.02 - Applicability. 
This overlay district can be combined with any single-family, multi-family or neighborhood commercial district identified in the zoning ordinance. For purposes of identification, an established PD overlay district shall be suffixed with the zoning notation of the district with which it is combined (e.g. PD-R-1-7 or PD-CN). The application for an overlay zone shall be processed consistent with Chapter 17.46. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.42.03 - Permitted uses. 
Uses listed on the permitted use list of the district to which the planned development district is being combined. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.42.04 - Conditional uses. 
Uses listed on the conditional use list of the district to which the planned development district is being combined. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.42.05 - Application requirements. 
Prior to filing an application for a zoning ordinance amendment to reclassify property to the planned development overlay district, the applicant shall submit to the city a development plan, which shall include the following: 
A.	Legal description and boundary survey map of the exterior boundaries of the land to be developed. 
B.	A site plan of the project consistent with Chapter 17.54. 
C.	Front elevation drawings of the major building features of the project.
D.	A phase plan, if applicable.
E.	The location and general arrangement of all open space, landscaping and hardscape areas. 
F.	An infrastructure and utilities plan.
G.	Schematic plan for adjacent properties.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.42.06 - Site plan review. 
No development shall be constructed on any lot or site in this district until a site plan has been submitted and approved consistent with Chapter 17.54. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.42.07 - Planned single-family residential development standards. 
The following development standards together with applicable standards specified in the single-family residential base zone shall apply to all land and structures within this planned development overlay district. 
A.	Minimum Site Area. The minimum site area for application of the planned development overlay district to single-family residential districts shall be one acre. 
B.	Density. For single-family residential developments, the number of residential dwelling units per acre shall not exceed the density permitted by the land use element of the general plan. 
C.	Height. The maximum height of a structure shall be consistent with the requirements of the base zone. 
D.	Coverage. The maximum building coverage of a lot shall be consistent with the requirements of the base zone. 
E.	Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size of single-family residential lots may be five thousand (5,000) square feet, except in the case of the RA and R-1-10 districts. 
F.	Average Lot Size. The average lot size of a subdivision created under the planned development overlay district shall not be less than the minimum lot size of the base zone (Note: the average lot size is calculated by dividing the square footage of all residential lots to be created by the number of proposed lots). 
G.	Lot Frontage and Depth. The minimum lot frontage of single-family residential lots shall be consistent with the requirements of the base zone except in the case of the R-1-7 zone district in which case the minimum lot width may be as follows: interior lot, fifty (50) feet; corner lot, sixty (60) feet. 
The minimum lot depth of single-family residential lots shall be consistent with the requirements of the base zone. 
H.	Yards.
1.	Front Yard: Front yard setbacks for single-family residential buildings shall be consistent with the requirements of the base zone except in the case of the R-1-7 zone district in which case fifty (50) percent of the buildings can deviate from the front yard setback standard. Buildings that deviate from the front yard setback may have a fifteen (15) foot setback and their porches and overhangs may have a ten foot setback. All garages shall have a front yard setback of twenty (20) feet from the rear of sidewalk or alley, and shall also at a minimum be ten feet back from face of residential dwelling. 
2.	Side Yard: Side yard setbacks for single-family residential buildings shall be consistent with the requirements of the base zone except in the case of a zero-lot-line development wherein one side yard may be zero and the opposing side yard shall be ten feet. 
3.	Rear Yard: Rear yard setbacks for single-family residential buildings shall be consistent with the requirements of the base zone. 
I.	Duplex Locations. All duplexes shall be located on corner lots. The front door of each living unit shall face a different street. A maximum of one duplex per twenty (20) single-family residential dwellings may be constructed in a subdivision. Duplex units shall have the same setback requirements as adjacent single-family units, except in the case of the side yard between a duplex and single family unit. This side yard shall be twelve (12) feet. 
J.	Elevations. The elevation drawings of buildings to be constructed in the planned development combining district shall be those traditional to Woodlake and the San Joaquin Valley. Architectural historians familiar with the San Joaquin Valley have identified several styles common to the region. These include but are not limited to Craftsman, Art Deco, Victorian, Prairie, Spanish, and Spanish Revival to name a few. 
K.	Streets and Alleys.
1.	In order to take advantage of passive solar opportunities, most subdivision streets and alleys shall be oriented east and west. 
2.	Single-family residential subdivisions may have local streets that have a minimum right-of-way width of fifty-six (56) feet, thirty-two (32) feet paved width. Tree-line parkways shall be installed in this right-of-way. The parkway shall have a width of seven feet; the sidewalk five feet. 
3.	Single-family residential subdivisions may have cul-de-sac streets that have a minimum right-of-way width of fifty-two (52) feet, twenty-eight (28) feet paved width. Tree-line parkways shall be installed in this right-of-way. The parkway shall have a width of seven feet; the sidewalk five feet. All cul-de-sac streets shall provide for a pedestrian opening at the end of the cul-de-sac when there is an opposing street, park or other type of public right-of-way or open space feature. 
4.	Alleys are permitted within residential subdivisions. Alleys shall have a right-of-way of twenty-four (24) feet and a paved width of twenty (20) feet. A concrete vee gutter is required in the middle of the alley. The non-paved portion of the right-of-way shall be landscaped and provided with irrigation. Garbage pickup shall not be permitted in the alleys. 
L.	Passive Solar Design.
1.	Eighty (80) percent of garages will be situated on the west side of a residential that is located on an east/west street and on the south side of the residential dwelling on a north/south street. 
2.	Ground-mounted heating/cooling units will be situated on the east side of a residential dwelling that is located on an east/west street and on the north side of the residential dwelling on a north/south street. 
3.	Minimal glazing will be permitted on west-facing residential walls.
M.	Neighborhood Pocket Parks. One lot of not less than the average lot size for the subdivision for every thirty (30) lots within a subdivision shall be dedicated and improved as a neighborhood pocket park unless the planning commission finds that the location of an existing or future community park will meet the needs of the residents of the subdivision. 
Where the commission finds that a park is not necessary, an in lieu fee shall be paid. The amount of said fee shall be determined by the city engineer and shall be identified in a subdivision agreement. 
N.	Residential Unit Design.
1.	Residential dwelling units can have a fifteen (15) foot front yard setback if the garage is setback a minimum distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line or back of sidewalk whichever distance is greater. 
2.	Residential dwelling units situated on corner lots shall be designed so that the garage and the front door face different streets. 
3.	Alleys may be incorporated into the design of a subdivision. The garages of residential dwelling units that back up to an alley shall open up to the alley, not the street. 
4.	If alleys are incorporated into the design of a subdivision, said alley shall be landscaped. A landscaping and irrigation plan shall be submitted to the city planner for review and approval. If the landscaped area exceeds two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in area, the landscaping and irrigation plan shall be prepared consistent with Chapter 17.66. 
5.	Rooms are permitted to be built above garages.
6.	A residential dwelling unit is permitted to be built on a property line if there is a minimum distance of ten feet between said unit and a structure on the adjacent lot. 
7.	A two-car carport can be built in place of a two-car garage so long as: the carport is setback twenty (20) feet further than the setback on the house, the carport is connected to the house, the carport has the same roof pitch as the house and the roofing material is the same, and the support beams or posts are decorative in style. 
8.	All fencing visible from the street shall contain pilasters. These pilasters shall generally be placed as follows: where two fences intersect, where a fence and a gate intersect or at the corner of a lot. 
9.	All front yards and street side yards shall be landscaped and shall be provided with an automatic irrigation system. A minimum of one, fifteen (15) gallon tree per twenty-five (25) feet of street frontage shall be required of each lot. A twenty-four (24) inch box tree shall be planted on each corner lot within the subdivision. 
Not more than fifty (50) percent of the landscaped portion of the front yard area shall be planted with turf. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.42.08 - Planned multi-family residential. 
Improvements, standards, and procedures not specifically detailed below shall conform to the base zone district. 
A.	Minimum Site Area. The minimum site area for application of the planned development overlay district to multi-family residential districts shall be one-half acre. 
B.	Density. For multi-family residential developments, the number of residential dwelling units per acre shall not exceed the density permitted by the general plan. 
C.	Height. The maximum height of a structure shall be consistent with the requirements of the base zone. 
D.	Coverage. The maximum building coverage of a lot shall be consistent with the requirements of the base zone. 
E.	Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size of multi-family residential lots shall be consistent with the requirements of the base zone. 
F.	Lot Frontage and Depth.
1.	The minimum lot width of multi-family residential lots shall be consistent with the requirements of the base zone. 
2.	The minimum lot depth of multi-family residential lots shall be consistent with the requirements of the base zone. 
H.	Yards.
1.	Front Yard. Front yard setbacks for multi-family residential buildings shall be consistent with the requirements of the base zone. All garages shall have a front yard setback of twenty (20) feet from rear of sidewalk and shall also have a minimum ten foot setback from face of residential dwelling. 
2.	Side Yard. Side yard setbacks for multi-family residential buildings shall be consistent with the requirements of the base zone. 
3.	Rear Yard. Rear yard setbacks for multi-family residential buildings shall be consistent with the requirements of the base zone. 
I.	General Building Design and Orientation.
1.	The elevation drawings of multi-family buildings to be constructed in the planned development combining district shall be those traditional to Woodlake and the San Joaquin Valley. Architectural historians familiar with the San Joaquin Valley have identified several styles common to the region. These include but are not limited to Craftsman, Art Deco, Victorian, Prairie, Spanish, and Spanish Revival to name a few. 
2.	Multi-family buildings located on corner lots shall have the front doors of the living units facing both streets. 
3.	Straight building lines is discouraged by staggering units, varying building heights and roof lines. 
4.	Monotonous building designs is discouraged by using different building materials, color schemes, and landscaping treatments. 
5.	All mechanical equipment shall be screened from view with a wall, fencing, or landscaping.
6.	Front porches and balconies are encouraged.
7.	Buildings shall be designed and oriented to reduce overview of private backyards and patio areas, both on-site and on adjacent properties. 
8.	Multi-family development shall be pedestrian oriented. Providing multiple pedestrian access points and constructing pedestrian oriented improvements (shaded arbors, lighting, tree-lined sidewalks, and walkways across parking lots) are two examples. 
9.	Multi-family buildings should be oriented east and west in order to take advantage of passive solar opportunities. 
J.	Parking Requirements and Parking Lot Design.
1.	Parking requirements shall be consistent with the base zone.
2.	On-street parking should be discouraged through the use of red-curbing, landscaping and/or fencing. 
3.	Off-street parking should be located on the side or at the rear of the building(s).
4.	One-half of the required parking stalls shall be covered. Covered parking stalls shall have design elements similar to the primary buildings, including roof pitch, roof composition and paint color. 
5.	Parking lots shall be landscaped with trees so that fifty (50) percent of the lot is shaded within ten years. Rows of parking stalls shall be interrupted with a tree-containing planter. 
6.	Pedestrian pathways through parking lots shall be clearly delineated using improvements such as landscaping, lighting and pavement material. 
K.	Landscaping Improvements.
1.	If the landscaped area exceeds two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in area, the landscaping and irrigation plan shall be prepared consistent with Chapter 17.66. 
2.	The major treatment for all setback areas shall be a combination of lawn and trees, with shrubs being planted at the base of buildings. Plant material shall be varied in size, shrubs from one to five gallons and trees from fifteen (15) gallons to twenty-four (24) inch box. All landscaped areas shall be provided with an automatic irrigation system. Not more than fifty (50) percent of the landscaped area shall be planted with turf. 
3.	Tree lined parkways will be installed along streets that abut the multi-family project.
4.	Blank walls will receive special landscaping attention, which could include climbing vines trained on a trellis or installation of trees or shrubs. 
5.	Deciduous trees shall be planted along the south and west facing building walls to allow solar access during the winter. 
6.	Trees should be located where they will screen views by residents of parking lots, back yards and patios. 
7.	Twenty-four (24) inch box trees should be planted in the street-side setback areas at a ratio of one tree per fifty (50) feet of street frontage. 
8.	On-site open space amenities shall be centrally located and easily visible from surrounding units. Benches, shading and a drinking fountain should be incorporated into this open space feature. 
L.	Fencing and Walls.
1.	All fencing visible from the street shall contain pilasters. These pilasters shall generally be placed as follows: where two fences intersect, where a fence and a gate intersect or at the corner of a lot. Fencing may be staggered and/or fencing materials may be mixed in order to create visual interest. 
2.	Fences or walls that surround a parking lot shall be landscaped with plant material, such as vines and shrubs, that masks these hard surfaces. 
3.	Decorative wrought-iron fencing is encouraged, especially between on-street parking and the living units. 
4.	Gates and pedestrian opening into the project shall be accentuated with pilasters, awnings, landscaping, trellises and/or lighting. 
M.	Trash Enclosures.
1.	Trash enclosures shall be constructed of solid masonry material. They shall be designed so that walk-in access is permitted by tenants without having to open the gates. 
2.	The trash enclosure shall have decorative heavy gauge metal gates and be designed with cane bolts on the doors to secure the gates when it is in the open position. A concrete apron shall be constructed either in front of the trash enclosure or at a point of dumpster pickup by the waste removal truck. 
3.	A landscaped trellis will be constructed over the trash enclosure. Landscaping should also be planted on the perimeter of the enclosure. 
4.	The dimensions of the trash enclosure shall be consistent with Woodlake's improvement standards. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.42.10 - Planned neighborhood commercial. 
Improvements, standards, and procedures not specifically detailed below shall conform to the base zone district. 
A.	Site Area. The minimum and maximum site area for a neighborhood commercial development shall be consistent with the base zone district. 
B.	Height. The maximum height of a structure shall be thirty-five (35) feet but not greater than two stories. 
C.	Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall be consistent with the base zone except in the case of offices and residential uses, which shall be permitted in the second story of a building. 
D.	Conditional Uses. Conditional uses shall be consistent with base zone district.
E.	Building Design.
1.	All buildings should have a distinguishing base.
2.	All buildings should have a distinguishable roof, cornice or parapet.
3.	Buildings located at a street intersection should have a corner treatment, including a diagonal cut ground floor opening, a corner window, a fountain or statue or an architectural feature, like a turret or bay window. 
4.	Buildings may be constructed behind sidewalk so long as there is ten-foot sidewalk pattern. 
5.	All storefronts should have display windows, an easily identifiable entrance, and a facade with architectural accents, including columns, awnings, light fixtures, pilasters, paneling, etc. 
6.	All projects shall contain a pedestrian focal feature, such as an interior courtyard, fountain, statue, tree-lined pedestrian corridor, etc. 
7.	Building with parking lots at the rear shall have distinguishable rear entrances.
F.	Parking Requirements and Parking Lot Design.
1.	Parking requirements for uses in the neighborhood commercial development shall be consistent with the base zone. 
2.	Shared parking is recommended.
3.	Off-street parking shall be located on the side or at the rear of the building(s).
4.	Parking lots shall be landscaped with trees so that fifty (50) percent of the lot is shaded within ten years. Rows of parking stalls shall be interrupted with a tree-containing planter. 
5.	Pedestrian pathways through parking lots shall be clearly delineated using improvements such as landscaping, lighting and pavement material. 
6.	Parking lots located adjacent to residentially designated land shall be separated by a six-foot block wall, which is landscaped with vines, shrubs or trees. Parking lots adjacent to streets shall be separated by a low wall (forty-eight (48) inches), which is landscaped on both sides. 
G.	Landscaping, Fencing/Walls, Lighting and Trash Enclosure Improvements.
1.	Tree lined parkways will be installed along streets that abut the neighborhood commercial project. 
2.	Blank walls should receive special landscaping attention, which could include climbing vines trained on a trellis or installation of trees or shrubs. 
3.	All fencing visible from the street shall contain pilasters. These pilasters shall generally be placed as follows: where two fences intersect, where a fence and a gate intersect or at the corner of a lot. 
4.	Fences or walls that surround a parking lot shall be landscaped with plant material, such as vines and shrubs, that masks these hard surfaces. 
5.	Gates and pedestrian openings into the project shall be accentuated with pilasters, awnings, landscaping, trellises and/or lighting. 
6.	Decorative street lights shall be installed along the streets that abut the neighborhood commercial development. In addition, these same types of lights shall be installed in the parking lots and along any pedestrian corridor. 
7.	Trash enclosures shall be constructed of solid masonry material. They shall be designed so that walk-in access is permitted by tenants without having to open the gates. 
8.	The trash enclosure shall have decorative heavy gauge metal gates and be designed with cane bolts on the doors to secure the gates when it is in the open position. A concrete apron shall be constructed either in front of the trash enclosure or at a point of dumpster pickup by the waste removal truck. 
9.	A landscaped trellis will be constructed over the trash enclosure. Landscaping should also be planted on the perimeter of the enclosure. 
10.	The dimensions of the trash enclosure shall be consistent with Woodlake's improvement standards. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.43 - COTTAGE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.43.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the cottage development (CD-X) overlay district is to provide housing alternatives to the typical detached, single-family house. This overlay district is intended to address the changing composition of households, and the need for smaller, more diverse, and often, more affordable housing choices. The use of the overlay district encourages innovation and diversity in housing design and site development, while ensuring compatibility with surrounding single-family residential development. 
The cottage development overlay district is structured to produce a comprehensive development that is superior to typical single-family residential development from an environmental impact perspective. In addition to better design strategies, a development constructed in this overlay zone will have less of an impact on the environment, which translates into a smaller carbon footprint and consistency with recent State legislation, AB 32 and SB 375. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.43.02 - Applicability. 
This overlay district can be combined with any single-family or multi-family residential district identified in the zoning ordinance. For purposes of identification, an established CD overlay district shall be suffixed with the zoning notation of the district with which it is combined (e.g. CD-R-1-7 or CD-RM-3). The application for an overlay zone shall be processed consistent with Chapter 17.46. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.43.03 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the CD combining district shall be those uses listed on the permitted use list of the R-1-7 district to which the planned development district is being combined. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.43.04 - Conditional uses. 
Uses permitted in the CD combining district shall be those uses listed on the conditional use list of the R-2 and R-3 zone districts to which the planned development district is being combined. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.43.05 - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to the housing types allowed through the provisions in this chapter: 
A.	"Cottage." A detached, single-family dwelling unit containing one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet or less of gross floor area. 
B.	"Carriage Unit." A single-family dwelling unit, not to exceed five hundred (500) square feet in gross floor area, located above a garage structure in a cottage housing development. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.43.06 - Site plan review. 
No development shall be constructed on any lot or site in this district until a site plan has been submitted and approved consistent with Chapter 17.54. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.43.07 - Residential development standards. 
The following development standards together with applicable standards specified in the residential base zone shall apply to all land and structures within the cottage development overlay district. 
A.	Minimum/Maximum Residential Unit Size.
1.	The minimum unit size for a cottage unit shall be 800 square feet; the maximum unit size shall be one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. 
2.	The minimum unit size for a carriage house shall be two hundred fifty (250) square feet; the maximum unit size shall be 500 square feet. 
B.	Minimum site area. The minimum site area for application of the cottage development overlay district to single-family residential districts shall be one-quarter acre. 
C.	Density. For single-family residential developments, the number of residential dwelling units per acre may be double the density permitted by the base residential zone. 
D.	Height. The maximum height of a structure shall be one story except in the case where a carriage house in built above a garage. 
E.	Coverage. The maximum building coverage of a lot shall be consistent with the requirements of the base zone. 
F.	Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size of single-family residential lots is two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, except in the case of the RA and R-1-10 districts. 
G.	Average Lot Size. The average lot size of a subdivision created under the planned development overlay district shall not be less than one-half of the minimum lot size of the base zone (Note: the average lot size is calculated by dividing the square footage of all residential lots to be created by the number of proposed lots). 
Exhibit 43-1: Zoning Standards
  
H.	Lot Frontage and Depth. The minimum lot frontage of single-family residential lots shall be one-half of the requirements of the base zone. The minimum lot depth of single-family residential lots shall be one-half of the requirements of the base zone. 
I.	Yards.
1.	Front Yard: Front yard setbacks for single-family residential buildings shall be one-half of the requirements of the base zone. All garages shall have a front yard setback of twenty (20) feet from the rear of sidewalk, and shall also be a minimum be ten back from face of residential dwelling. 
2.	Side Yard: Side yard for single-family residential buildings shall have a minimum setback of three feet except in the case of a zero-lot-line development wherein one side yard may be zero and the opposing side yard shall be ten feet. 
3.	Rear Yard: Rear yard setbacks for single-family residential buildings and garages shall be one-half of the requirements of the base zone. 
J.	Residential design.
1.	Dwellings within a cottage housing development should be oriented to promote a sense of community, both within the development, and with respect to the larger community, outside of the cottage project (see Exhibit 43-2). A cottage development should not be designed to "turn its back" on the surrounding neighborhood. 
Exhibit 43-2: Site Design Sample
  
2.	Where feasible, each dwelling unit that abuts a common open space area shall have a primary entry and/or covered porch oriented to the common open space. 
3.	Each dwelling unit abutting a public right-of-way (not including alleys) shall have an inviting facade incorporating such elements as a porch, front door and significant windows. If a dwelling unit abuts more than one public right-of way, the city shall determine to which right-of-way the inviting facade shall be oriented. 
4.	The elevation drawings of buildings to be constructed in the cottage development combining district shall be those traditional to Woodlake and the San Joaquin Valley (see Exhibit 43-3). Architectural historians familiar with the San Joaquin Valley have identified several styles common to the region. These include but are not limited to Craftsman, Tudor, Victorian, Prairie, Spanish, and Spanish Revival. 
Exhibit 43-3: Selected Residential Design Standards
  
5.	Each residential unit must have a covered porch with a minimum area of sixty-four (64) square feet per unit and a minimum dimension of seven feet on all sides. 
6.	Carriage units are permitted to be built above garages.
7.	A residential dwelling unit is permitted to be built on a side property line if there is a minimum distance of ten feet between said unit and a structure on the adjacent lot. 
8.	All front yards and street side yards shall be landscaped and shall be provided with an automatic irrigation system. At a minimum, one, fifteen (15) gallon tree per twenty-five (25) feet of street frontage shall be required on each lot. Top facilitate water conservation, not more than fifty (50) percent of the landscaped portion of the front yard area shall be planted with turf. 
9.	Projects should include a mix of unit sizes within a single development.
K.	Streets, Sidewalks and Alleys.
1.	In order to take advantage of passive solar opportunities, a majority of subdivision streets and alleys shall be oriented east and west. 
Exhibit 43-4: Solar Subdivision Orientation
  
2.	Single-family residential subdivisions may have local streets that have a minimum right-of-way width of fifty-six (56) feet, thirty-two (32) feet paved width. Tree-lined parkways shall be installed in this right-of-way. The parkway shall have a width of seven feet; the sidewalk five feet. 
3.	Single-family residential subdivisions may have cul-de-sac streets that have a minimum right-of-way width of fifty-two (52) feet, twenty-eight (28) feet paved width. Tree-lined parkways shall be installed in this right-of-way. The parkway shall have a width of seven feet; the sidewalk five feet. All cul-de-sac streets shall provide for a pedestrian opening at the end of the cul-de-sac when there is an adjacent street, park or other type of public right-of-way or open space feature. 
4.	Alleys are permitted within residential subdivisions. Alleys shall have a right-of-way of twenty-four (24) feet and a paved width of twenty (20) feet. A concrete vee gutter is required in the middle of the alley. The non-paved portion of the right-of-way shall be landscaped and provided with irrigation. 
5.	Interior sidewalks in a cottage development shall have a minimum width of five feet. Sidewalk connections should link all buildings to the public right-of way, common open space and parking areas. 
L.	Passive Solar Design.
1.	At least eighty (80) percent of garages should be situated on the west side of a residential that is located on an east/west street and on the south side of the residential dwelling on a north/south street. 
2.	Ground-mounted heating/cooling units will be situated on the east side of a residential dwelling that is located on an east/west street and on the north side of the residential dwelling on a north/south street. 
3.	Minimal glazing will be permitted on west-facing residential walls.
Exhibit 43-5: Passive Solar Design Elements
  
M.	Common Park.
1.	There shall be a common park area that is centrally located on the project site. It shall be fronted on at least two sides by cottage units. The area of the common park shall be determined by the number of residential units in the project. A minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of common park area shall be required for each residential unit. 
2.	The common park area shall be maintained by a landscaping and lighting district or a homeowners association. 
3.	Landscaping located in common open space areas shall be designed to allow for easy access and use of the space by all residents, and to facilitate maintenance needs. Where feasible, existing mature trees should be retained. 
4.	Surface water management facilities shall be limited within common open space areas. Low Impact Development (LID) features are permitted, provided they do not adversely impact access to or use the common open space for a variety of activities. Conventional stormwater collection and conveyance tools, such as flow control and/or water quality vaults are permitted if located underground. 
O.	Parking.
On-site parking shall be provided as follows: 
1.	Units under seven hundred (700) square feet: One space per unit.
2.	Units between seven hundred (700) through one thousand (1,000) square feet: One and a half spaces per unit. 
3.	Units over one thousand (1,000) square feet: Two spaces per unit.
4.	Parking areas should be located so their visual presence is minimized, and associated noise or other impacts do not intrude into public spaces. These areas should also maintain the single-family character along public streets. 
5.	Shared detached garage structures may not exceed four garage doors per building, and a total of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. 
6.	For shared detached garages, the design of the structure must be similar and compatible to that of the dwelling units within the development. 
7.	Shared detached garage structures and surface parking areas must be screened from public streets and adjacent residential uses by landscaping or architectural screening. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.46 - ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.46.01 - Purpose. 
As the general plan of Woodlake is put into effect over the years, there will be a need for changes in district boundaries and other regulations of this title. As the general plan is reviewed and revised periodically, other changes in the regulations of this title may be warranted. Such amendments shall be made in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.46.02 - Boundary changes. 
A.	A change in the boundaries of any district may be initiated by the owner of the property within the area for which a change of district is proposed or the authorized agent of the owner filing an application for a change of district boundaries. If the area for which a change in district is proposed is more than one ownership, at least fifty (50) percent of the property owners or their authorized agents shall join in filing the application. 
B.	A change in boundaries of any district, or a change in a district regulation, off-street parking or loading facilities requirement, general provisions, exception or other provision may be initiated by resolution of the planning commission, or by action of the city council in the form of a request to the planning commission that in either case the procedure prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.46.03 - Application and fees. 
A.	A property owner or authorized agent, desiring to propose a change in the boundaries of the district in which the property is located, may file an application with the planning commission for a change in district boundaries on a form prescribed by the planning commission which shall include the following data: 
1.	Name and address of the applicant;
2.	Statement that the applicant is the owner of the property for which the change in district boundaries is proposed or the authorized agent for the owner, or the plaintiff in an action of eminent domain to acquire the property involved; and 
3.	Address and description of the property, including APN, number of acres, land use, surrounding land uses and other details that could be relevant to the planning commission. 
B.	The application shall be accompanied by a drawing of the site and the surrounding area for a distance of at least three hundred (300) feet from the boundary of the site, showing the location of streets, and property lines and the names and last known addresses of the recorded legal owners of all properties shown on the latest adopted tax roll of the county. Assessor's maps may be used for this purpose. 
C.	The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by a resolution of the city council sufficient to cover the cost of processing the application as prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.46.04 - Public hearing notice. 
A.	The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for a change in district boundaries or a district regulation, off-street parking or loading facilities requirement, general provision, exception, or other provision of this title initiated by the planning commission or city council within forty-five (45) days of the date when the application was filed or the proposal was initiated. 
B.	Notice of a public hearing shall be given not less than ten days nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the date of the pubic hearing by: (1) a publication of a notice of the time and place of the hearing and a general explanation of the matter to be considered in a newspaper of general circulation within Woodlake; (2) mailing a notice of the time and place of the hearings to all persons whose names appear on the property owners list submitted under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.46.05 - Public hearing. 
A.	At the pubic hearing, the planning commission shall review the application or the proposal and may receive pertinent evidence and testimony as to why and how the proposed amendment is necessary to achieve the objectives of the zoning ordinance prescribed in this chapter or how or why the proposed amendment is consistent with the stated purposes and application intended for the zone classification proposed. 
B.	The planning commission may review proposals for the use of the property for which a change in district boundaries is proposed or plans or drawings showing proposed structures or other improvements, in light of the fact that under the provisions of this title a change in district boundaries cannot be made conditionally. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.46.06 - Investigation and report. 
The planning director or his designated representative, shall make an investigation of the application and shall prepare a report thereon which shall be submitted to the planning commission, including a recommendation as to the action to be taken by the planning commission and a statement supporting such recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.46.07 - Action of the planning commission. 
Within forty-five (45) days following the completion of the public hearing, the planning commission shall make specific findings in writing as to whether the change is required to achieve the objectives of the zoning ordinance and the goals, policies and action programs of the general plan. The commission shall transmit a report to the city council recommending that the application be granted or denied or that the proposal be adopted or rejected, including, if warranted, a written statement of the reasons for the recommendation, together with one copy of the application, resolution of the commissioner request of the city council, the scale drawing of the site and surrounding area and all other data therewith, the minutes of the public hearing, the report of the planning director and the findings of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.46.08 - Action of the city council. 
A.	Upon receipt of the planning commission's resolution and report, the city council shall hold a public hearing; provided, however, that if the matter under consideration is an amendment to change property from one district classification to another, and the planning commission has recommended against the adoption of such amendment, the city council need not take any further action thereon unless an interested party shall request such a hearing by filing a written request with the city clerk within five days after the planning commission files its recommendation with the city council. 
B.	Notice of the time and place of said hearing shall be given in the time and manner provided in Chapter 17.04. 
C.	The city council, after the close of the public hearing, shall make specific findings in writing as to whether the amendment is required in order to achieve the objectives of the zoning ordinance and goals, policies and action programs of the general plan and, when applicable, whether the amendment would be consistent with the purposes and application intended for the zoning district classification proposed. 
D.	The city council may approve, modify or deny the recommendation of the planning commission; provided, however, that if modified, the modification shall be first referred to the planning commission for report and recommendation. The planning commission shall not be required to hold a hearing thereon. Failure of the planning commission to report within forty (40) days of the reference, or such longer period as may be designated by the city council, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed modification. 
E.	If the council finds that the proposed amendment is required, in its original or modified form, it shall enact an ordinance amending the regulations of this title. If the council finds that an amendment is not required, it shall deny the application or proposal for amendment. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.46.09 - Amendment of official zoning map. 
A change in a district boundary shall be indicated on the official zoning map together with the date, the amendment action and ordinance number. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.46.10 - New application. 
Following the denial of an application for a change in a district boundary, no application for the same or substantially the same change shall be filed within one year of the date of denial of the application. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.46.11 - Urgency zoning ordinance amendments. 
To protect the public interest, health, safety and welfare, the city council may adopt an urgency zoning ordinance amendment limiting the use of property that may be in conflict with a general plan, specific plan, or zoning amendment that is being contemplated by the planning commission or city council. The following regulations shall govern the procedures for an urgency zoning ordinance amendment. 
A.	Adoption of an urgency zoning ordinance amendment shall require a four-fifths vote of the city council. 
B.	The urgency ordinance shall not be binding forty-five (45) days from its adoption except under the following conditions: 
1.	Subject to a public hearing, the city council may extend the urgency ordinance amendment for ten months and fifteen (15) days. 
2.	An urgency ordinance amendment may be extended for an additional year, subject to a four-fifths vote by the city council. 
3.	Ten days prior to the expiration or extension of an urgency ordinance, the city council shall issue a written report describing the measures being taken to alleviate the condition that led to the adoption of the urgency zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.46.12 - Prezoning. 
Woodlake may prezone unincorporated territory to delineate the zoning of the subject territory in the event of annexation to the city. The procedure for prezoning shall be consistent with the requirements outlined in this chapter. 
Exhibit 46-1: Zoning Ordinance Amendment Process
  
  
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.48 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 
Sections: 
 
17.48.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for processing conditional use permits and temporary use permits. 
Specific uses listed in districts of this ordinance are permitted subject to receiving a conditional use permit. Because of their unusual characteristics, or unique area in which they are proposed, these uses require special consideration so that they may be located properly with respect to the purpose and objectives of this ordinance and with respect to their effects on surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.48.02 - Application and fee. 
An application for a conditional use permit shall be made to the planning department on a form prescribed by the department. The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.48.03 - Hearings and notice. 
Upon receipt of a conditional use permit application, the planning department shall prepare a notice for a public hearing consistent with the requirements contained in Chapter 17.04. The application shall include the following information: 
A.	Name and address of applicant;
B.	Statement that the applicant is the owner of the property, or is the authorized agent of the owner; 
C.	Statement setting forth the precise circumstances or conditions applicable to the land, structure, or use which makes the granting of a use permit necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right, together with any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of the use permit; 
D.	An accurate scale drawing of the site and the surrounding area for a distance of at least three hundred (300) feet from each boundary of the site showing the existing locations of streets and property lines and a list of the names and last known addresses of the recorded legal owners, as shown on the county assessor's records, of all drawings shown on the drawing. 
E.	Preliminary floor plans and front, side and rear elevations of the proposed structures; and 
F.	A site plan, drawn to scale, which shall show the following:
1.	Lot and building dimensions;
2.	All buildings and structures: location, size, height, and proposed use;
3.	Yards and space between buildings;
4.	Walls and fences; location, height and materials;
5.	Off-street parking and loading: Location, number of spaces, dimensions of spaces, and internal circulation pattern; 
6.	Access: pedestrian, vehicular and service. Points of ingress and egress;
7.	Signs: location, size, height, and type of illumination;
8.	Lighting: location and general nature;
9.	Street dedication and improvements; and
10.	Landscaping and irrigation: location and type.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.48.04 - Report and findings. 
The planning department shall prepare a report on the conditional use permit application. 
The department shall provide a recommendation based on the following findings: 
A.	That the location of the proposed use is in accordance with the purpose and objectives of this ordinance and the purpose of district in which the subject site is located. 
B.	That the location of the proposed use and the conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity. 
C.	That the proposed use will not have a significant impact on the environment.
D.	That the proposed use will comply with applicable provisions contained in this ordinance.
E.	That the proposed use is consistent with the Woodlake general plan.
F.	That the site for the proposed use is adequate in size, shape and location to accommodate the use in the district for which it is proposed. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.48.05 - Action of the planning commission. 
Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall take action on the conditional use permit. The commission can approve, approve with conditions or deny the conditional use permit based on the finding listed above. The commission's decision shall be forwarded to the city council for their consideration. 
Within ten days of adopting a resolution on the conditional use permit, the commission shall transmit a copy of its resolution to the person that filed the conditional use permit application. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.48.06 - Conditions. 
The planning commission can approve a conditional use permit subject to conditions. Conditions may involve the operation of the use, maintenance of the property or specific aspects associated with the development, including storage and display of goods, grading, surfacing and drainage improvements; vehicular ingress and egress; parking and loading; landscaping and irrigation and maintenance thereof; regulation of light, vibration, odors, and noise; appearance of buildings, grounds, signs, and other structures; street dedication and improvements; and hours of operation. In cases where certain improvements may be phased over time, Woodlake may request a bond or monetary deposit to insure faithful performance on the part of the applicant. The value of the bond or deposit shall be determined by the city engineer. 
Conditions set forth for a conditional use permit can only be required in order to achieve the purpose and objectives of this chapter. Conditions which require dedication of land for a purpose not reasonably related to the use of the property shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.48.07 - Review by city council. 
At the first regular meeting held more than thirty (30) days after a decision on the conditional use permit by the planning commission, the city council shall review the decision. The city council may affirm, reverse, or modify a decision of the commission; provided, that if a decision denying the conditional use permit is reversed or a decision granting a use permit is modified, the city council shall, on the basis of the record transmitted and such evidence as may be submitted, make the findings prerequisite to the granting of a use permit detailed in Section 17.48.04. 
A use permit shall become effective three days following the date on which the use permit is granted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.48.08 - Lapse of conditional use permit. 
A conditional use permit shall lapse and become void one year from the date it became effective, unless by conditions of the use permit a greater time is allowed, or unless a building permit is issued by the chief building official and construction on the use has commenced. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.48.09 - Extension of conditional use permit. 
A conditional use permit for which no building permit has been issued may be renewed in increments of one year, not to exceed three one-year extensions; provided, that prior to the one year expiration, an application for renewal is filed with the planning department. The planning commission by resolution may approve, approve with conditions or deny the renewal application. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.48.10 - Revocation. 
Where the city finds that a use operating under a conditional use permit is not complying with the conditions of that use permit, the operation of the use shall be suspended. Within sixty (60) days of the suspension, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the conditional use permit. Based on a report from the planning department, findings contained in Section 17.48.04 of this chapter, and testimony from the public, the commission may revoke the conditional use permit with conditions that may be necessary to assure compliance with the purpose and objectives of this chapter. The commission's decision shall be final unless appealed to the city council consistent with the requirements contained in Chapter 17.06. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.48.11 - New application. 
Following the denial or revocation of a conditional use permit, no application for the same or substantially the same conditional use permit shall be filed within one year of the date of denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.48.12 - Use permit to run with the land. 
A conditional use permit shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the property or structure that was the subject of the use permit application. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.48.13 - Preexisting conditional use permits. 
A conditional use permit granted under the provisions of the Tulare County Zoning Ordinance and supplementary provisions thereto prior to the enactment of this chapter shall, upon the annexation of the property into Woodlake, become null and void at the end of one year after said annexation has been completed. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.48.14 - Temporary conditional use permits. 
A.	Purpose. The purpose of a temporary conditional use permit is to provide for the short-term use of property and structures that are consistent with the purpose and objectives of this chapter. 
B.	Applicant and fee. An application and fee for a temporary conditional use permit shall be made to the planning department on a form prescribed by the department. The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council. 
C.	Report and findings. The planning director is authorized to review and approve temporary conditional use permits subject to reviewing the following findings. The director may add conditions to insure consistency with the purpose and objectives of the chapter including the following: 
1.	That egress and ingress and off-street parking facilities are properly designed and adequate to serve the use. 
2.	That the site is adequate in size and location and has the proper accessibility to accommodate the use. 
3.	That there are adequate public services, including fire protection, water supply, waste water disposal, and police protection to serve the use. 
4.	That upon termination of the use the site shall be restored to its original condition. All materials and equipment associated with the temporary use shall be removed. 
5.	That reasonable time limits be established for the use, not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
6.	That the applicants for a temporary conditional use permit shall have all applicable licenses and permits. 
7.	That the signage for the use be approved by the planning department.
D.	Processing. Temporary conditional use permits may be processed as an administrative matter by the planning director. Following a decision by the director, an administrative agreement shall be prepared that outlines the findings and conditions on the temporary use permit. 
E.	Temporary uses and activities. The following uses and activities are eligible for a temporary use permit. The planning commission, by resolution, may add other uses to the list. The planning director shall determine the appropriate districts for the uses and activities listed below. 
1.	Christmas tree sales.
2.	Promotional displays and activities, including amusement rides, street dances, concerts, live entertainment and promotional outdoor displays and sales. These activities may be conducted in any non-residential district. Temporary signs are permitted with the approval of planning director. All display material, signs and related improvements shall be removed no later than twenty-four (24) hours from the end of the activity. Sales areas shall be located where adequate parking is available and sight distances at intersections and driveways will not be obstructed. 
3.	Temporary uses. The temporary use of property by nonprofit or charitable organizations, including activities such as expositions, concerts, carnivals, amusement rides, and church rivals. 
4.	Temporary outdoor sales. Temporary outdoor sales, sidewalk sales and parking lot sales in association with a permitted business for which there is an enclosed building. No off-site signs shall be permitted and no more than six of these events shall occur on the subject property per calendar year. 
5.	City-sponsored uses and activities, not occupying a structure and occurring at regular periodic intervals. 
F.	Exemptions.
The following uses shall be exempt from securing a temporary use permit from the city. 
1.	Fireworks stands,
2.	Garage and yard sales.
G.	Appeal. A decision of the planning director may be appealed to the planning commission consistent with the procedures contained in Chapter 17.06. 
Exhibit 48-1: Conditional Use Permit Process
  
  
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.50 - VARIANCES 
Sections: 
 
17.50.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for processing variance applications. A variance may be granted where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and conditions inconsistent with the purpose and objectives of this ordinance may result from the strict application of certain provisions of this ordinance. The granting of a variance shall not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the vicinity and in other like districts within the city. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.50.02 - Applicability. 
The planning commission and city council may grant a variance from district regulations, including setbacks, lot dimensions, height of structures, lot coverage, parking and loading standards, and sign regulations. The power to grant variances shall not extend to district permitted and conditional use regulations. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.50.03 - Application and fee. 
An application for a variance shall be made to the planning department on a form prescribed by the department. The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.50.04 - Hearings and notice. 
Upon receipt of a variance application, the planning department shall prepare a notice for a public hearing consistent with the requirements contained in Chapter 17.04. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.50.05 - Report and findings. 
The planning department shall prepare a report on the variance application. The department shall provide a recommendation based on the following findings, which are pursuant to Government Code Section 65906. 
A.	That there are special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, and that the strict application of this ordinance deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical classifications; 
B.	That granting a variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in the same vicinity and district and denied to the property for which the variance is sought; 
C.	That granting the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in such vicinity and district in which the property is located; 
D.	That granting the variance does not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and district in which such property is located; 
E.	That granting the variance does not allow a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject parcel; and 
F.	That granting the variance will not be inconsistent with the general plan.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.50.06 - Action of the planning commission. 
Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall take action on the variance. The commission can approve, approve with conditions or deny the variance based on the finding listed above. To approve a variance, the commission shall find that all of the above the findings are true. The commission's decision shall be final unless appealed to the city council consistent with the requirements contained in Chapter 17.06. 
Within ten days of adopting a resolution on the variance, the commission shall transmit a copy of its resolution to the person that filed the variance application. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.50.07 - Conditions. 
The planning commission can approve a variance subject to the conditions. Such conditions will assure that the approved variance shall not constitute a grant of a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and district in which the subject property is located. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.50.08 - Appeal to city council. 
Upon an appeal of the planning commission's action, the city council shall hold a public hearing and take action by resolution on the variance. The council shall consider the commission's decision, the claims contained in the appeal, and the findings contained in Section 17.50.05 of this chapter. The council can approve, approve with modifications or deny the decision of the planning commission. The decision of the council shall be final. The variance shall become effective three days following the date of council approval. Within ten days of adopting a resolution on the variance, the council shall transmit a copy of its resolution to the person who filed the variance application. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.50.09 - Lapse of variance. 
A variance shall lapse and become void one year from the date it became effective, unless conditions of the variance allow a greater time, or unless a building permit is issued by the chief building official and construction has commenced on the use that is the subject of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.50.10 - Revocation. 
Where the city finds that a use or activity, which is the subject of a variance, violates its conditions or no longer complies with the findings contained in Section 17.50.05 of this chapter, the holder of the variance shall be notified of the noncompliance finding. Within sixty (60) days of this notification, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the revocation of the variance. Based on a report from the planning department, findings contained in Section 17.50.05 of this chapter, and public testimony, the commission may revoke the variance, reinstate the variance or reinstate the variance with conditions that may be necessary to assure compliance with the purpose and objectives of this ordinance. The decision of the commission can be appealed to the city council consistent with the requirements of Chapter 17.06. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.50.11 - New application. 
Following the denial or revocation of a variance, no application for the same or substantially the same variance shall be filed within one year of the date of denial or revocation.  
17.50.12 - Variance to run with the land. 
A variance shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the property or structure that was the subject of the variance application. 
Exhibit 50-1: Variance Permit Process
  
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.52 - MINOR DEVIATIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.52.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a mechanism whereby minor deviations from district regulations can be granted by the planning director or the chief building official. A minor deviation may be granted up to ten percent of the district regulations and up to twenty (20) percent for setback distances. Any minor deviation that exceeds the deviation percentage explained above shall be processed as a variance consistent with the regulations detailed in Chapter 17.50. 
Minor deviations shall only be granted when practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and conditions inconsistent with the purpose and objectives of this ordinance may result from the strict application of certain provisions of this ordinance. The granting of a minor deviation and its associated conditions shall not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in vicinity and in other like districts in Woodlake. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.52.02 - Applicability. 
The planning director may grant a minor deviation from district regulations, including setbacks, lot dimensions, height of structures and fences, walls and hedges, lot coverage, parking standards and sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.52.03 - Application and fee. 
An application for a minor deviation shall be made to the planning department on a form prescribed by the department. The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.52.04 - Report and findings. 
The city planner shall prepare a report on the minor deviation application and shall review the following findings in regards to a minor deviation. 
A.	There are special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, unclear property lines, where the strict application of this Ordinance deprives such property right possessed by other property in the same vicinity or other properties that have the same district classification; 
B.	That granting a minor deviation is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same vicinity or other properties that have the same district classification; 
C.	That granting the minor deviation will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and district in which the property is located; and 
D.	That granting the minor deviation does not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and district in which the property is located. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.52.05 - Action of the planning director. 
Minor deviations may be processed as an administrative matter by the planning director. Following a review of a minor deviation application and the findings listed above, the Planning Director may take action on the minor deviation. The Planning Director can approve, approve with conditions or deny the minor deviation based on the findings listed above. Following a decision by the planning director, an administrative agreement, consistent with Chapter 17.63, shall be prepared that outlines the findings and conditions of the decision. 
The director's decision shall be final unless appealed to the planning commission consistent with the requirements contained in Chapter 17.06. Within ten days of approving the minor deviation, the director shall transmit a copy of the administrative agreement to the person that filed the minor deviation application. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.52.06 - Conditions. 
The director can approve a minor deviation subject to conditions. Conditions will assure that the approved minor deviations shall not constitute a grant of a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and district in which such property is situated. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.54 - SITE PLAN REVIEW 
Sections: 
 
17.54.01 - Purpose 
The purpose of the site plan process is to enable the planning commission to make a finding that the proposed development is in conformity with the intent and provisions of this ordinance and to guide the building department in the issuance of building permits. The site plan review process is constructed to ensure that development constructed in Woodlake meets good urban design standards, does not have an adverse impact on neighboring properties, does not impact the public health, safety and welfare, and produces a development that will enhance the image and marketability of Woodlake. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.54.02 - Applicability. 
The site plan review process shall be applicable to all uses on the permitted and conditional use lists of Woodlake's zone districts. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.54.03 - Exemptions. 
The following uses shall be exempt from Woodlake's site plan review process: 
A.	Single-family dwellings;
B.	Open space uses that do not require a building permit;
C.	Incidental and accessory structures;
D.	Various public and private utility and infrastructure improvements;
E.	Small family day care homes;
F.	Existing permitted uses whose building area is being increased by less than twenty-five (25) percent; and 
G.	Other uses the planning director determines do not require site plan review because it would not further the objectives of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.54.04 - Application and fee. 
An application for a site plan permit shall be made to the planning department on a form prescribed by the department. The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council. Uses requiring a conditional use permit shall not be required to pay for a site plan review permit in that the fee would be covered by the fee for a conditional use permit. The information requirements detailed below will be required of use permit applicants. The application shall include the following information: 
A.	Name and address of applicant.
B.	Statement that the applicant is the owner of the property, or is the authorized of the owner. 
C.	An accurate scale drawing of the site and the surrounding area for a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet from each boundary of the site showing the existing locations of streets and property lines. 
D.	Preliminary floor plans and front, side and rear elevations of the proposed structures.
E.	A site plan, drawn to scale, which shall show the following:
1.	Lot and building dimensions.
2.	All buildings and structures: location, size, height, and proposed use.
3.	Yards and space between buildings.
4.	Walls and fences; location, height and materials.
5.	Off-street parking and loading: Location, number of spaces, dimensions of spaces, and internal circulation pattern. 
6.	Access: pedestrian, vehicular and service: points of ingress and egress.
7.	Signs: location, size, height, and type of illumination.
8.	Lighting: location and general nature.
9.	Street dedication and improvements.
10.	Landscaping and irrigation: location and type.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.54.05 - Action of the site plan review committee. 
Within fifteen (15) working days after the submission of a site plan, the site plan review committee shall review the site plan and shall provide a recommendation to the planning commission of approval, approval with conditions or denial. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.54.06 - Report and findings. 
The planning department shall prepare a report on the site plan permit application. The department shall prepare a report and recommendation based on the findings and conditions provided by the site plan review committee. This report shall be forwarded to the planning commission. The findings shall include the following: 
A.	That the location of the proposed use is in accordance with the purpose and objectives of this ordinance and the purposes of the district in which the subject site is located. 
B.	That the location of the proposed use and the conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity. 
C.	That the proposed use will not have a significant impact on the environment.
D.	That the proposed use will comply with applicable provisions contained in this ordinance.
E.	That the proposed use is consistent with the Woodlake general plan.
F.	That the site for the proposed use is adequate in size, shape and location to accommodate the use for which it is proposed. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.54.07 - Action of the planning commission. 
Following the review of the planning department's report on the site plan review application, the planning commission shall take action on the site plan permit. The commission can approve, approve with conditions or deny the site plan permit based on the finding listed above. The commission's decision shall be final unless appealed to the city council consistent with the requirements contained in Chapter 17.06. 
Within ten days of adopting a resolution on the site plan permit, the commission shall transmit a copy of its resolution along with its required conditions to the person that filed the site plan permit application. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.54.08 - Street dedication and improvements. 
In addition to the conditions detailed in the planning commission's resolution, changes in the neighborhood that would result from traffic generated by the development undergoing site plan review may require land dedication and/or street improvements. Should the commission find that approval of the proposed development combined with existing traffic in and near the subject property warrant road improvements along the subject property, the commission may warrant conditions as follows: 
A.	The applicant shall dedicate necessary right-of-way along the subject property adequate to facilitate the installation of roadway improvements consistent with Woodlake's Circulation Element and Improvements Manual. 
B.	The applicant shall install roadway improvements, including curbs, gutters, sidewalks and street paveout, along the subject property that are consistent with Woodlake's Circulation Element and Improvements Manual. 
C.	The applicant shall install non-roadway improvements within the roadway right-of-way, including street signs, street lights, street trees and bus stops. 
All improvements shall be constructed and installed to city standards and shall be installed at the time of development. Where it is determined by the planning commission that it is impractical to install any or all improvements at the time of development, an agreement to make such improvements may be accepted in lieu thereof. In the event of such an arrangement, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with Woodlake for the installment of improvements before a building permit is issued. The applicant shall deposit money with the City of Woodlake or post a bond with the city in the amount determined by the city engineer to guarantee the installation of said improvements. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.54.09 - Building permit. 
Before a building permit shall be issued for any building or structure proposed as part of a site plan review, the chief building official shall find that the proposed building location and size, facilities and improvements are in conformance with the site plan and conditions approved by the planning commission or city council. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.54.10 - Lapse of site plan. 
Site plan approval shall lapse and shall become void one year following the date on which it was approved unless, prior to expiration of one year, a building permit has been issued by the chief building official and construction has commenced. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.54.11 - Revocation. 
Upon violation of any conditions of an approved site plan, said site plan shall be revoked and building permits associated with an approved site plan shall be suspended. Within thirty (30) days of the revocation and suspension, the city council shall consider the matter. If not satisfied that the regulation, general provision, condition or conditions are being complied with, the city council may revoke the site plan and/or building permit and take action as may be necessary to ensure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.54.12 - Site plan to run with the land. 
A site plan shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the property or building that was the subject of a site plan application. 
Exhitbit 54-1: Site Plan Review Process
  
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.56 - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.56.01 - Purpose. 
The lack of certainty in the approval of development projects can result in the waste of resources, escalate the cost of housing and other development to the consumer, and discourage investment in and commitment to comprehensive planning which would make maximum efficient utilization of resources at the least economic cost to the public. A development agreement assures the applicant of a development project that existing policies, rules and regulations, and conditions of approval, remain in place once the project has been approved. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.56.02 - Authority. 
Any city may enter into a development agreement with any person having a legal or equitable interest in real property for the development of property. Further, Woodlake may enter into a development agreement with any person having equitable interest in real property in unincorporated territory within its sphere of influence. However, the agreement shall not become operative unless annexation proceedings are completed within the time limit specified by the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.56.03 - Development agreement contents. 
A development agreement shall specify the duration of the agreement, the permitted uses of the property, the density or intensity of the use, the maximum height and size or buildings, and provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes. The development agreement may contain conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions shall not prevent development of the land for the uses and to the density or intensity of development set forth in the agreement. The agreement may provide that construction shall be commenced within a specified time and that the project or any phase thereof be completed within the specified time. The agreement may also include terms and conditions relating to applicant financing of necessary public facilities and subsequent reimbursement over time. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.56.04 - Application and fees. 
An application for a development agreement shall be made to the planning department on a form prescribed by the department. The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.56.05 - Hearings and notice. 
A public hearing on an application for a development agreement shall be held by the planning commission and city council. Notice of intention to consider adoption of a development agreement shall be given consistent with Chapter 17.06. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.56.06 - Report and findings. 
The planning department shall prepare a report on the development agreement application. The department shall provide a recommendation based on the following findings: 
A.	That the location of the proposed project is in accordance with the purpose and objectives of this ordinance and the purposes of the district in which the subject site is located. 
B.	That the location of the proposed project and the conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity. 
C.	That the proposed project will not have a significant impact on the environment.
D.	That the proposed project will comply with applicable provisions contained in this ordinance. 
E.	That the proposed project is consistent with the Woodlake general plan and any specific plans. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.56.07 - Development agreement regulations. 
Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, rules, regulations, and policies governing the permitted uses of land, density, and design, improvement and construction standards and specifications, applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement, shall be those rules, regulations, and official policies in force at the time of execution of the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.56.08 - Action of the planning commission. 
Following a public hearing, the planning commission shall review the planning department's report and shall take actin on the development agreement. The commission can approve, approve with conditions or deny the development agreement. The commission's action and findings shall be forwarded in a resolution to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.56.09 - Action of the city council. 
Following a public hearing, the city council shall consider the commission's action and findings and the information contained in the staff report. The council can approve, approve with modifications or deny the development agreement. Said actions shall be by means of an ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.56.10 - Amendment or cancellation of development agreement. 
Either party may propose an amendment to or, cancellation of, in whole or in part of the development agreement previously entered into. If proposed by the applicant the procedure shall be the same as the procedure for entering into an agreement. However, where the city council initiates the proposed amendment to, or the cancelation of, the development agreement, it first shall give at least thirty (30) days notice to the applicant of its intention to initiate proceedings in advance of giving public notice. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.56.11 - Recordation of development agreement. 
No later than ten days after Woodlake enters into a development agreement, the city clerk shall record with the county recorders office a copy of the agreement. The burdens of the agreement shall be binding upon, and the benefits of the agreement shall apply to all successors in interest to the parties to the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.56.12 - Review of development agreement. 
An approved development agreement shall be reviewed at least every twelve (12) months, at which time the applicant, or successor in interest thereto, shall be required to demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. If, as a result, of such periodic review, the local agency finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the applicant or successor in interest thereto has not complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the local agency may terminate or modify the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.58 - DENSITY BONUS 
Sections: 
 
17.58.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of a density bonus is to encourage the private sector to construct affordable housing for "target households" as defined by the State Health and Safety Code. A density bonus can be approved by Woodlake if a private sector housing developer agrees to construct a certain percentage of target households and agrees to maintain their affordability for a specific time period. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.58.02 - Definitions. 
A.	Density bonus: An increase in units of at least twenty-five (25) percent over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the residential zone district or the Woodlake land use element. 
B.	Developer incentives:
1.	Reduce or eliminate standards contained in the subdivision ordinance or Woodlake's Improvements Manual. 
2.	Reduce or eliminate residential zone district requirements, including open space, lot size, setbacks, or parking standards. 
3.	Reduce or eliminate any design requirements exceeding Uniform Building Code specification.
C.	Housing development: One or more residential projects that have five or more residential units. 
D.	Low income household: A unit affordable to a household at a rent that does not exceed eighty (80) percent of the county median household income. 
E.	Very low income household: A unit affordable to a household at a rent that does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the county median household income. 
F.	Extremely low income household: A units affordable to a household at a rent that does not exceed thirty (30) percent of the county median household income. 
G.	Target households: Lower-income households or senior citizen households.
H.	Senior households: Those residential units that have at least one occupant that is at least fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.58.03 - Application and fees. 
An application for a density bonus shall be made to the planning department on a form prescribed by the department. The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.58.04 - Density bonus requirements. 
Government Code Section 65915 indicates that when an applicant seeks a density bonus for a housing development the density bonus requirements are triggered when the residential development sets aside at least twenty (20) percent of the total units as affordable to low-income households; or at least ten percent of the total units as affordable to very low-income households; or at least fifty (50) percent of the units for occupancy by "qualifying residents" (senior citizens). 
Development concessions or incentives that may be provided by the city of Woodlake include a reduction in site development standards; a modification of zoning code requirements (including a reduction in setbacks, square footage requirements, or parking spaces; or architectural design requirements which exceed the minimum building standards); approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development, and if such nonresidential uses are compatible with the project; or other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the city of Woodlake, which result in identifiable cost reductions. 
A project that receives a density bonus and concession or incentive must retain affordability of the units for at least thirty (30) years. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.58.05 - Application. 
An application for a density bonus shall be made to the planning department on a form prescribed by the department. The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.58.06 - Public hearings. 
Upon receipt of a density bonus application, the planning department shall prepare a public hearing notice consistent with the requirements contained in Chapter 17.04. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.58.07 - Report and findings. 
The planning department shall prepare a report on the density bonus application. The department shall provide a recommendation based on the following density bonus requirements: 
A.	The housing development qualifies for a density bonus based on the requirements outlined in Section 17.58.04. 
B.	The applicant has provided to the city the legal instrument that will insure that "target households" will remain affordable for at least thirty (30) years. 
C.	The application has selected a developer incentive or concession.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.58.08 - Action of planning commission. 
Following a public hearing, the planning commission shall review the planning department's report and shall take action on the density bonus application. The commission can approve, approve with conditions or deny the density bonus. The commission's recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council. 
If the commission approves the density bonus and the developer provides an instrument that will insure that "target households" will remain affordable for thirty (30) years or longer, the commission may grant a developer incentive. If the commission finds that a developer incentive is not necessary to insure the affordability of "target households," it shall make a written finding that the incentive or concession is not necessary. 
The commission may deny a density bonus if it finds that the housing development will have an adverse impact on the public health, safety or welfare; there is no feasible method to mitigate or avoid the project's adverse impact on the environment; or the housing project does not comply with Section 17.58.04. 
The commission's decision shall not be based on a finding that the housing project will be occupied by "target households" and that this condition may have an adverse impact on the neighborhood or community. 
Within ten days of adopting a resolution on the density bonus, the planning department shall forward the commission's recommendation to the city council and shall transmit a copy of the commission's resolution to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.58.09 - Action of the city council. 
Following a public hearing, the city council shall consider the planning commission's recommendation and shall take action on the density bonus application. The council can approve, approve with modifications or deny the density bonus application. One of the following actions shall be initiated. 
A.	If the city council approves or approves with modification an ordinance on the density bonus application, the council shall initiate proceedings to adopt a second reading of the ordinance. 
B.	Any modification of the proposed density bonus by the city council, which is based on information not considered by the planning commission, shall cause the density bonus application to be referred back to the commission for its reevaluation and recommendation. The planning commission is not required to hold a noticed public hearing. Failure of the commission to make a recommendation within forty (40) days after the referral shall cause the council's decision to become final. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.58.10 - Density bonus housing agreement. 
Agreements, contracts or other instruments between the city and the developer shall be required to insure that "target households" shall remain affordable for the period of time agreed to by the city and the developer. Said agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney and shall be recorded with the county recorders office. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.58.11 - Density bonus calculations. 
The base density of a property for which a density bonus is being requested shall be determined by the property's zoning. A housing development may qualify for a minimum increase, or density bonus, of 35 percent over the maximum number of permitted residential units of the property's zoning. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.60 - NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES 
Sections: 
 
17.60.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent the expansion of non-conforming uses and structures to the maximum extent possible, to establish criteria under which they may be continued or possibly expanded and to provide for the modification or removal of these non-conforming uses and structures in a fair, defensible and timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.60.02 - Definitions. 
A.	A non-conforming use is a use of a structure or land that was lawfully established and maintained prior to the adoption of the Woodlake zoning ordinance but which, does not conform with the use regulations for the district in which it is located. 
B.	A non-conforming structure is a structure that was lawfully erected prior to the adoption of the Woodlake zoning ordinance but which does not conform with the standards of coverage, setbacks, height or distance between structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.60.03 - Continuation, maintenance and abandonment. 
A.	A use legally occupying a structure or a site on the effective date of the zoning ordinance (Ordinance No. 287, 1974) or amendments thereto, which does not conform with the use regulations for the district in which the use is located shall be deemed a legal, non-conforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
B.	A structure legally occupying a site on the effective date of the zoning ordinance (Ordinance No. 287, 1974) or amendments thereto, which does not conform with the standards of coverage, setbacks, height, or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located shall be deemed a legal, non-conforming structure and may be continued, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
C.	A sign or outdoor advertising structure legally occupying a site on the effective date of the zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, which does not conform with the standards for message content, location, size, lighting, or movement prescribed in Chapter 17.69 for the district in which it is located shall be deemed to be a non-conforming sign or outdoor advertising structure, and may be displayed and maintained except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
D.	Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on a non-conforming site, a non-conforming structure, or a non-conforming sign or outdoor advertising structure. Improvements in the design or appearance of these non-conforming features may be made so long as the discrepancy between the existing conditions of the use, structure, sign or advertising structure and the current district standards is not increased. 
E.	Alterations and additions to uses that are non-conforming shall be prohibited unless required by law or unless the moving, altering or enlargement will result in the elimination of the non-conforming use. 
F.	Alterations and additions to structures, signs and outdoor advertising structure shall be prohibited unless required by law or unless the moving, altering or enlargement will result in the elimination of the non-conforming structure, sign or outdoor advertising structure. 
G.	Whenever a non-conforming use, structure, sign or outdoor advertising structure has been abandoned, discontinued, or changed to a conforming use for a continuous period of six months, the non-conforming use shall not be re-established and the non-conforming structure, sign or outdoor advertising structure shall be removed. 
H.	Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or applied so as to require the termination, discontinuance or removal or so as to prevent the expansion, modernization, replacement, maintenance, alteration, reconstruction or rebuilding and continued use of a public building or public utility buildings, structures, equipment and facilities. 
I.	Fences, walls and hedges that do not conform to the provisions of Woodlake zoning ordinance shall, within two years of the effective date of this ordinance, be removed or made to conform. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.60.04 - Restoration of damaged structure. 
A.	Whenever a non-conforming use, structure, sign or outdoor advertising structure is destroyed by fire, or other calamity, or by an act of God or by the public enemy to the extent that less than fifty (50) percent of the value of a use, structure, sign or outdoor advertising structure is destroyed as determined by the chief building official, the feature may be restored; provided, that restoration is started within three months of the act of destruction and is completed within one year from the time of the event. 
B.	Whenever a non-conforming use, structure, sign or outdoor advertising structure is destroyed by fire, or other calamity, or by an act of God or by the public enemy to the extent that more than fifty (50) percent of the value of a use, structure, sign or outdoor advertising structure is destroyed as determined by the chief building official, the feature shall be voluntarily razed, shall be required by law to be razed or shall be restored to conformity with the regulations for the district in which the feature is located. A non-conforming use shall not be resumed. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.62 - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.62.01 - Purpose. 
It is the policy of the city, pursuant to the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (hereafter called "fair housing laws"), to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures to ensure equal access to housing and facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities. This chapter establishes a procedure for making requests for reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures of the jurisdiction to comply fully with the intent and purpose of fair housing laws. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.62.02 - Applicability. 
Reasonable accommodation in the land use and zoning context means providing individuals with disabilities or developers of housing for people with disabilities, flexibility in the application of land use and zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures, or even waiving certain requirements, when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities. 
An individual with a disability is someone who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone with a record of such impairment. 
A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by an individual with a disability, his or her representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, when the application of a land use, zoning., or building regulation, policy, practice or procedure acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.62.03 - Application and fee. 
Any eligible person as defined in Section 17.62.02 may request a reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures. An application for reasonable accommodation shall be made to the planning department on a form prescribed by the department. The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council. 
Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.62.04 - Action of planning director. 
The planning director shall prepare a report on the reasonable accommodation application. Reasonable accommodation applications shall be processed as an administrative matter. The planning director can approve, approve with conditions or deny the application based on the findings listed below. Following a decision by the planning director, an administrative agreement, consistent with Chapter 17.63, shall be prepared that outlines the findings and conditions of the decision. The decision shall be made within thirty (30) days of receiving the application. The written decision of the planning director shall be final unless appealed to the planning commission consistent with the requirements contained in Chapter 17.06. 
The planning director shall render a decision based on the following findings: 
A.	The Woodlake housing element contains policies and action programs that removes governmental constraints to housing for individuals with disabilities, including local land use and zoning constraints. 
B.	The attorney general of the State has recommended that cities and counties implement fair housing reasonable accommodation procedures for making land use and zoning determinations concerning individuals with disabilities. 
C.	A fair housing reasonable accommodation will ensure Woodlake's compliance with federal and state fair housing laws and provide greater opportunities for the development of critically needed housing for individuals with disabilities. 
D.	The housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be used by an individual with disabilities protected under fair housing laws. 
E.	Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make housing available to an individual with disabilities protected under the fair share housing laws. 
F.	Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city. 
G.	Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the jurisdiction's land use and zoning or building codes. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.62.05 - Appeal to the planning commission. 
Upon an appeal of the planning director's decision, the planning commission shall take action by resolution on the reasonable accommodation application. The commission shall consider the planning director's decision, the claims contained in the appeal, and the findings contained in Section 17.62.04 of this chapter. The commission can approve, approve with modifications or deny the recommendation of the planning director. The decision of the commission shall be final. The decision shall become effective three days following the date of the commission's approval at which time the applicant may secure a building permit for the accommodation under consideration. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.63 - ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL 
Sections: 
 
17.63.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a process whereby the planning director can make administrative decisions on minor planning requests in order to expedite the building or planning process. Said decisions are minor planning or building issues that will not negate the purpose and intent of the Woodlake general plan or zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.63.02 - Applicability. 
The planning director may review and grant approval of the following minor planning requests: 
A.	Home occupation permits;
B.	Temporary conditional use permits;
C.	Building permits for fences, signs and accessory structures;
D.	Site plans for parking lots;
E.	Building permit applications for additions to existing buildings and uses, where the existing building or use is being expanded by less than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the existing building or use; 
F.	Classification of conditional uses, placing uses on the conditional use list of districts with the finding that the use to be added is similar in nature to the uses already listed; and 
G.	Minor deviations.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.63.03 - Definitions. 
A.	"Administrative agreement:" An agreement duly executed and legally binding between the city, prepared and signed by the planning director, and the applicant for a minor planning request. The agreement will delineate the terms and conditions agreed upon by the two parties. 
B.	"Minor planning request:" The temporary use of a structure or land, a deviation from a development standard of a district, addition of uses to a conditional use list, site plans for existing land uses, where the existing building is being expanded by less than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the building or use, or other minor planning requests that might be added to this chapter by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.63.04 - Application and fee. 
An application for a minor planning request shall be submitted to the planning department on a form prescribed by the planning department. The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.63.05 - Findings. 
The planning director shall review the minor planning request and shall make the following findings prior to approving the request. 
A.	That the minor planning request will not adversely impact the purpose and intent of the Woodlake zoning ordinance. 
B.	That the minor planning request will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and district in which the property is located. 
C.	That approving the project will not have a significant adverse impact on the environment.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.63.06 - Action of planning director. 
Following a review of a minor planning request and the findings above, the planning director may take action on the matter. The director can approve, approve with conditions or deny the planning request. Following a decision by the planning director, an administrative resolution shall be prepared that outlines the findings and conditions of the director's decision. The planning director and the applicant shall sign the administrative resolution. 
The director's decision shall be final unless appealed to the planning commission consistent with the requirements contained in Chapter 17.06. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.63.07 - Appeal to the planning commission. 
Upon an appeal of the planning director's decision, the planning commission shall take action by resolution on the minor planning request. The commission shall consider the planning director's decision, the claims contained in the appeal, and the findings contained in Section 17.63.04 of this chapter. The commission can approve, approve with modifications or deny the recommendation of the planning director. The decision of the commission shall be final. The decision shall become effective three days following the date of the commission's approval at which time the applicant may secure a building permit for the accommodation under consideration. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.63.08 - Conditions. 
The planning director can approve a minor planning request subject to conditions. Such conditions will ensure that the approved project shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and district in which such subject property is located. Said conditions shall be contained in an administrative resolution. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.63.09 - Administrative resolution requirements. 
To prepare an administrative resolution, the planning director shall find that: 
A.	A person has a legal or equitable interest in real property for the development of such property. 
B.	The minor planning request is consistent with the Woodlake general plan.
C.	The approval of the minor planning request is within the purpose and intent of the Woodlake zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.63.10 - Administrative resolution contents. 
An administrative agreement shall indicate the type of minor planning request being desired; the findings and decision of the planning director; a list of conditions; and it shall contain signature lines for the applicant and the planning director. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.64 - SPECIAL USES 
Sections: 
 
17.64.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide procedures, development standards and location criteria for special uses within the city. Special uses may include but are not limited to card rooms and pool halls, group care homes, modular buildings and adult businesses. The location criteria and development standards for special uses is intended to ensure that these uses do not have an adverse impact on the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.64.02 - Accessory structures. 
Accessory structures provide opportunities for small scale aesthetic and shade structures; functional, protected, enclosed ancillary storage and activity space; and additional guest housing; among other benefits. As subordinate facilities to a principal structure, however, appropriate regulation is required in order to ensure compatibility of land uses, protect privacy of neighbors, ensure minimum open space and area requirements, and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the neighborhood and community. 
It is the purpose of this section to recognize accessory structures as desirable and beneficial accessory uses, and to provide for such uses under certain circumstances so long as land use compatibility is maintained, privacy of neighbors is protected, minimum open space and area requirements are maintained, and public health, safety, and welfare is preserved. 
For purposes of this chapter, garages and carports shall not be considered to be accessory structures. Accessory structures shall conform to all of the following requirements: 
A.	Accessory structure review shall be performed by the planning department.
B.	All accessory structures shall comply with the requirements of the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the city. 
C.	An accessory structure in any district may only be constructed on a lot containing a principal structure. 
D.	Accessory structures, and any accessory uses (including surfaced area for parking) may not exceed thirty (30) percent of the square footage of the required rear yard. 
E.	The maximum height for an accessory structure is fifteen (15) feet.
F.	Minimum setbacks for an accessory structure shall be:
1.	Front yard: Same as principal structure.
2.	Rear yard: Ten feet (Zero feet if rear yard adjoins an alley).
3.	Interior side: Five feet (Zero feet if interior side yard adjoins an alley). If the accessory structure is less than seven feet in height and contains no electrical, plumbing or mechanical improvements, the side yard setback may be reduced to zero feet. 
4.	Street side: Same as principal structure.
G.	The size of a non-habitable accessory structure shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the gross square footage of the primary structure (including any attached facilities such as a garage). 
H.	An applicant may apply for a minor deviation permit to reduce the required ten-foot rear setback for accessory structures to a minimum of five feet for lots not adjoining an alley. 
I.	An applicant may apply for a minor deviation permit to exceed the limitations established herein on structure height and/or size. 
J.	Accessory structures shall individually be located a minimum of ten feet from them principal structure and any other accessory structure. 
K.	Except for guest houses and second dwelling units, accessory structures shall not be used for dwelling purposes. 
L.	A non-habitable accessory structure (small shed) less than or equal to one hundred twenty (120) square feet in size and intended for storage purposes only may be located within the required rear yard or interior side yard but not in the front yard. The maximum shed height shall be seven feet. 
M	Shipping containers shall not be permitted in any single-family or duplex residential district within the city. 
N.	Portable carports shall not be permitted in the front or street-side, side yards.
Exhibit 64-1: Selected Accessory Structure Standards
  
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.64.03 - Temporary sales of alcoholic beverages. 
The temporary sales of alcoholic beverages shall not be subject to a conditional use permit, but shall be subject to review and approval by the planning director and police chief in accordance with the temporary conditional use permit procedures detailed in Section 17.48.14. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.64.04 - Modular structures. 
The purpose of this section is to control the approval and location of all modular structures within the city and to ensure that the uses of said structures, which shall meet the use requirements of the district in which the property is located, will not have a detrimental effect on the appearance of Woodlake nor on surrounding properties. Regulation of modular structures is therefore deemed necessary to promote the public health, safety and welfare of residents of the city. 
A modular structure shall mean any designed, manufactured, remanufactured, used, or converted to a transportable building for use for commercial, office or industrial purposes. 
A.	A permanent modular structure shall be approved by the planning director and shall comply with the following development standards: 
1.	A permanent modular structure shall be place on a permanent foundation.
2.	A permanent modular structure shall be of an architectural style that is consistent with buildings in the surrounding neighborhood. The modular structure shall require skirting around the base of the structure. 
3.	Permanent parking spaces and unloading zones shall be required consistent with Chapter 17.68. 
4.	Landscaping and irrigation shall be required consistent with Chapter 17.66. 
5.	The business or use conducted within the structure shall secure a business license from the city prior to being open to the public. 
B.	A temporary modular structure shall be approved by the planning director and shall comply with the following development standards: 
1.	A temporary modular structure shall be removed from the subject property within thirty (30) days. 
2.	A temporary modular structure shall require skirting around the base of the structure.
3.	The business or use conducted within the structure shall secure a business license from the city prior to being open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.64.05 - Garage conversions. 
The conversion of a garage to a living area will require a building permit as well as the approval of the planning director. As a condition of approval, the conversion of a garage to a living area will require the property owner to construct on the same property a two-car garage or two-car carport consistent with all applicable district regulations. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.64.06 - Garage, rummage and yard sales. 
Garage, rummage or yard sales conducted in residential districts shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.	No more than three sales may be conducted in any one calendar year.
B	Each sale shall last no more than two consecutive days beginning each day no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and ending no later than 7:00 p.m. 
C.	Personal property sold at a sale shall not include second hand goods obtained for purposes of resale. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.64.07 - Home occupations. 
Persons wishing to conduct a home occupation, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of a building as a residential dwelling, shall apply for a business license/home occupation permit through the planning director. Home occupations shall comply with the following regulations: 
A.	There shall be no stock-in-trade other than products manufactured on the premises. Direct sales shall not be made on the premises. 
B.	A home occupation shall be conducted within the residential dwelling by the resident and shall be clearly incidental to the use of the structure as a dwelling. 
C.	A home occupation shall not be conducted in an accessory structure and there shall be no storage of equipment or supplies in an accessory structure or in the yard area. 
D.	A home occupation shall not involve the use of any material or mechanical equipment not recognized as being part of normal household or hobby uses. 
E.	No signs shall be permitted on the premises advertising the existence of a home occupation in the residence. 
F.	No one other than the resident(s) of the residence shall be employed in the conduct of the home occupation. 
G.	A home occupation shall not create any light, vibrations or noise beyond the boundaries of the subject property. 
H.	A home occupation shall not create pedestrian, automobile or truck traffic significantly in excess of the normal amount generated by a residential dwelling. 
I.	The applicant for a home occupation permits may appeal the decision of the planning director consistent with Chapter 17.06. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.64.08 - Community care facilities. 
A "community care facility" means any facility, place, or building that is maintained and operated to provide non-medical residential care, day treatment, adult day care, or foster family agency services for children, adults, or children and adults, including, but not limited to, the physically handicapped, mentally impaired, incompetent persons, and abused or neglected children. A community care facility shall be permitted in any single-family residential district so long as there is six or fewer persons, excluding supervisorial services, and that there is not a similar facilities within one-quarter mile of the care facility. A community care facility shall include the following: 
A.	"Residential facility" means any family home, group care facility, or similar facility determined by the director, for 24-hour non-medical care of persons in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual. 
B.	"Adult day program" means any community-based facility or program that provides care to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of these individuals on less than a 24-hour basis. 
C.	"Therapeutic day services facility" means any facility that provides non-medical care, counseling, educational or vocational support, or social rehabilitation services on less than a 24-hour basis to persons under eighteen (18) years of age who would otherwise be placed in foster care or who are returning to families from foster care. 
D.	"Foster family home" means any residential facility providing 24-hour care for six or fewer foster children that is owned, leased, or rented and is the residence of the foster parent or parents, including their family, in whose care the foster children have been placed. The placement may be by a public or private child placement agency or by a court order, or by voluntary placement by a parent, parents, or guardian. 
E.	"Small family home" means any residential facility, in the licensee's family residence, that provides 24-hour care for six or fewer foster children who have mental disorders or developmental or physical disabilities and who require special care and supervision as a result of their disabilities. 
F.	"Social rehabilitation facility" means any residential facility that provides social rehabilitation services for no longer than eighteen (18) months in a group setting to adults recovering from mental illness who temporarily need assistance, guidance, or counseling. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.64.09 - Mobile home parks. 
The purpose of this section is to establish procedures and development standards for mobile home parks in Woodlake. Woodlake's housing element acknowledges that these parks serve as a valuable source of housing for the elderly and households in the low- to moderate-income categories. 
A.	Mobile home parks, new and expansion of existing, shall require a conditional use permit consistent with Chapter 17.48. 
B.	The residential density of a mobile home park shall not exceed the land use designation of the Woodlake general plan. 
C.	The minimum parcel size for a mobile home park shall be five acres.
D.	The conditions and development standards for a new or an expansion of an existing mobile home park shall be as follows: 
1.	Each mobile home pad shall consist of a base material adequate to support a mobile home. 
2.	No more than seventy-five (75) percent of an individual lot shall be covered with structures, including the mobile home, carport, patio and storage buildings. 
3.	All tongues and tow bars shall be removed once a mobile home is fixed to the lot.
4.	All mobile homes shall be fitted with skirting, extending from the floor level of the mobile home to the ground. 
5.	A mobile home shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet and a minimum length of forty (40) feet. 
6.	The front yard of each individual mobile home lot shall be landscaped.
7.	An on-site manager shall be required for all mobile home parks containing sixteen (16) or more mobile home units. 
8.	Setbacks for the mobile home park shall be as follows:
a.	Front yard: Fifteen (15) feet.
b.	Side yard: Fifteen (15) feet.
c.	Rear yard: Fifteen (15) feet.
9.	Setbacks for a mobile home shall be as follows:
a.	Front yard: Ten feet.
b.	Side yard: Five feet.
c.	Rear yard: Ten feet.
10.	Accessory structures including, greenhouses, storage sheds, shall not be located within three feet of a side or rear yard. 
11.	Each mobile home site shall provide two off-street parking stalls. Said stalls may be designed as tandem stalls. Each stall shall have a minimum width of ten feet and a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet. All stalls shall be paved consistent with Woodlake's Improvements Manual. 
12.	A seven-foot solid block wall shall be constructed along all property lines.
13.	A mobile home park shall have no fewer than two entrances for vehicles from a public street. 
14.	Five percent of the gross area of any mobile home park shall be devoted to useable open space. 
15.	Interior streets within the mobile home park shall have a minimum paved width of thirty-two (32) feet. Said streets shall be constructed consistent with Woodlake's Improvements Manual. 
16.	All setback areas that front onto a public street shall be provided with landscaping and an automated irrigation system. 
Exhibit 64-2: Selected Mobile Home Park Standards
  
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.64.10 - Recycling/buyback centers. 
Recycling and buyback centers shall be permitted uses in all of Woodlake's commercial districts subject to the applicant securing a temporary use permit. The conditions and development standards for recycling/buyback centers shall be as follows: 
A.	The location of these centers shall be conducted in a parking lot that is associated with a commercial use. The centers shall not be permitted to locate in the front of any commercial storefront but should be established on the side or rear of the commercial development. 
B.	The recycling/buyback centers shall provide trash containers.
C.	At the conclusion of daily business, the area around the center shall be cleaned of all trash and debris, and the trash containers shall be emptied. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.64.11 - Second residential units. 
A.	The construction of second residential units within the city shall be consistent with Government Code Section 65852.2, which provides for cities to set standards for the development of second dwelling units with ministerial review in an effort to increase the supply of small, affordable residential units throughout the state. 
B.	Any application for secondary dwelling unit that meets the location and development standards contained in this section, shall be approved ministerially, through Woodlake's building permit process, without discretionary review or public hearing. 
C.	One secondary dwelling unit may be located on any lot zoned for single-family dwellings.
D.	Applications for second dwelling units shall conform to the following submittal requirements:
1.	A scaled plot plan of the subject parcel on which the secondary dwelling unit will be located. Indicate the location and dimensioned setbacks, and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures on the site. Provide dimensions of all easements, right-of-way(s), building envelopes, parking, and paved areas. 
2.	Complete floor plans of both existing and proposed conditions shall be provided. Each room shall be dimensioned and resulting floor area calculation included. The use of each room shall be labeled. The size and location of all doors, closets, walls, and cooking facilities shall be clearly depicted. 
3.	Elevations that show all exterior structure dimensions, all architectural projections, and all openings for both the existing residence and the proposed secondary dwelling unit. The secondary dwelling unit shall meet the following design standards: 
a.	A second dwelling unit shall have a roof pitch and roof overhang equal to the roof pitch and roof overhang of the primary residence. The roof material shall be the same as the material on the primary residence unless the planning director finds that a different standard would be more compatible with the neighborhood. 
b.	A second dwelling unit shall have the same siding material as the primary residence unless the planning director finds that a different material would be more compatible with the neighborhood. 
c.	The maximum size of a secondary dwelling unit shall be six hundred forty (640) square feet. 
d.	No addition to the primary dwelling to accommodate a secondary dwelling unit may exceed three hundred twenty-five (325) square feet. 
e.	A secondary dwelling unit shall be permitted only if it complies with all primary dwelling unit setbacks, based on the zoning district in which it is located. The minimum required distance between the secondary dwelling unit and the primary dwelling unit, and all other structures on the property, shall be in accordance with the Uniform Building Code. 
f.	A secondary dwelling unit shall be permitted only if it complies with all primary dwelling unit height restrictions, based on the zoning district in which it is located. 
g.	The property shall conform to the lot coverage requirements applicable to the primary dwelling unit, based on the zoning district in which it is located. 
h.	A secondary dwelling unit shall provide one off-street parking space for each bedroom of the secondary dwelling unit in addition to that required for the primary dwelling unit. This additional parking space may be covered or uncovered and shall meet all parking space location, dimension, and surfacing requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
E.	Secondary dwelling units may be rented or lived in by the owner of the unit.
F.	No separate unit shall be created for sale, lease or financing pursuant to the State Subdivision Map Act. 
G.	A maximum of one secondary dwelling unit shall be permitted on any residentially zoned lot where at least one, but no more than one, single-family residence exists on the property. No secondary unit shall be permitted on a property containing multiple dwellings. 
H.	Mobile homes are not permitted as secondary dwelling units.
I.	The secondary dwelling unit shall have a sidewalk that connects the public right-of-way with the front door of the second unit. The address and mailbox for the second dwelling unit shall be located near the public right-of-way. 
J.	The owner(s) of the subject property on which the second dwelling unit exists shall occupy either the primary or second unit. All utilities including, sewer, water, garbage, gas and electricity, shall be under the name of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.64.12 - Wireless telecommunication equipment. 
The purpose of this section is to provide uniform standards for the desired design, placement, permitting, and monitoring of telecommunication facilities consistent with applicable federal requirements. The standards are intended to address adverse visual impacts and operational effects of these facilities through appropriate design, siting, screening techniques and locational standards while providing for the communication needs of residents, local businesses, and government agencies. Wireless telecommunication facilities include, residential & commercial TV antennae and satellite antennae; public safety facilities, telecommunication facilities accessory to public equipment for data acquisition such as irrigation controls, well monitoring and traffic signal controls, telecommunication facilities erected for emergency situations and/or public information coverage with a duration of less than seven days, satellite Earth Station facilities not exceeding two meters in diameter or in diagonal measurement and television & AM/FM radio antennae for commercial purposes, and monopoles and lattice towers. 
The following location criteria and development standards shall apply to all wireless telecommunications equipment: 
A.	With the exception of monopole and lattice tower facilities, all wireless lattice towers shall not be permitted within one thousand (1,000) feet of an existing tower. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.64.13 - Large family day care homes, nursery schools and day care centers. 
Large family day care homes serving fewer than fourteen (14) children, nursery schools, and day care centers are licensed by the State Department of Social Welfare. Such care is specifically suitable for comprehensive, enriched partial or full day care for children between the ages of three and five years and for children needing after-school care who would benefit from large group contact. Large family day care homes, nursery schools, and day care centers shall have a minimum of: 
A.	Thirty-five (35) square feet of unencumbered indoor space per child;
B.	An adequate fence between adjoining properties; and
C.	Seventy-five (75) square feet of unencumbered outdoor space per child.
D.	The facilities may also be subject to other requirements, such as the California Health and Safety Code, the California Administrative Code, and the Uniform Building Code; 
E.	Large family day care homes, nursery schools and day care centers shall secure a conditional use permit consistent with Chapter 17.48. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.65 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
Sections: 
 
17.65.01 - Purpose and intent. 
A.	It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of Woodlake and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of the ordinance to condone or legitimatize the distribution of obscene material. 
B.	One of the important purposes of the regulations set forth in this chapter is to discourage and to minimize the opportunity for criminal conduct. As such, nothing in this chapter shall permit or be interpreted to permit to be interpreted to permit any use, conduct, and/or activity which is specifically prohibited under the following California Penal Code sections: 
1.	Receipt of money for placement of person for purposes of cohabitation (Penal Code 266d); 
2.	Purchase of person for purposes of prostitution of placement of person for immoral purposes (Penal Code 266e); 
3.	Sale of person of immoral purposes (Penal Code 266f);
4.	Pimping (Penal Code 266h);
5.	Pandering (Penal Code 266i);
6.	Lewd or obscene conduct (Penal Code 314);
7.	Houses of ill-fame (Penal Code 315);
8.	Disorderly houses which disturb the immediate neighborhood (Penal Code 316);
9.	Places of prostitution (Penal Code 317);
10.	Place of prostitution; place of lewdness; place used as bathhouse permitting conduct capable of transmitting AIDS (Penal Code 11225). 
C.	Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to permit or permit any use, conduct, and/or activity which violates any federal, state or local law of regulation. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.65.02 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined as follows: 
A.	"Sexually oriented businesses" are those businesses defined as follows:
1.	"Adult arcade" means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image producing machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are regularly available or used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
2.	"Adult bookstore," "Adult novelty store" or "Adult video store" means a commercial establishment which (a) has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or (b) derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or (c) devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior floor or display space or (d) devotes a significant or substantial portion of its business activities or employees' time, or advertising, to the sale, rental or viewing for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following: 
a.	Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction of description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; 
b.	Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
c.	An establishment may have other significant or substantial business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials, depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store so long as one of its significant or substantial business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the specified materials which depict or describe "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." 
3.	"Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, "bottle club," or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features: (a) persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nude; (b) live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas," or by "specified sexual activities," or (c) films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
4.	"Adult motel" means a motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which: (a) offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, and which regularly provides or makes available to patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television, or (b) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten hours; or (c) allows a tenant or occupant to rent or sub-rent the sleeping room for a time period of less than ten hours. 
5.	"Adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" are regularly shown for any form of consideration. 
6.	"Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which, for any form or consideration, regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
7.	"Nude model studio" means any place where a person, who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided for money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. This term does not include a modeling class operated by a proprietary school, licensed by the State of California; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; by a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing, where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class, and where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
8.	"Regularly features" or "regularly shown" with respect to an adult cabaret, adult theater, or adult motion picture theater means at least three times within any thirty (30) day period; or carried on as part of the business's routine scheduling of events or activities and not so infrequently as to constitute a single, rare or unusual event or occurrence. 
9.	"Significant" or "substantial portion" means such a percentage of its activities, space allocation, revenues, advertising targeting, stock in trade, floor or display space, business receipts, revenues, or other business undertakings as to indicate to a reasonable person that a sexually oriented portion of the business is one of its important activities, though not necessarily its only or even primary activity; for this purpose, evidence that twenty-five (25) percent or more of its revenues are derived from such sexually oriented activities or materials, or that twenty-five (25) percent or more of its interior floor space or display space is devoted to such sexually oriented activities or materials, or that twenty-five (25) percent or more of its actual stock in trade regularly displayed and immediately available for use, rental, purchase, viewing or perusal is comprised of such sexually oriented materials, all as defined in Section 17.65.02 of this chapter, shall be evidence that a "significant or substantial portion" of the business is devoted to such uses. 
B.	"Employee" means a person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operation of said business. 
C.	"Establishment" means and includes any of the following:
1.	The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business;
2.	The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this chapter; 
3.	The addition of a any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this chapter to any other existing sexually oriented business; 
4.	The relocation of any such sexually oriented business; or
5.	The substantial enlargement of any such sexually oriented business.
D.	"Nudity" or "state of nudity" means: (a) the appearance or display of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or (b) a state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human buttock, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of the female breast. 
E.	"Operator" means and includes the owner, permit holder, custodian manager, operator or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises. 
F.	"Permitted or "Unlicensed premises" means any premises that requires a license and/or permit that is classified as a sexually oriented business. 
G.	"Permittee and/or licensee" means a person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license. 
H.	"Person" means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
I.	"Public building regularly frequented by children" means any building owned, leased or held by the United States, the state, the county, the city, any special district, school district, or any other agency or political subdivision of the state or the United States, which building is used as a library, community center, children's center, or any other use having special attraction to children, or which building is often visited by children for social activities unaccompanied by their parents or other adult custodian. 
J.	"Public park" or "recreation area" means public land which has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, open space wilderness areas, or similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city park and recreation authorities. 
K.	"Religious institution" means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is primarily for religious worship and related religious activities, as identified on the latest equalized tax roll. 
L.	"School" means any public or private educational facility including, but not limited to nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities. School includes the school grounds, but does not include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school. 
M.	"Semi-nude" means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
N.	"Sensitive land uses" means residences and residential neighborhoods, child day care facilities, cemeteries, religious institutions, schools, boys' clubs, girls' clubs, or similar existing youth organizations, or public parks, or any public building regularly frequented by children. 
O.	"Sexually oriented business" means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment, escort agency or nude model studio. 
P.	"Specified anatomical areas" as used in this chapter means and includes any of the following: 
1.	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or 
2.	Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Q.	"Specified sexual activities" as used in this chapter, means and includes any of the following: 
1.	The fondling or other intentional touching of buttocks for purpose of sexual arousal, or fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts. 
2.	Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
3.	Masturbation, actual or simulated;
4.	Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
5.	Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections 1 through 4 of this subsection. 
R.	"Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business" means an increase in the floor areas occupied by the business as the floor areas existed on the affected date of this chapter. 
S.	"Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business" means and includes any of the following: 
1.	The sale, lease or sublease of the business; or
2.	The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means.  
17.65.03 - Establishment and classification of businesses regulated. 
The establishment of any sexually oriented business shall be permitted only in the zone district permitted, and shall be subject to the following restrictions: No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any sexually oriented businesses, as defined above, within one thousand (1,000) feet of any sensitive land use, as defined above. These limitations apply to sexually oriented businesses classified as follows: 
A.	Adult arcade;
B.	Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store;
C.	Adult cabaret;
D.	Adult motel;
E.	Adult motion picture theater;
F.	Adult theater; and
G.	Nude model studio.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.65.04 - Measurement of distance. 
The distance between any sexually oriented business and any sensitive land use shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects from property line to property line. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.65.05 - Location of sexually oriented business. 
The City of Woodlake's zoning ordinance requires that sexually oriented businesses shall be allowed only in a zone where such uses are specifically permitted; the ML (light industrial) zone, at the time of adoption of this chapter. Permits for sexually oriented businesses shall be required and governed by the procedures and policies specified in the City of Woodlake Municipal Code. In addition, any sexually oriented business shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
A.	The person commits a misdemeanor, if he operates or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business outside of the permitted zone. 
B.	The person commits a misdemeanor if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of any sensitive land use, as defined above. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.65.06 - Non-conforming uses. 
A.	Any sexually oriented businesses operating on (effective date of this ordinance) that is in violation of Sections 17.65.01—17.65.05 shall be deemed a non-conforming use. A non-conforming use will be permitted to continue for a two-year period with possible extensions for extenuating circumstances to be granted by the city council only upon a convincing showing of extreme financial hardship. Such extensions shall not exceed a total of three years in addition to the initial amortization period. Any such non-conforming business loses its right to operate as a non-conforming use, if, for any reason, it voluntarily discontinues its business operation for a period of thirty (30) days or more or if its license to operate is revoked, and such revocation is not overturned by a court of competent jurisdiction. Such non-conforming uses, while non-conforming, shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. 
B.	A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a non-conforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business permit and/or license, within one thousand (1,000) feet, of a sensitive land use. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit and/or license, but this provision does not apply when an application for a permit and/or license is submitted after a permit and/or license has expired or has been revoked. 
C.	Abandonment. Notwithstanding the above, any discontinuance or abandonment of the use of any lot or structure as an adult-oriented business shall result in a loss of legal non-conforming status of such use. 
D.	Amortization—Annexed property. Any adult-oriented business which was a legal use at the time of annexation of the property and which is located in the city, but which does not conform to the provisions of Sections 17.65.03—17.65.05 shall be terminated within two years of the date of annexation unless an extension of time has been approved by the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.65.06A. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.65.07 - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without having a valid permit due to location restrictions is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for the misdemeanor punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or one hundred eighty (180) days imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. If an injunction is sought and granted, the sexually oriented business shall be obligated to pay the city, attorneys' fees and costs of the city, at the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.65.08 - Exception for certain nude modeling. 
It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter if a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
A.	By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of California; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
B.	By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
C.	In a structure:
1.	Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
2.	Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
3.	Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.66 - LANDSCAPING, IRRIGATION AND GRADING 
Sections: 
 
17.66.01 - Purpose. 
The city finds that there is a limited supply of water and the demand for this resource is ever increasing; that Woodlake's economic well-being is dependent upon having an adequate supply of water in the future; and that it is important to Woodlake's long-term environmental goals that water be conserved and used in an efficient manner. 
Woodlake realizes that well-designed and maintained urban landscapes improve the appearance of the community and its quality of life by cleaning the air, providing shade and reducing erosion; and that these landscapes should be designed, installed and maintained to be water efficient. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for local landscaping, irrigation and grading regulations that are consistent with the State's Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.66.02 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to landscape projects that involve new construction for public agency projects and private development projects with a landscaped area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet and which require a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.66.03 - Landscaping, irrigation and grading plan. 
The landscaping, irrigation and grading plan shall contain the following elements: 
A.	Project Information.
1.	Date;
2.	Project applicant;
3.	Project address;
4.	Total landscaped area;
5.	Project type;
6.	Water supply type;
7.	Project contacts; and
8.	Applicant signature and date with statement, "I agree to comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape ordinance." 
B.	Water efficient landscape worksheet.
1.	Hydrozone information table;
2.	Water budget calculations;
C.	Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA).
D.	Estimated total water use (ETWU).
E.	Soil management report.
F.	Landscape design plan.
G.	Irrigation design plan.
H.	Grading design plan.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.66.04 - Water efficient landscape worksheet. 
A project applicant shall complete the water efficient landscape worksheet which contains two sections: 
A.	A hydrozone information table for a landscape project (see State of California's Model Landscaping Ordinance). 
B.	A water budget calculation for the landscaped project (see State of California's Model Landscaping Ordinance). The water budget calculations shall adhere to the following: 
1.	The plant factor shall use the following ranges: 0 to .3 for low water use plants; from .4 to .6 for moderate water use plants; and from .7 to 1.0 for high water use plants. 
2.	All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporary irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone. 
C.	The maximum applied water allowance shall be calculated using the following equation:
MAWA = (ETo)(.62) [.7 × LA) + (.3 × SLA)], 
where 
MAWA = maximum applied water allowance, 
ETo = Evapotranspiration in inches per year; 
LA = landscaped area; and 
SLA = special landscaped area. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.66.05 - Soil management report. 
In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project applicant as follows: 
A.	Soil samples shall be submitted to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations.
1.	Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants. 
2.	The soil analysis may include soil texture, infiltration rate, pH, total soluble salts, sodium, percent organic matter and recommendations. 
B.	The applicant shall comply with the following:
1.	If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the local agency as part of the Certificate of Completion. 
2.	The soils analysis report shall be made available to the professional preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.66.06 - Landscape design plan. 
For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. 
A.	A landscape design plan shall contain the following:
1.	Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter or other method.
2.	Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed use water. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation. 
3.	Identify recreation areas.
4.	Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants.
5.	Identify areas irrigated with recycled water.
6.	Identify type of mulch and application depth.
7.	Identify soil amendments, type and quantity.
8.	Identify type and surface area for water features.
9.	Identify hardscapes, pervious and impervious.
10.	Identify location and installation details of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Stormwater best management practices are encourage in the landscape design plan and examples include, but are not limited to: 
a.	Infiltration beds, swales, and basins that allow water to collect and soak into the ground. 
b.	Constructed wetlands and retention ponds that retain water, handle excess flow, and filter pollutants. 
c.	Pervious or porous surfaces that minimize runoff.
11.	Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies.
12.	Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape. 
B.	Any plant may be selected for the landscape, providing the estimated total water use (ETWU) in the landscaped area does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). To encourage the efficient use of water, the following is highly recommended: 
1.	Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation.
2.	Selection of water-conserving plant and turf species.
3.	Selection of plants based on disease and pest resistance.
4.	Selection of trees based on applicable local tree ordinances or tree shading guidelines.
5.	Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists.
C.	Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use.
D.	Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site. To encourage the efficient use of water, the following is highly recommended: 
1.	Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate. 
2.	Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants to minimize damage to property or infrastructure. 
3.	Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain. 
E.	Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape. 
F.	The use of invasive and/or noxious plant species is strongly discouraged.
G.	Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features.
H.	Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features.
I.	Pool and spa covers are highly recommended.
J.	A minimum of two inches of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications. 
K.	Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes.
L.	Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.66.07 - Irrigation design plan. 
For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following criteria shall be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package. 
A.	The irrigation design plan shall contain:
1.	Location and size of separate water meters for landscape.
2.	Location, type and size of components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices. 
3.	Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply.
4.	Flow rate, application rate, and design operating pressure for each station.
5.	The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system. 
B.	Dedicated landscape water meters are highly recommended on landscape areas smaller than five thousand (5,000) square feet to facilitate water management. 
C.	Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data shall be required for irrigation in all irrigation systems. 
D.	The irrigation system shall be designed to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure range for optimal performance. 
1.	If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system. 
2.	Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation. 
E.	Sensors, either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy, rainy or freezing weather. 
F.	Manual shut-off valves shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency or routine repair. 
G.	Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. 
H.	High flow sensors that detect and report high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are recommended. 
I.	Check valves or auto-drain valves are required for all irrigation systems.
J.	Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use. 
K.	Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers and turf. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.66.08 - Grading design plan. 
For the efficient use of water, a grading plan for a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff and water waste. A grading plan shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. A comprehensive grading plan shall be prepared by a civil engineer. 
A.	The grading design plan shall include the following:
1.	Height of graded slopes;
2.	Drainage patterns;
3.	Pad elevations;
4.	Finished grade; and
5.	Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.
B.	To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that the project applicants grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within the property lines and does not drain onto impervious hardscapes, avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soils, and avoid soil compaction in landscaped areas. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.66.09 - Certificate of completion. 
A.	The certificate of completion shall include the following elements:
1.	Date;
2.	Project name;
3.	Applicant name, telephone and mailing address;
4.	Project address and location;
5.	Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address; and
6.	Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, signer of the irrigation plan or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the approved landscape documentation package. 
B.	The project applicant shall submit the signed certificate of completion to the city planner for review. The planning director shall approve or deny the certificate of completion. The applicant may appeal the planning director's decision consistent with Chapter 17.06. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.66.10 - Irrigation scheduling. 
For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria: 
A.	Irrigation shall be regulated by automatic controllers.
B.	Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. unless weather conditions such as rain or freezing temperatures prevent it. 
C.	For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the estimated total water use (ETWU). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data or soil moisture sensor data. 
D.	Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following: 
1.	The plant establishment period;
2.	The established landscape; and
3.	Temporary irrigated areas.
E.	Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply. 
1.	Irrigation intervals, days between irrigation;
2.	Irrigation run times, hours or minutes per irrigation event;
3.	Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event;
4.	Amount of water to be applied on a monthly basis;
5.	Application rate setting;
6.	Root depth setting;
7.	Plant type setting;
8.	Soil type;
9.	Slope factor setting; and
10.	Shade factor setting.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.66.11 - Irrigation maintenance, audit and analysis. 
A.	Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion. 
B.	All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. 
C.	All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation audit. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.68 - PARKING AND LOADING 
Sections: 
 
17.68.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide parking and loading regulations for new, and the expansion of existing, development and uses in Woodlake. This chapter will also serve to: provide accessible, attractive, secure, and well maintained parking and off-street loading facilities; provide parking and loading facilities that are designed to reduce traffic congestion; minimize the impact of new development on parking and loading facilities on surrounding properties; ensure the maneuverability of emergency vehicles in parking facilities and provide for loading and delivery services in proportion to the needs generated by the proposed land use which are clearly compatible with adjacent parcels and the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.68.02 - General requirements. 
A.	No building shall be constructed or use permitted unless off-street parking and loading spaces are provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter unless otherwise exempted by this chapter. 
B.	When an existing use or building is enlarged and requires additional parking and loading under the provisions of this chapter, said improvements shall be provided on the subject site or the developer shall provide an in lieu parking fee consistent with the provisions in this chapter. 
C.	For uses not listed in this chapter, the planning director shall determine a parking and loading standard for the use based on the operational, size and locational characteristics of the use and the standards that similar cities apply to said use. 
D.	Fractional space requirements shall be rounded up when the fractional number is .5 or more and shall be rounded down when the fractional number is less than .5. 
E.	In any residential district, all inoperable motor vehicles shall be stored in a garage, carport or outside the front yard setback area of a residential district.  
17.68.03 - Number of parking spaces required. 
The minimum number of parking spaces (or stalls) required for new uses or buildings or the expansion of existing buildings or uses are detailed below. 
A.	Residential uses.
a.	Single-family residence: two covered stalls per unit.
b.	Second residential unit: one uncovered stall per unit.
c.	Condominium unit.
1.	One bedroom: one covered stall per unit.
2.	Two or more bedrooms: two covered stalls per unit.
d.	Specialized housing.
1.	Emergency shelters: one stall for every four beds.
2.	Group care housing: two stalls for every two clients; tandem parking is permitted.
3.	Transitional housing: one stall for every three clients.
4.	Supportive housing: one stall for every three clients.
5.	Labor camps: one stall per living unit.
6.	Nursing homes: one stall for every three beds.
7.	Family and group day care homes: one stall for every three beds.
e.	Multiple family units: 1.5 stalls per units; half of which shall be covered.
f.	Senior housing: one covered stall per unit.
g.	Mobile home parks: two covered stall per unit; tandem parking permitted.
h.	Trailer parks: one stall per trailer pad.
i.	Motels and hotels: one stall per room.
j.	Convalescent home: one stall per three beds.
k.	Retirement homes.
B.	Office uses.
a.	Medical and dental offices: one stall per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of building area. 
b.	Medical and dental clinics: one stall per two hundred (200) square feet of building area. 
c.	Professional offices, including insurance, specialized consultants, law, travel, real estate, accountants, financial advisors and architects: one stall per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of building area. 
d.	Other offices: one stall per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of building area.
C.	Personal services.
a.	Banks, savings and loan, check cashing, credit unions, and Western Union offices: one stall per two hundred (200) square feet of building area. 
b.	Self-service laundry: one stall for every three machines.
c.	Barber/beauty shops, day spas, massage therapists and hair stylists: two stalls per station. 
d.	Funeral home, mortuaries: one stall for every fifty (50) square feet of building area.
D.	General commercial uses.
a.	Retail stores including clothing, shoes, stationary, sporting goods, kitchen wares, gift shops, book stores and beauty supplies: one stall per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of building area. 
b.	Convenience stores: one stall per two hundred (200) square feet of building area.
c.	Furniture, hardware and appliance stores: one stall per six hundred (600) square feet of building area. 
d.	Grocery stores: one stall per three hundred (300) square feet of building area.
e.	Antique and second-hand shops: one stall per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of building area. 
f.	Auto parts: one stall per five hundred (500) square feet of building area.
E.	Eating and drinking establishments.
1.	Coffee and tea establishments, candy shops and bakeries: one stall per one hundred (100) square feet of building area. 
2.	Restaurants: one stall per four seats.
3.	Fast food establishments: one stall per one hundred (100) square feet of building area. 
4.	Donut shops: one stall per one hundred (100) square feet of building area.
5.	Sandwich shops and delicatessens: one stall per (100) square feet of building area.
6.	Sports bars: One stall per three seats.
7.	Bars: one stall per three seats.
F.	Service commercial establishments.
1.	Tire, brake, radiator, and auto repair shops: one stall per two hundred (200) square feet of building area. 
2.	Multi-tenant auto-related shops: one stall per two hundred (200) square feet of building area. 
3.	Full-service car washes: one stall per two hundred (200) sq. ft. of building area.
4.	Self-service car washes: one parking stall per bay.
5.	New/used-car sales.
6.	Oil change shops: one stall per bay.
7.	Service stations: one stall per three hundred (300) square feet of building area.
8.	Auto glass, upholstery and stereo shops: one stall per two hundred (200) square feet of building area. 
9.	Paint and body shop: one stall per two hundred (200) square feet of building area.
10.	Wholesale establishments: one stall per six hundred (600) square feet of building area. 
G.	Recreation uses.
1.	Health clubs: one stall per one hundred (100) square feet of building area.
2.	Bowling alleys: one stall per one hundred (100) square feet of building area.
3.	Dance and martial arts studios: one stall per one hundred (100) square feet of building area. 
4.	Golf courses: 1.5 stalls per tee plus one stall for every four seats.
6.	Stadiums, arenas, and other outdoor facilities: one stall for every five seats.
7.	Video arcades: one stall per one hundred (100) square feet of building area.
8.	Rodeo and equestrian facilities: one stall for every five seats.
9.	Miniature golf course: 1.5 stalls per tee.
H.	Miscellaneous commercial.
1.	Retail nursery/garden shops: one stall for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of outdoor display area. 
2.	Agricultural Chemicals/Sales: one stall per five hundred (500) square feet of building area. 
3.	Agricultural services, including topping, farming operations, trucking, farm maintenance, spraying, agricultural contractors, and contract farming: one stall per five hundred (500) square feet of building area. 
4.	Farm machinery, sales and service: one stall per five hundred (500) square feet of building area. 
I.	Industrial uses.
1.	Manufacturing: one stall per five hundred (500) square feet of building area.
2.	Fabrication: one stall per five hundred (500) square feet of building area.
3.	Mini-storage: two stalls plus one stall for every two hundred fifty (250) square feet of building area. 
4.	Warehousing: one stall per one thousand (1,000) square feet of building area.
5.	Packing house: one stall per seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of building area.
6.	Food production and processing: one stall per five hundred (500) square feet of building area. 
J.	Institutional uses.
1.	Churches: one stall per four seats.
2.	Schools.
a.	Nursery and pre-schools: one stall per classroom plus one stall for every two hundred fifty (250) square feet of non-classroom building area. 
b.	Elementary and middle schools: one stall per classroom plus one stall per five hundred (500) square feet of building area. 
c.	High schools: three stalls for every two staff members.
d.	Business and trade schools: three stalls for every two staff members.
3.	Libraries, museums and art galleries: one stall per five hundred (500) square feet of building area. 
4.	Hospitals: one stall per bed.
5.	Medical clinics: one stall for every two hundred (200) square feet of building area.
K.	Government.
1.	Governmental centers: one stall per four hundred (400) square feet of building area.
2.	Courthouses: one stall per four hundred (400) square feet of building area.
3.	Public safety buildings: one stall per four hundred (400) square feet of building area. 
4.	Corporation, transportation and fuel yards: one stall per five hundred (500) square feet of building area. 
5.	Wastewater treatment facilities: one stall per four hundred (400) square feet of building area. 
6.	Water treatment facilities: one stall per four hundred (400) square feet of building area. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.68.04 - Parking lot design standards and location criteria. 
A.	Design Dimensions. Parking lots shall be designed to be consistent with the standards, dimensions and requirements of the details contained in Exhibit 68-1. The construction of parking lots shall be consistent with the improvements standards contained in Woodlake's Improvements Manual. 
Exhibit 68-1: Parking Design Standards
  
B.	Circulation. Parking lots shall be designed so that a travel lane within a parking lot has a minimum width of twelve (12) feet, the backup distance for a car backing out of a stall has a minimum distance of twenty-seven (27) feet, and that backing into a public street from a parking stall shall be minimized in order to maintain effective traffic flow along the public street. Single-family dwellings will be exempt from this requirement. The use of alleys to access parking lots shall be encouraged. 
C.	Paving, Slope and Drainage. All parking lots shall be constructed with a four-inch aggregate base and a two-inch asphalt or concrete overlay, described in the Woodlake Improvements Manual. Parking lots shall be sloped so that storm water runoff flows towards public streets or alleys, into on-site landscape planters or bioswales or into pervious hardscape features. 
D.	Curbing and Wheel Stops. Concrete curbing shall be provided around all parking lots and landscape planters consistent with the Woodlake Improvements Manual. Wheel stops may be provided in parking stalls to ensure that the overhang of a vehicle does not interfere with pedestrian movements along a sidewalk, or damage landscaping adjacent to the parking lot. 
F.	Stripping and Symbols. Parking lot stalls and travel lanes shall be clearly marked with painted strips. Parking stalls for handicapped persons shall be stripped and provided with the appropriate symbols and signage that are consistent with the American Disabilities Act (see Exhibit 68-2). 
Exhibit 68-2: Striping and Handicap Space Design Standards
  
G.	Lighting. All parking lots shall have pole lighting that properly illuminates the parking lot but does not cause a nuisance for adjoining properties. 
H.	Driveways. Driveways from a public street or alley shall have locations and dimensions consistent with the Woodlake Improvements Manual. For one-way driveways the width of the driveway shall be fifteen (15) feet; two-way driveways shall have a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet. 
I.	Landscaping (see also Exhibit 68-3). All parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements in Chapter 17.66. Trees shall be planted within all parking lots. Tree species shall be selected that will not cause damage to the parking lot or adjacent sidewalks, driveways or curbing, and will shade more than fifty (50) percent of the parking lot within ten years. Landscape planters between the parking lots and public streets shall be planted with low hedges. As an alternative, a low wall (three feet) may be constructed and shrubs, turf or ground cover may be planted between the wall and the street. 
Exhibit 68-3: Typical Parking Lot Landscaping Scheme
  
J.	Location Criteria. Parking lots shall be located on the same property as the building they serve, except that parking for buildings in the central commercial (CC) district may be located within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property. In the CC district, parking lots shall be located at the rear or side of the subject building. Parking lots shall not be located on the corner where two streets intersect. 
K.	Shared Parking. Where two or more non-residential uses share a single parking lot, the number of required parking spaces may be reduced by a maximum of twenty (20) percent, as long as the total number of spaces is not less than the required for the use requiring the largest number of spaces. 
Where non-residential uses share a single parking lot and it can be demonstrated that the uses operate at different times of the day (an evening use versus a day-time use), the required number of parking spaces may be reduced by up to fifty (50) percent of the combined parking requirements of the two uses. 
L.	Parking Standard Modifications. Parking space requirements may be modified through Woodlake's minor deviation process. A reduction of up to twenty (20) percent in a project's required parking spaces may be approved by the planning director if the following findings can be made: 
1.	That the granting of the minor deviation will not create a safety hazard or lead to a condition where the loading of public vehicles onto public streets will interfere with the free flow of traffic on these streets. 
2.	That the granting of the minor deviation will not create a safety hazard of any other condition inconsistent with the objectives of the zoning ordinance. 
M.	Handicapped Parking Spaces. Handicapped parking stalls shall be provided per the Uniform Building Code. Handicapped parking stalls shall be designed consistent with the illustrations shown in Figure No. 2. 
N.	Loading Facilities.
1.	Commercial, industrial, office, institutional, and public uses exceeding ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size shall be required to install an off-street loading facility unless the planning director finds that due to the operational nature of the use, none or more than one off-street loading space should be required. 
2.	To the extent possible, loading facilities should be located at the rear or side of the building that they are to serve. 
3.	Streets and alleys shall not be used as loading or unloading areas, nor shall trucks use streets and alleys for maneuvering trailers into a loading space. 
4.	Loading facilities, at a minimum, shall have a length of twenty-five (25) feet, a width of twelve (12) feet, and an overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet. All loading surfaces shall be paved consistent with Woodlake's Improvements Manual. 
5.	Where a loading facility is near or adjacent to a residential district or other noise-sensitive land uses, noise attenuating design measures will be incorporated into the project. These design measures could include increased setback distances, the construction of a seven-foot solid block wall, landscaping or locating the loading facilities away from noise-sensitive land uses. 
6.	All loading facilities shall be lighted to provide adequate illumination of the loading area for safety and security reasons. Where a loading area is near or adjacent to a residential district or other light-sensitive uses, the lighting shall be directed away from these uses. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.69 - SIGNS 
Sections: 
 
17.69.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for regulating signs, including the type, size, location and construction standards of signs by zone district. Signs have an obvious impact on the character and quality of the city. As a prominent part of the visual environment, they attract or repel the viewing public, affect the safety of vehicular traffic and their suitability or appropriateness helps to set the tone of the neighborhood. The objectives of this chapter include the following: 
A.	To reinforce that the sign should serve primarily to identify the general nature of an establishment or to direct attention to a project, activity, place, person, organization, or enterprise. 
B.	As identification devices, signs must not subject the citizens of Woodlake to excessive competition for their visual attention. As appropriate identification devices, signs must be compatible with the building, the neighborhood, and other signs in the area. 
C.	The city intends to encourage the installation of signs that improve the appearance of the property and the neighborhood and to enhance the economic effectiveness of signs. 
D.	The provisions in this chapter provide standards to safeguard life, health, property, and public welfare in keeping with the character of the city by regulating the size, height, structural design, quality of materials, construction location, electrification, illumination and maintenance of all types of signs and sign structures. 
E.	The provisions in this section present criteria indicating whether or not signs conform to the above intentions of suitability and safety. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.69.02 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following items are defined in this section. Some terms are illustrated in Exhibits 69-1 and 69-2. 
A.	"A-frame sign." See "sandwich board sign."
B.	"Advertising structure" means any notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise, and all such structures used as an outdoor display, including billboards, regardless of size and shape, for the purposes of making anything known, the origin or place of sale of which is not on the property with such advertising structure. 
C.	"Aggregate area" means the total area of all permanent signs on the premises.
D.	"Alley-side sign" means a sign placed on the wall of a building that faces onto or abuts a public alley. 
E.	"Animated sign" means a sign with action or motion, whether by flashing lights, color changes, wind, rotation, movement of any parts of the sign or letters or parts of the sign structure, or other motion. 
F.	"Awning sign" means a sign applied to an awning or canopy that is attached to a building.
G.	"Banner" means any cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, or similar material attached to, or appended on or from any structure, staff, pole, line, or framing upon which there is an advertising message. 
H.	"Changeable copy sign" means a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a "time and temperature" sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter. 
I.	"Copy" means any graphic, letter, numeral, symbol, insignia, text, sample, model, device, or combination thereof which relates to advertising, identification, or notification. 
Exhibit 69-1: Selected Sign Definitions
  
J.	"Directional Sign" means signs giving only information and direction to the viewer and containing no advertising message. 
K.	"Directory sign" means a sign typically used to list individual businesses in a multi-tenant complex or center. 
L.	"Externally illuminated sign" means a sign which has light cast on its surface from an artificial exterior source installed for the purpose of illuminating the sign. 
M.	"Freestanding sign" means a sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights, or braces in or upon the ground. 
N.	"Internally illuminated sign" means any sign whose illumination originates from within the structure of the sign and the source of which is not visible from the exterior of the sign. 
O.	"Nonconforming sign" means any sign which was lawfully erected or maintained prior to the time of adoption of this title. 
P.	"Occupancy frontage" means a single lineal dimension measured horizontally along the front of a building which defines the limits of a particular occupancy at that location and which has direct pedestrian access through an exterior wall which is visible from the public right of way. 
Q.	"Off-premises signs and billboards" means any sign not located on the same lot or project site as the use, product, or service it advertises. 
R.	"Roof line" means the highest point of a parapet wall or the main roof structure or a highest point of a parapet wall other than such architectural features as cupolas, pylons, projections or minor raised portions of the roof. 
S.	"Pedestrian oriented sign" means a sign which is specifically located and designed to be viewed from a pedestrian right-of-way. 
T.	"Pennant" means series of lightweight plastic, fabric, or other materials, suspended from a rope, wire, or string designed to move in the wind. Pennants shall not include banners as defined in this chapter or individual flags mounted on a single pole. 
U.	"Political sign" means a sign advertising a candidate for political office, a political party or a measure scheduled for an election. 
V.	"Portable sign" means a sign which is capable of being carried or moved by manual or mechanical means from one location to another and which is not affixed to the ground, a structure, or a vehicle. 
W.	"Projecting sign" shall mean a sign that projects from and is supported by a wall or a façade of a building and are also referred to as marquee signs. 
X.	"Reader board" means a sign indicating the name, address and type of business of the businesses within a building. 
Y.	"Roof sign" means a sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet of a building.
Z.	"Sandwich board sign" means a portable sign with advertising messages mounted on two surfaces with two edges connected and the other two edges spread so that the two faces read from different directions. 
AA.	"Sign" means any words or symbols used for visual communication including its structure and component parts intended to be used to attract attention to an activity. "Sign area" means the geometric area of a sign including all elements such as board or frames, perforated or a solid background, ornamental embellishments, arrows or other sign media. The area of individual signs shall be measured as follows (see also Exhibit 69-2): 
1.	Sign faces counted: Where a sign has two faces containing sign copy, which are oriented back to back and separated by not more than twenty-four inches at any point, the area of the sign shall be measured using one sign face only. 
2.	Wall mounted letters: Where a sign is composed of letters individually mounted or painted on a building wall, without a border or decorative enclosure, the sign area is that of the smallest area of a rectangle within which all letters and words can be enclosed. 
3.	Three-dimensional signs: Where a sign consists of one or more three-dimensional objects such as balls, cubes, clusters of objects, or sculptural or statute-type trademarks, the sign area shall be measured as the area of the smallest rectangle within which the object(s) can be enclosed, when viewed from a point where the largest area of the object(s) can be seen. 
Exhibit 69-2: Sign Area Measurement
  
BB.	"Sign copy" means any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs, or other symbolic representations incorporated into a sign face and/or its structure with the purpose of attracting attention to the subject matter. 
CC.	"Sign face" means the panel surface of a sign which carries the advertising or identification message. 
DD.	"Sign structure" means any structure which supports or is capable of supporting any sign. A sign structure may or may not be an integral part of a building. For the purpose of a freestanding sign, the sign structure shall include the aggregate area of the sign including the sign copy and all structural elements of the sign. 
EE.	"Site" means the length of a site along the street or other principal public thoroughfare, but not including such a length along an alley, watercourse, railroad or freeway. 
FF.	"Special events sign" means any sign advertising specific temporary events, such as carnivals, festivals, exhibits, and parades, but not including promotional sales or grand opening signs. 
GG.	"Temporary sign" means a sign designed to be used for short periods of time, as opposed to a permanently-mounted sign such as a freestanding sign or wall sign. 
HH.	"Temporary subdivision sign" means a sign erected and maintained within the boundaries of a recorded subdivision and indicating the name of the subdivision, the name of the contractor and/or subdivider, the name of the owner and/or agent, and giving information regarding directions, price or terms concerning the sale or lease of parcels within the subdivision. 
II.	"Wall sign" means a sign attached to or erected against the wall or façade of building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall or façade. 
JJ.	"Window sign" means a sign mounted within or on a window.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.69.03 - Applicability. 
No sign shall be erected, placed, established, painted, created, or maintained in the city which is not in conformance with the standards, procedures, and other requirements of these provisions. All signs erected within the Woodlake city limits shall be subject to the sign application procedures within these provisions. The regulations in this chapter are in addition to those set forth in the California Building Code, the California Electrical Code and the 1997 Uniform Sign Code, as adopted, and any amendments made thereto by the city, and the nuisance provisions in the Woodlake Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.69.04 - Standards by zone districts. 
Signs permitted by zone district are listed as follows: 
A.	Residential (RA, R-1, RM), Urban Reserve (UR), Open Space (O), Agriculture (A) and Public Facilities (PF) zone districts. 
1.	Name plates shall be permitted subject to the following conditions.
a.	Maximum size: two square feet;
b.	Content: Name plates may display the following: name of the premises upon which it is displayed; name of the owner or lessee of the premises; address of the premises; nature of a home occupation engaged in on the premises; and private information such as "beware of dog" or "no solicitors," that does not contain an advertising message. 
c.	Placement: Name plates shall be affixed flush to the subject building.
2.	"For rent" and "for sale" signs shall be permitted. Not more than two such signs, not exceeding a total of six square feet (aggregate) in area, shall be permitted on any lot or parcel. 
3.	For subdivisions, apartment complexes and mobile home parks, churches and other permitted institutional uses, no more than one sign shall be erected at any entrance to the development. Signs shall not exceed thirty-five (35) square feet for all readable surfaces, nor exceed four feet in height. 
B.	Commercial and industrial zone districts (CN, CS, CC, CH and I).
The following signs are permitted for each business in commercial and industrial districts (see also Exhibit 69-3 for graphic illustrations of standards for various sign types). For multi-tenant shopping centers or office parks containing three or more individual uses, a coordinated sign program shall be submitted for review and approval by the planning director. 
1.	The number of wall signs permitted per business or parcel is as follows:
a.	One primary wall sign is permitted on the wall with the primary public entrance to the business. For businesses with more than one entrance, only one entrance shall be counted as the primary entrance. 
b.	Where the site abuts a public street and the primary wall sign is on a wall not facing the street, a secondary wall sign is permitted on the wall facing the street. 
c.	If the site has a parking lot and a building wall faces the parking lot and that wall does not have a wall sign permitted under a. or b., above, a secondary wall sign is permitted on the wall facing the parking lot. Not more than one such parking lot sign is permitted. 
d.	For businesses fronting onto a public alley, one alley wall sign is permitted for the wall that faces onto the alley. 
2.	Calculation of wall sign area:
a.	For a primary wall sign, 0.9 square foot of sign area is permitted for each foot of linear occupancy frontage, as shown in Exhibit 69-4, up to a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of sign area, whichever is less. Notwithstanding this regulation, all businesses shall be permitted a minimum of twenty-five (25) square feet of primary wall sign. 
Exhibit 69-3: Selected Sign Standards
  
b.	Where a secondary wall sign is permitted, the maximum sign area shall be one-half the permitted sign area of a primary sign. 
c.	For an alley wall sign, the maximum sign area shall be twenty-five (25) square feet.
d.	For multi-tenant buildings, each tenant shall be permitted one sign mounted on the wall with the primary entrance, except for corner units which may be permitted a primary wall sign and a secondary wall sign. 
3.	Maximum height: Not to exceed the top of the vertical wall surface on which the sign is mounted. Signs mounted on a pitched roof may not extend the peak of the ridge line of the roof. No sign is permitted on the top of a flat-roofed structure. 
4.	Permit. A sign permit shall be obtained for all wall signs, consistent with the procedure outlined in Section 17.69.11 of this chapter. 
Exhibit 69-4: Permitted Wall Sign Area
  
2.	Free-standing signs.
a.	Maximum height: Ten feet.
b.	Maximum area: Thirty-five (35) square feet per sign face.
c.	Sign design: Free standing signs shall be designed as a monument sign with a solid base extending the entire height of the sign. 
d.	Number per parcel: One free-standing sign is permitted per parcel (or collection of parcels functioning as a single integrated development) for each one thousand (1,000) feet of street frontage, or fraction thereof, except that parcels with frontage on more than one public street shall be permitted one free-standing sign for each one thousand (1,000) lineal feet of frontage (or fraction thereof) on each street. 
e.	Setbacks: A free standing sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any interior side property line. Encroachment into a setback may be permitted by the planning director where the location of existing improvements presents a functional hardship in compliance with the required setback. 
f.	Landscaping. All freestanding signs shall be surrounded by landscaping of an area at least twice the size of one side of the sign structure. 
g.	Permit. A sign permit shall be obtained for all free-standing signs, consistent with the procedure outlined in Section 17.69.11 of this chapter. 
3.	Directional Signs.
a.	Maximum height: Four feet.
b.	Maximum area: Six square feet.
c.	Number per site: One per driveway from a public street.
d.	Location: Directional signs shall be placed within five feet of a driveway that accesses the site from a public street. Placement of directional signs shall ensure the sight safety of vehicles entering/leaving a site is not compromised. 
e.	Permit. A sign permit shall be obtained for all directional signs, consistent with the procedure outlined in Section 17.69.11 of this chapter. 
4.	Directory signs.
a.	Number per site: One per public vehicle and/or pedestrian entrance to the site.
b.	Maximum area: Thirty-five (35) square feet.
c.	Maximum height (if freestanding): Six feet.
d.	Location: No directory sign which is a freestanding sign may locate closer than five feet to any neighboring property line or closer than three feet to any point of ingress/egress. 
e.	Permit. A sign permit shall be obtained for all directory signs, consistent with the procedure outlined in Section 17.69.11 of this chapter. 
5.	Temporary/portable signs.
a.	Banners.
i.	Number of signs: One banner sign is permitted per business.
ii.	Maximum height: Not to exceed roof line of nearest building or building affixed to but in no case higher than thirty (30) feet. Banner signs shall not be attached to existing freestanding signs. 
iii.	Maximum area: Fifty (50) square feet.
iv.	Permitted time: Banner signs may not be utilized for more than thirty (30) days per calendar year. The banner shall include a date visibly noted on the sign and be removed within thirty (30) days of the posted date. 
v.	Temporary signs used to identify a business shall be removed within thirty (30) days and replaced with a permanent sign. 
vi.	Permit. A sign permit shall be obtained for all banner signs, consistent with the procedure outlined in Section 17.69.11 of this chapter. 
b.	Sandwich board signs.
i.	Maximum height and width: Three feet wide and four feet tall, maximum.
ii.	Maximum area: Twelve (12) square feet.
iii.	Number per business: One.
iv.	Location: May be placed on the business site as long as conflicts with vehicle safety are not caused. May also be placed on the public sidewalk adjacent to the business with approved encroachment permit, but must permit a minimum of five feet of passage area on sidewalk. 
v.	Permitted display time: During business hours.
vi.	Permit. A sign permit shall be obtained for all sandwich board signs, consistent with the procedure outlined in Section 17.69.11 of this chapter. 
c.	Changeable message signs. A business that enters into an agreement with the City to not use temporary signs may be permitted a changeable message sign to be incorporated into its free-standing monument sign, or as a building wall sign, provided that the overall sign area for the business is not increased (see Figure 69-3). 
6.	Projecting signs.
a.	Maximum height and projection: Not to exceed roof line of wall or structure to which projecting sign is attached. (Note: Bottom of sign shall be a minimum of eight feet from ground to provide proper clearance). 
b.	Number per business: One, but a projecting sign is permitted only where a wall sign is not used on the same wall. 
c.	Calculation of area: One-half square foot of sign area for each lineal foot of building frontage of the business to which sign pertains. 
d.	Maximum area: Twenty (20) square feet.
e.	Location: Projecting signs may extend over public rights-of-ways including public sidewalks not to exceed two-thirds of the distance from the building face to which the sign is attached to the curb face of said sidewalk. 
f.	Permit. A sign permit shall be obtained for all projecting signs, consistent with the procedure outlined in Section 17.69.11 of this chapter. 
7.	Awning/canopy signs.
a.	Number of signs: Where an awning is present, a sign may be affixed to the awning.
b.	Maximum area: The area of signage on each surface of an awning shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the individual surface. 
c.	Location: Awning signs shall be made of removable materials such as individual cut-out letters and/or symbols attached, stenciled or other wise placed on the canopy surface, and may be located on exterior surfaces of a canopy. Canopy signs shall be of color, size and design to harmonize with the color, size and design of the canopy on which they are placed. 
d.	Permit. A sign permit shall be obtained for all canopy/awning signs, consistent with the procedure outlined in Section 17.69.110 of this chapter. 
8.	Window Signs.
Maximum area: Up to twenty-five (25) percent of the area of each individual window may be covered with a window sign or graphic. No permit is required for window signs. 
9.	Alley-side signs.
a.	Number of signs/sign area: Any building facing a public alley shall be permitted one alley-side sign with a maximum of twenty-five (25) square feet of sign area. An alley-side sign may be in the form of either a wall-sign, awning sign, or projecting sign. 
b.	Height. Alley-side signs may not project above the wall on which they are mounted.
c.	Permit. A sign permit shall be obtained for all alley-side signs, consistent with the procedure outlined in Section 17.69.11 of this chapter. 
10.	"For sale," "for rent," or similar signs.
a.	Number of signs: One sign shall be permitted per street frontage.
b.	Size: Thirty-two (32) square feet per sign.
c.	Height: maximum of six feet.
d.	Permit. None required.
11.	Pedestrian signs.
a.	Number of signs: One pedestrian oriented sign that projects or hangs above a sidewalk on each side of a building with a public entrance. 
b.	Size: Each sign may be a maximum of five square feet in size and may hang or be suspended no lower than eight feet above grade level. 
c.	Permit. A sign permit shall be obtained for all pedestrian signs, consistent with the procedure outlined in Section 17.69.11 of this chapter. 
12.	Service station canopy signs.
a.	Number of signs: One sign is permitted on each canopy face.
b.	Size: Ten square feet, maximum per canopy face.
c.	Design. Additional graphic elements, such as color stripes associated with the particular brand shall not be permitted on service station canopies. 
d.	Permit. A sign permit shall be obtained for all service station canopy signs, consistent with the procedure outlined in Section 17.69.11 of this chapter. 
13.	Incidental traffic control signage in parking lots within private developments.
a.	Number of signs and size: As determined to be necessary by the city engineer.
14.	Special uses standards.
a.	Open air sales. In addition to the sign area permitted under this section, ten square feet of additional sign area is permitted for every five thousand (5,000) square feet of site area for vehicle and large equipment sales operations. The additional signage may be used to increase the allowable area for wall signs and freestanding signs, except that height shall not be increased for freestanding signs. 
b.	Drive-through menu boards. No more than two drive-through menu/order boards are permitted for each food and/or beverage establishment featuring a drive-through. Each sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet and be no taller than eight feet. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.69.05 - Miscellaneous signs. 
A.	Construction project signs. Shall not exceed thirty (32) square feet in area, and eight feet in overall height, unless legally required by governmental contract to be larger. One sign is permitted for each street upon which the construction site fronts. A construction project sign shall not require a sign permit and may exist no longer than the period of construction. 
B.	Subdivision advertising signs.
1.	Time of placement: Subdivision signs may require a sign permit and shall be permitted as long as some portion of the property advertised for sale remains unsold or up to two years in duration, whichever is less. 
2.	Location: Subdivision signs may only be located on the premises which they advertise.
3.	Size and number of signs: No individual sign may exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet of area and be no taller than ten feet. No more than four separate signs are permitted on the grounds of each subdivision. 
4.	Model home lots: Signs are permitted on the same lot with a model home provided they do not exceed four in number and ten square feet each in area. Signs shall be removed after the developer concludes the initial sale of the lots or homes to their initial owners. 
5.	Permit: A sign permit shall be obtained for all subdivision signs, consistent with the procedure outlined in Section 17.69.11 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.69.06 - Design criteria. 
A.	Design compatibility: The design of all signs shall be compatible and harmonious with the colors, materials and architecture of the building and the immediate vicinity. Freestanding signs shall be finished with the same or compatible materials as the building on the site. 
B.	Size: Notwithstanding applicable sign standards elsewhere in this chapter, sign size shall be proportionate to the size and scale of the site and building upon which the sign is proposed. Sign dimensions as specified in this chapter are maximum allowable dimensions; it may be necessary that signs be smaller than the maximum allowed in order to be proportionate in size and scale to achieve the design objectives of this section. 
C.	Commercial and industrial center signs: Individual tenant signs within multi-tenant centers shall be coordinated in size, location, materials and illumination. 
D.	Color: Colors shall be used in coordinated groupings, and shall be compatible with those colors used in the building or project design. For cabinet-style signs, a dark sign background is preferred with light colored copy (characters/graphics). 
E.	Logos and trademarks: The use of established corporate colors or logos shall not be prohibited by this section. When established corporate colors are incompatible with buildings colors, compatibility in design with the surrounding development should be accomplished through the use of appropriate background colors or other design features. 
F.	Lighting intensity: The light emitted or reflected by a sign, or emitted by a light source, shall be of reasonable intensity and shall be compatible with the architecture of the building and the immediate vicinity. Artificial light sources shall be shielded to prevent light spillage, glare or annoyance to persons on or inside adjoining properties or to public or private rights-of-way. 
Exhibit 69-5: Selected Sign Design Criteria
  
G.	Sign bases and frames: Freestanding signs shall be either housed in a frame, or set onto a base, presenting a solid, attractive, and well-proportioned appearance. The size and shape of the frame or base shall be proportionate to the size and mass of the sign and should be low-profile in design. Pole type signs are not permitted. Guy wires, angle irons, braces and other support or construction elements shall be screened or hidden from view. 
H.	Landscaping: Freestanding signs shall be located in a landscaped area proportionate to the size of the sign, but not less than twice the size of one side of the sign face. Appropriate accent landscaping should be placed at the base of the sign. 
I.	Sign copy: Should be simple and concise without excessive description of services or products. On freestanding signs, sign copy should be designed to contribute to the design of the structure on which it is displayed. In all cases, freestanding sign design and sign copy should be coordinated to provide an attractively designed freestanding element which identities the development or project. 
J.	Wall signs: Building signs should be mounted flush against the building, and shall not project above the roof ridge or the top of the parapet. 
K.	Maintenance: All signs and their supporting members shall be kept in good repair and maintained in good structural condition at all times. 
L.	Design quality. All signs shall be professionally designed and manufactured. Signs that utilize handmade lettering or elements should be avoided. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.69.07 - Prohibited signs and locations. 
A.	Any sign mounted or attached to a vehicle parked for the purpose of calling attention to or advertising a special business establishment; 
B.	Any sign or sign structure which has become a public nuisance due to inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment; 
C.	Any sign which obstructs in any manner the ingress to, or egress from, a door, window, fire escape, or other access way required by building codes adopted by the City of Woodlake; 
D.	Any sign unlawfully installed, erected, or maintained;
E.	Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a business conducted or a product sold as prescribed in this chapter. 
F.	Any sign which encroaches into any city right-of-way and/or easement, except an approved pedestrian, canopy, wall sign or projecting sign. 
G.	Any sign that flashes, blinks, moves, changes color, appears to change color, changes intensity, or contains any part of attachment which does the same except that standard barber poles, time and temperature signs and approved bulletin board signs shall be permitted in commercial and industrial zones if otherwise in compliance with these provisions. 
H.	Any unofficial sign, signal or device, or any sign, signal or device which purports to be or is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view any official sign or signal. 
I.	Any light of any color of such brilliance as to blind or impair the vision of drivers upon any roadway. Further, no light shall be placed in such a position as to prevent the driver of a vehicle from readily recognizing any traffic sign or signal. 
J.	Any sign located so that it interferes with visibility at an intersection, public right-of-way, driveway, or other ingress/egress. 
K.	Any sign located or displayed on or over public property except as expressly permitted by these provisions, unless approved by the city council. 
L.	Any sign attached to a tree.
M.	Any roof-top mounted sign.
N.	Blimps, balloons or other forms of aerial advertising.
O.	Any sign erected or maintained which has less horizontal or vertical clearance from communication lines and energized electrical power lines than that prescribed by the state, or rules and regulations duly promulgated by agencies thereof. 
P.	Off-site signs, advertising structures and billboards.
Q.	Portable signs, other than approved banners and sandwich board signs, except for temporary signs for community events as provided for in Section 17.69.08G. 
R.	Any sign which, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, is in conflict with the spirit or intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.69.08 - Exempted signs. 
The following signs and devices shall not be subject to the provisions in this chapter: 
A.	Signs placed by a governmental body or public utility, required to be maintained by law. 
B.	Memorial tablets or plaques placed by recognized historical agencies.
C.	Flags of the National or State Government.
D.	Traffic or other signs of government agencies, signs required by law or contract with a governmental agency, railroad crossing signs, legal notices, and such temporary emergency or non-advertising signs as may be authorized by the city council. 
E.	Decorations or window signs to celebrate nationally recognized holidays and local celebrations. 
F.	Temporary political signs, that adhere to the following regulations:
1.	Political signs are permitted on lots or parcels privately owned with permission of the property owner. 
2.	The combined area of sign by any one candidate on any one parcel shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
3.	Political signs shall not be attached to trees, fence posts, or utility poles, except on private property where signs may be attached to fence posts with permission of the property owner. 
4.	Political signs shall not be lighted either directly or indirectly.
5.	No political sign or portion thereof shall be placed in any street right-of-way or on any city-owned property. 
6.	No sign shall be erected in violation of street corner setback requirements which are established to ensure traffic safety, nor shall any such sign interference with pedestrian traffic. 
7.	Political signs shall be erected no more than sixty (60) days prior to the date of the election. 
8.	All political signs shall be removed within fourteen (14) days following the date of the election. Signs not removed within this period may be removed by the city and the cost of removal assessed against the candidate. 
9.	Provisions of this subsection shall not apply to political advertising on legally established existing commercial billboard structures. 
G.	Temporary signs placed by recognized non-profit or other community organizations advertising community events. Such signs shall be limited to sixteen (16) square feet in area and no taller than four feet. Only one such sign is permitted per parcel. Said signs shall be erected no more than fourteen (14) days before the event and shall be removed no more than seven days after the event. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.69.09 - Murals. 
It is the intent of the city council, for purposes of promoting the local economy, tourism, and for further purposes of beautifying Woodlake, to adopt standards regarding murals, their location and design. 
A.	Location. Murals may be located on the sides of buildings and walls on property in any commercial, industrial or public/quasi-public zone district within the city. 
B.	Mural design approval. Prior to painting, installation and execution of a mural, an application shall be submitted to the Woodlake planning commission. The application shall include a detailed drawing or sketch of the mural plus other details as prescribed on the application or deemed by the commission to be pertinent. The commission shall forward the application, with a recommendation to the city council. The council shall review and approve, approve with modifications, or deny the application as submitted. 
C.	Criteria for design of murals.
1.	The subject matter of the mural shall be of historical or community significance regarding the growth and development of the City of Woodlake and its surrounding environs or be of such high quality as to be appropriate. A mural shall not contain elements that advertise an existing business or product. 
2.	The paint to be used shall be appropriate for use in an outdoor locale, for an artistic rendition and shall be of a permanent, long-lasting variety. 
3.	The mural shall be designed and painted by qualified mural artists with sufficient knowledge in the design and painting of such projects. 
4.	To the extent feasible, the mural shall be vandal and graffiti resistant.
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.69.10 - Non-conforming signs. 
The lawful use of a sign existing on the effective date of this chapter, although such use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, may be thus continued; provided, however, a non-confirming sign which has been abandoned, or the use for which it is advertised has ceased to function for a period of ninety (90) days or more, shall be brought into conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
A.	No non-conforming sign shall in any manner (except for face changes) be structurally altered, reconstructed, or moved without being made to comply with the provisions of this chapter; however, nothing herein shall prohibit the painting, maintenance, or repairing of such sign, including the face and changing of copy. 
B.	If, at any time, any sign in existence or maintained on the effective date of this chapter, which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, is destroyed by fire, accident, explosion or act of nature to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of the value thereof, such sign shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, the value of any sign shall be the estimated cost of replacement of the sign in kind as determined by the chief building official. 
C.	The planning director or his/her designee shall immediately cause the removal of any sign which, in the judgment of the director is found to be within the public right-of-way and/or easements and are found to place citizens in immediate peril, by any or a combination of the following methods using sound judgment under the circumstances: 
1.	Removal or modification of said sign by city staff with business owner (or property owner if business has ceased operations) to be billed for time and materials. 
2.	Notification orally or in writing to the business owner causing the removal of said signs within a 24-hour period or lesser period of time, as prescribed by the planning director. 
3.	Immediate citation of the business owner (or property owner if business has ceased operations) or party responsible for said sign. 
D.	Any business that has ceased operations for at least thirty (30) days shall remove all temporary signs and all window signs. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.69.11 - Administration. 
Except for where otherwise stated in this chapter, no sign may be placed or erected without written approval issued by the zoning administrator in the form of a sign permit. In addition, building permits shall be required for the erection of signs, except painted, window, or temporary signs, following the issuance of written approval by the planning director. 
A.	Applications: Applications for sign approval shall be made upon forms provided by the planning department. Two sets of sign plans shall be submitted to the planning department for review. Sign plans shall include the following: 
1.	Address of sign location.
2.	Name and phone number of owner and/or applicant.
3.	Name, address, and phone number of contractor or erector.
4.	A site plan shown location of proposed sign(s) on the subject site.
5.	Elevation drawing(s) showing location on building or other structure, including height of sign and any projection from building. 
6.	Elevation of sign showing dimensions and materials.
7.	Construction details of typical sections for all proposed signs. In some cases, the building inspector will require that the details are accompanied by the signature of a California licensed engineer or architect. 
8.	Sign valuation, and for electric signs, the number of transformers.
9.	Additional information may be required as deemed necessary by the planning director, including engineered footing and foundation details for freestanding signs. 
B.	Review of sign applications. Permission for installation of a sign shall be issued only after review by the planning director, or designee, who shall approve, disapprove, or conditionally-approve the sign application on the basis that it conforms to the purpose and the standards of this chapter. 
C.	Appeals. Appeals to this chapter shall be processed consistent with the process for appeals established in Chapter 17.06. 
D.	Violations. Violations shall be processed consistent with Chapter 17.70. 
E.	Maintenance. All signs and supporting structures shall be kept in good repair and in proper state of preservation. The display surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted and clean. The immediate surrounding premises shall be maintained free of weeds and rubbish. The planning director is authorized to order the painting, cleaning or repair of signs which become dilapidated and the cleaning of the immediate premises. Such maintenance shall be completed within thirty (30) days of receiving written notice. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.69.12 - Minor deviations. 
A minor deviation allowing an increase of up to twenty (20) percent in permitted sign area standards may be granted by the planning director upon written request, subject to such conditions as it may impose without any notice, if the director finds that to do so would not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property and improvements in the area in which the property is located. 
A.	Minor deviation may be granted upon making the following findings:
1.	There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions which apply to the property involved or the existing or intended use of the property which do not apply generally to other properties in the same zoning district. 
2.	Granting of a minor deviation will not negatively impact surrounding properties.
B.	Appeals. Any decision of the planning director regarding a minor deviation may be appealed to the planning commission consistent with Chapter 17.06. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.70 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
17.70.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a mechanism for enforcing the provisions of this ordinance. Further, to ensure that Woodlake's planning efforts are achieved and that the public health, safety and welfare is protected. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.70.02 - Administration. 
All department heads, officials or other employees of the city that are vested with the authority to issue and permit, license or certificate shall to the provisions of this ordinance and shall not issue any permits, licenses or certificates for uses, buildings or structures that are in conflict with this ordinance. Any permit, license or certificate issued in conflict with this ordinance, intentionally or otherwise, shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.70.03 - Code enforcement. 
The planning director and code enforcement officer, or other person authorized by the city manager, shall be authorized to enforce provisions of this ordinance and to issue citations and make arrests pursuant to Section 836.5 of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.70.04 - Violation. 
Any structure or use which is established, operated, erected, moved, altered, enlarged, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this ordinance, is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties set forth in this chapter and/or revocation procedures contained in other chapters of this title. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.70.05 - Right of entry. 
In the discharge of enforcement duties authorized persons shall have the right to enter any site, building or structure for the purpose of investigation and inspection. Such right of entry shall be exercised only at reasonable hours and only with the consent of the owner or tenant unless a written order from the court has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.70.06 - Abatement. 
Any person violating any provisions of this title shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Section 19(c) of the California Penal Code and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the general penalty provisions of this chapter. A person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense each day during any portion of which a violation of this title is committed, continued or permitted by the person and shall be punishable as herein provided. 
Any structure erected, moved, altered, enlarged or maintained and any use of a site contrary to the provisions of this title is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney shall immediately institute necessary legal proceedings for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps as may be necessary to accomplish these ends, and shall apply to a court of competent jurisdiction to grant such relief as will remove or abate the structure or use and retrain or enjoin the person from erecting, moving, altering, or enlarging the structure or using the site contrary to the provisions of this title. The remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
17.70.07 - Penalties. 
Any person, partnership, organization, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provisions of this title or any condition imposed on an entitlement, permit or license, or violating or failing to comply with any order made hereunder, shall be guilty of an infraction of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second violation of the same provision of this title within one year; or (3) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation of the same provision of this title within one year. The phrase "violation of the same title" as used in this section means and refers to a violation of the same numbered section of the Woodlake zoning ordinance. In addition, each day such violation continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
The city may impose fees on applicants to cover the full costs incurred by the city for the monitoring and enforcement of the requirements of this chapter as well as those conditions and mitigation measures imposed on an approved permit or license. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 17.72 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.72.01 - Purpose. 
Unless the text of this ordinance states otherwise, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and construction of this Ordinance. Words and phrases used in this ordinance shall be defined as follows:  
17.72.02 - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are as follows: 
A.	Provide coherent and consistent explanation of the terms used in the ordinance.
B.	Avoid misinterpretation of the regulations, procedures, and standards as put forth in the ordinance. 
C.	Introduce a common vocabulary to facilitate communication regarding the ordinance. 
17.72.03 - Definitions. 
"Abutting" means two or more parcels sharing a common boundary of a least one point. 
"Abandoned" means to cease or suspend from developing or maintaining a building or use for a stated period of time. 
"Access" mean safe, adequate, and usable ingress or egress to a property or use. 
"Accessory structure" means a structure containing no kitchen or bathroom and located upon the same lot or parcel as the principal use or structure to which it is an accessory. The structure is customary, incidental, and subordinate to the use of the principal building, or the principal use of the land. All accessory structures shall be constructed with, or subsequent to, the construction of the principal structure or activation of the principal use. 
"Adjacent to" means properties that are next to each other sharing a common property line. 
"Agricultural accessory structures" mean those uses and structures customarily incidental and subordinate to the agricultural use of the land, including: barns, storage sheds, corrals, pens, fences, windmills, watering and feed troughs; the storage and use of farm implements, irrigation, and crop-protection equipment; the storage and use of fuels for heating buildings and operating farm equipment or appliances; water and waste water treatment facilities and systems for private uses and structures which are determined by the Planning Director to be necessary, customary, and incidental to the agricultural use of the lot or parcel. Agricultural accessory uses shall not include construction equipment storage yards. 
"Agricultural operations" means the cultivation and tillage of soil, dairying, the production, irrigation frost protection, cultivation, growing, harvesting, and processing of any agricultural commodity, including timber, viticulture, agriculture, horticulture, the raising of livestock, fur-bearing animals, fish, or poultry, and any commercial practices incidental to, or in conjunction with, such agricultural operations, including preparation for market, delivery to storage or to market, or to carriers for transportation to market. 
"Airport" means any area of land or water designated and set aside for the landing and taking off of aircraft and utilized in the interest of the public for such purposes, a map of which has been or is hereafter included as a part of the Zoning Map of the City of Woodlake. 
"Airport elevation" means the elevation of the highest point on the usable or designed runway as established by the city engineer. 
"Airport hazard" means any structure, tree, or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft. 
"Airport reference point" means the point established at the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated. 
"Alley" means a public way permanently reserved as a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property. 
"Alluvial fan" means a geomorphological feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash floodings, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and depositions, and channel migration. 
"Alter" means to make any change in the supporting or load bearing members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or floor joists, which will prolong the life of the structure. 
"Amusement machine" means any mechanical or electronic machine, apparatus, contrivance, appliance, or device which may be operated or played upon the placing or depositing therein of any coin, check, slug, ball, or any other article or device, or by paying therefore either in advance of or after use, involving in its use either skill or chance, including but not limited to a tape machine, card machine, pinball machine, bowling game machine shuffleboard machine, marble game machine, horse racing machine, basketball game machine, baseball game machine, football game machine, an electronic video game, or any other similar machine or device except for a billiard or pool table, music machine, or a merchandise vending machine. 
"Ancillary use" means a use incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal use, located on the same lot or parcel. 
"Animal hospital" means a facility where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment; the ancillary use of the premises as a kennel or a place where animals or pets are boarded for remuneration. 
"Annexation" means the incorporation of a land area into an exiting community with a resulting change in the boundaries of that community. 
"Antenna" means any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or receiving of electromagnetic radio frequency waves, including antennas or towers used for transmitting or receiving television, radio, citizen's band or cellular phone communication. An antenna can be affixed to or supported by a roof or exterior wall of a building or other structure or an antenna can be ground mounted, which is supported by a platform, framework, pole, or other structural system that is affixed to or placed directly on or in the ground. 
"Anti-drain valve (check valve)" means a valve located under a sprinkler head to hold water in the system so it minimizes drainage from the low elevation sprinkler heads. 
"Apex" means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front. 
"Application rate" means the depth of water applied to a given area, usually measured in inches per hour. 
"Arcade" means a place of business having four or more amusement machines. 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or VO AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one foot to three feet; a clearly defined channel doesn't exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and, velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
"Automatic controller" means a mechanical or solid timer, capable of operating valve stations to set the days and length of time of a water application. 
"Backflow prevention device" means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contaminations of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system. 
"Balloon or blimp" means an airtight bag, possibly rigid or semi-rigid, which will rise and float above the earth when filled with hot air or gas. 
"Base flood" means a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-Year Flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this title. 
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgraded - i.e., below ground level on all sides. 
"Block" means the properties abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided land or water course. 
"Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels or property of any kind. 
"Building face" means the exterior surface of any building, regardless of frontage. 
"Building frontage" means the building elevations facing a street, plaza or mall. Where the building contains multiple uses, it shall be linear frontage of that portions of the building between the occupancy separation walls. 
"Bulletin board" means a permanently constructed sign containing a surface area that may have interchangeable letters, words, or numerals displaying the name of the institution, events conducted upon and/or services offered upon such premises. 
"Church" means a building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for worship and which building, together with its accessory buildings, and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
"Co-location" means the location of two or more wireless communication facilities on a single support structure. Co-location shall also include the location of wireless communication facilities with other facilities, including water tanks, light standards, and buildings. 
"Combining districts" mean zones or geographical areas in Woodlake that may require special regulations or treatment due to unique features, resources or hazards. These districts may be combined with any district identified in this Ordinance. For purposes of identification, districts that are joined with a combining district shall be suffixed with the name of the combining district. 
"Commercial accessory structures" mean those uses and structures incidental and subordinate to the commercial use of the land including: trash storage areas and bins; vending machines; required loading and unloading facilities; outdoor tables, benches, umbrellas, fountains, ponds, statues, sculptures, paintings, and other works of art; radio and television antennas, private satellite dish antennas; the storage and use of fuels for fleet vehicles, heating buildings or for the operation of appliances or equipment used within a building; sales offices, showrooms and administrative offices; permitted signs; the storage and use of commercial fleet vehicles as part of the principal use; and other accessory uses and structures which are determined by the Planning and Building Director to be necessary, customary and incidental to the commercial use of the land. 
"Communications equipment building" means a building housing electrical and mechanical equipment necessary for the conduct of a public communication business with or without personnel. 
"Communication tower" means any structure which is used to transmit or receive electromagnetic radio frequency waves or that supports such a device. 
"Conditional use" means a use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as specified in this title and authorized by the planning commission. Requires a conditional use permit be obtained. 
"Density bonus" means an increase in units of at least twenty-five (25) percent over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under this title or Woodlake's land use element of the general plan. 
"Developer incentives:" 
1.	Reduce or eliminate standards contained in the Subdivision Ordinance or the City of Woodlake Standards and Specifications Manual. 
2.	Reduce or eliminate ordinance requirements, including open space, lot size, setback, or parking standards. 
3.	Reduce or eliminate any design requirements exceeding Uniform Building Code specifications.
"Development" means any man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging , filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
"Development agreement" means a contract duly executed and legally binding between the City of Woodlake and a developer that delineates the terms and conditions agreed upon by the two parties. 
"Dwelling" means a structure or portion thereof designed for or occupied for residential purposes whether for one family, several families, roomers or boarders, but for purposes of this definition specifically not to include automobile trailers, hotels, motels, labor camps, tents, railroad cars, converted, transit vehicles, mobile homes, except for the purposes of the MH district, or any type of temporary structure. 
"Dwelling, multiple-family" means a structure containing more than one dwelling unit, designed for occupancy or occupied by more than one family. 
"Dwelling, single-family" means a building containing one dwelling unit. 
"Electric distribution substation" means an assembly of equipment which is part of a system for the distribution of electric power where electric energy is received at a subtransmission voltage and transformed to a lower voltage for distribution for general consumer use. 
"Electric transmission substation" means an assembly of equipment which is part of a system for the transmission of electric power where electric energy is received at very high voltage from its source of generation by means of a network of high voltage lines, and where, by a means of transformers, said high voltage is transformed to a lower subtransmission voltage for purposes of supplying electric power to large individual consumers, interchange connections with other power producing agencies or electric distribution substations for transformation to still lower voltages for distribution to smaller individual users. 
"Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or later the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
"Expansion to an existing manufactured mobile home park or subdivision: means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
"Family" means an individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption or a group of not more than five persons, not including servants, who need not be related by blood, marriage or adoption, living as a single housekeeping unit. 
"Farm employee housing" means living quarters, including dwellings, sleeping accommodations and dining facilities, maintained for occupancy by persons employed principally in farming and related pursuits on land owned, leased or rented by the owner, lessee or tenant of the site on which the farm employee housing is located; excepting a labor camp and trailer park. 
"Farming." See "agricultural operations." 
"Flooding" means a general and temporary condition or partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
"Flood boundary and floodway map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administrative has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
"Flood hazard boundary map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administrative has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
"Flood insurance rates map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administrative has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk of premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
"Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
"Floodplain administrator" means the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving or enhancing, where possible, the natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations and open space plans. 
"Floodplain management regulations" mean other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term descried federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estates or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
"Floodway encroachment lines" mean the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps. 
"Floodway fringe" means that area of the floodplain on either side of the floodway where encroachment may be permitted 
"Floor area, gross" means a sum of the gross horizontal areas, in square feet, of the several floors of a building, including interior balconies and mezzanines, but not including the horizontal area occupied by any wall, inner court or shaft enclosure. 
"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
"Garage, private" means an accessory structure or a portion of a main structure used only for the storage of self-propelled passenger vehicles or trailers by families residing upon the premises; provided that not more than one-half of the space may be rented for the private passenger vehicles of persons not residing on the premises, except that all of the space in a garage of one or two car capacity may be so rented. 
"Garage, repair" means a structure or part thereof other than a private garage where motor vehicles are repaired or painted. 
"Garage, storage" means a structure or part thereof used for the storage, parking or servicing of motor vehicles, but not for the repair thereof. 
"Guest house" means living quarters within an accessory structure for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the premises, having no kitchen or cooking facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of ground surfaces prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
"Home occupation" means any use conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character thereof or adversely affect the uses permitted in the residential district of which it is a part; which creates no additional vehicular or pedestrian traffic, requires no additional parking space, generates no noises audible beyond the site, causes no radio or television interference; where no persons are employed other than domestic help, and no mechanical equipment is used other than that necessary for domestic purposes; no materials, equipment and/or supplies are stored outdoors other than such storage normally associated with the residential use of the property. For purposes of this definition, the storage of not more than one ton capacity shall be deemed as normally associated with residential use the property. 
"Hotel" means a structure or portion thereof in which there are individual guest rooms or suites, usually occupied on a transient basis, where lodging with or without meals is provided for compensation. 
"Housing development" means One or more groups of residential projects that each have more than five units. 
"Industrial accessory structures" means those uses and structures incidental and subordinate to the industrial use of the land including: loading and unloading facilities and equipment, parking areas and shipping terminals; water and waste water treatment facilities and systems; incidental services swishes cafeterias; storage facilities and garages, sales office, showrooms, and administrative offices; radio and television antennas, private satellite dish antennas; the storage and use of fuels for fleet vehicles, heating buildings or for the operation of appliances or equipment used within a building; the storage of fully operative fleet vehicles, heavy equipment or trucks as part of the principal use; permitted signs; and other accessory uses and structures which are determined by the planning and building director to be necessary, customary and incidental to the industrial use of the land. 
"Immediate family." Immediate family shall include spouse, parent or step-parent, brother or step-brother or half-brother, sister or step-sister or half-sister, child or step-child, or grandparents. 
"Inherent problems" shall mean problems associated with agricultural operations, including but not limited to, noise, odors, dust, chemicals, smoke, and extended hours of operations. 
"Institution" shall mean all governmental, religious, and charitable organizations. 
"Junk yard" means a site or portion of a site which waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled, including used furniture and household equipment yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and the like; excepting a site which such uses are conducted with a completely enclosed structure and excepting a motor vehicle wrecking yard as defined in this section. An establishment for the sale, purchase or storage of used cars of salvaged machinery in operable condition and the processing of used or salvage materials as part of a manufacturing operation shall not be deemed a junk yard. 
"Labor camp" means living quarters including dwellings, tents, bunkhouses, maintenance of way cars, trailers coaches or other housing accommodations, maintained in connection with any work or place where work is being performed and the site on which they are located, and/or a site set aside and provided for camping of five or more employees by a labor contractor; excepting farm employee housing as defined in this section. 
"Landscaping" means the addition of lawns, trees, plants, and other natural and decorative features to land. 
"Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
"Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
"Landing area" means the area of an airport used, or to be used, for the landing, taking off, or taxiing of aircraft. 
"Lodge or club" means an association of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated, for some common purpose, but not including groups organized to render a service carried on as a business. 
"Lot, corner" (see Exhibit 72-1 for illustration of lot types) means a site bounded by two or more adjacent street lines which have an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°). 
"Lot, interior" means a lot other than a corner lot. 
"Lot, key" means the first lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot whether or not separated by an alley. 
"Lot, reversed corner" means a corner lot whose side street line is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. 
"Lot line, front" means the property line dividing a lot from a street. On a corner lot the shorter street frontage shall be considered the front lot line. 
"Lot line, rear" means the property line opposite the front lot line. 
"Lot line, side" means any lot lines other than front lot lines or rear lot lines. 
Exhibit 72-1: Lot Types
  
"Low income household" means those units targeted for this category of household that shall be affordable at a rent that does not exceed thirty (30) percent of sixty (60) percent of the Woodlake County median income. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of this ordinance. (Note: This definition allows attached garages to be built at grade. Below grade garages are not allowed as they are considered to be basements). 
"Massage establishments" means any establishments wherein massage is given engaged in or carried on or permitted to be given, engaged in or carried on in any business of giving baths of any kind, nature of sort whatsoever where the body is rubbed or there is any manipulation of the body or similar procedure given. 
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Daturm (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
"Medical buildings" means clinics or offices for doctors, dentists, oculists, chiropractors, osteopaths, chiropodists, or similar practitioners of the healing arts; including accessory laboratories and a prescription pharmacy but not including offices for veterinarians. 
"Mobile home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used as a single-family dwelling unit with or without a foundation. A mobile home does not include a recreational vehicle, commercial coach, or factory-built home. 
"Mobile home park" means an area or parcel of land where three or more mobile homes or mobile home sites are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease for human habitation. Mobile home parks may contain accessory facilities: including recreation facilities; meeting rooms; parking lots for boats, recreational vehicles, and other vehicles; administrative offices and other accessory structures associated with mobile home parks. 
"Motel" means a structure or portion thereof or a group of attached or detached structures containing individual guest rooms, suites or dwelling units, usually occupied on a transient basis and usually with garage attached or parking space located in proximity to each unit, where lodging is provided for compensation. 
"Motor vehicle wrecking yard" means a site or portion of a site on which the dismantling or wrecking of used vehicles, whether self-propelled or not, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts is conducted. The presence on a site of two or more motor vehicles which have not been capable of operating under their own power for thirty (30) days or more or, in the case of vehicles not self-propelled, which have not been towable or from which parts have been removed for reuse or sale, shall constitute prima facie evidence of a motor vehicle wrecking yard. 
"Mural" means a permanent picture painted directly on an exterior wall or on panels to exterior walls. 
"Mural project permit" means a permit issued by the City of Woodlake to a private party authorizing the painting of a mural within the city. 
"New construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after effective date of Chapter 17.28 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
"Non-conforming use" means a use of a structure or land which was lawfully established and maintained prior to the adoption of this ordinance, but does not conform with the use regulations for the district in which it is located. 
"Non-conforming use (airport)" means any structure, tree or use of land that does not conform to the provisions of Chapter 17.41 at the time said chapter is made applicable to a particular airport. 
"Non-conforming structure" means a structure which was lawfully erected prior to the adoption of this title but does not conform with the development standards, including coverage, yard spaces, height of structures, or distances between structures, of the district in which the structure is located. 
"Nursery school" means the use of a site or portion of a site for an organized program devoted to the education or day care of five or more pre-elementary school age children other than those residing on the site. 
"Nursing home" means a structure operated as a lodging house in which nursing, dietary and other personal services are rendered to convalescent, invalids, or aged persons not including persons suffering from contagious or mental diseases, alcoholism or drug addiction and in which surgery is not performed and primary treatment, such as customarily is given in hospitals and sanitariums, is not provided. A convalescent home or a rest home shall be deemed a nursing home. 
"Obstruction" includes but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which my alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
"Off-site hazardous waste facility" means a hazardous waste facility that is not an on-site facility. 
"On-site hazardous waste facility" means a hazardous waste facility in which a hazardous waste is produced and which is owned by, leased to or under the control of the producer of waste. For purposes of Chapter 17.40, an on-site hazardous waste facility does not involve the disposal of hazardous wastes by either land filling or incineration. 
"One-hundred year flood." See "base flood." 
"Outdoor advertising structure" means a structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any outdoor advertising sign may be placed, located on a site other than the site on which the advertised use is located or on which the advertised product is produced. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, city, county, or district, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof. 
"Pitch" or "peak" shall mean the highest point as in the highest point of a roof. 
"Pre-zoning" means delineate the zoning of an unincorporated territory prior to annexation by the city. 
"Primary surface" A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has not specially prepared hard surface, or planning hard surfaced, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
"Railroad right-of-way" means a strip of land of a maximum width of one hundred (100) feet only for the accommodation of main line or branch line railroad tracks, switching equipment and signals, but not including lands on which stations, offices, storage buildings, spur tracks, sidings, section gang and other employee housing, yards or other uses are located. 
"Rain sensing device" means a system that automatically shuts off the irrigation system during periods of rain. 
"Record drawings" means a set of reproducible drawings that show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor. 
"Recreational area" means an active play area, including sport fields, school yards, picnic grounds or other areas where sport, outdoor or recreational activities take place. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or camping trailer, with or without motor power, designed for human habitation for recreational purposes with a living area less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet. 
"Recyclable material" means reusable material including but not limited to metals, glass, plastic and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Section 25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4) of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Recycling collection facility" means a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase, of recyclable materials from the public. Such facility shall not complete any processing except limited bailing, batching and the sorting of recyclable material and shall be classified as either a "small collection" or "large collection" facility. 
"Recycling facility" means a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or certified processor means a recycling facility certified by the Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer. Recycling facilities are either collection facilities or processing facilities. 
"Recycling large collection facility" means a collection facility which occupies an area of more than two hundred (200) square feet and may include a mobile unit, bulk reverse vending machine or a grouping of reverse vending machines, a kiosk type unit which may include a permanent structure, or an unattended container placed for the donation of recyclable materials. 
"Recycling processing facility" means a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. Processing means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, impacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning and remanufacturing. 
"Recycling small collection facility" means a collection facility which occupies an area of not more than two hundred (200) square feet, and may include a mobile unit, bulk reverse vending machine or a grouping of reverse vending machines, a kiosk type unit which may include a permanent structure, or an unattended container placed for the donation of recyclable materials. 
"Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
"Ravine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
"Right-of-way" means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road. 
"Runway" means the paved surface of an airport landing area designated for the landing or taking off of aircraft. 
"Satellite dish antenna" means a satellite earth station consisting of a receiving component of a disc or similar configuration whose purpose is to receive television signals from orbiting satellites or other sources and a low-noise amplifier whose purpose is to magnify television signals. 
"Second residential unit" means a second residential unit, or granny flat is either a detached or attached dwelling unit which provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the primary residence. It shall not exceed six hundred forty (640) square feet in floor area. 
"Service station" means a facility which supplies gasoline and diesel fuel to motor vehicles, and including grease racks or elevators, wash racks or pits, tire repairs, battery servicing and repairing, ignition service, sales of motor vehicle accessories and other customary services for automobiles, but excluding painting and body work. 
"Senior household" means those units that have at least one person occupying the residential unit that is at least fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
"Setback." See "yard, front," "yard, rear," or "yard, side." 
"Sign" means any medium, including its structure and component parts, which is used, or intended to be used, to attract attention to the subject matter for advertising purposes and shall include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, surface, or space when erected, painted, or maintained in view of the general public for identification, advertisement, or the promotion of the interests of any person. 
"Sign, freestanding" means a sign not attached to a building that is constructed upon, or affixed to, the ground by means of columns, poles, or similar structural components. 
"Sign, monument" means a sign generally located flush with the ground or upon a base but otherwise having a clearance from the ground of not more than two feet and supported by a solid base or one or more uprights. 
"Sign, off-premise" means a sign located on a site other than the same site as the business or entity being advertised. 
"Sign, legal, non-conforming" means a sign which existed as a legal sign prior to the effective date of this ordinance which is in conflict with the provisions of this chapter and continues to advertise a bona fide business. 
"Sign, prohibited, non-conforming" means a sign which existed as a legal sign prior to the effective date of this ordinance which is in conflict with the provisions of this chapter but no longer advertises a bona fide business which is in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. 
"Sign, projecting" means a sign attached to, and projecting from, the face of, or above, or upon, the roof of a building, structure, canopy, or marquee. 
"Sign, roof" means a sign erected upon a roof, or parapet wall of a building, and which is wholly or partially supported by said building. 
"Sign, wall" means a sign which is attached directly to, and parallel with, the building face or painted upon the wall, awning or marquee of a building or structural part thereof. 
"Sign, window" means a sign painted, printed, attached, glued, or otherwise affixed to a window. 
"Sign area" means the total surface space within a single continuous rectilinear perimeter containing words, letters, figures, or symbols, together with any frame, material, or color forming an integral part of the display, but excluding support structures, the face of a building, and incidental parts not drawing attention to the subject matter. 
"Site" means a parcel of land, subdivided or unsubdivided, occupied or to be occupied by a use or structure. 
"Site area" means the total horizontal area included within the property lines of a site. 
"Site depth" (see Exhibit 72-2 for illustration of site width and depth) means the horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines of a site measured along a line midway between the front side property line. 
"Site width" means the horizontal distance between the side property lines of a site measured at right angles to the depth at a point midway between the front and rear property lines. 
Exhibit 72-2: Site Width and Depth
  
"Slimline monopole" means a single, slim antenna pole not exceeding one and one-half feet in diameter at the base of the antenna or pole and one foot in diameter at the top of the antenna or pole. 
"Specified hazardous wasted facility" means an off-site hazardous waste facility which serves more than one producer of hazardous waste. 
"Stable" means a detached accessory structure including but not limited to a corral or paddock for the keeping of one or more horses owned by the occupants of the premises, and which are not kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
"Stock yard" means an enclosed area where animals are temporarily held for concentrated feeding or display preliminary to slaughtering, shipping or resale. 
"Stol primary surface" means any imaginary plane three hundred (300) feet wide, centered on the runway. Its length extends one hundred (100) feet beyond each runway end. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
"Street" means a thoroughfare, dedicated as such or acquired for public use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting land. 
"Structural" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or manufactured home. 
"Structure" means any object constructed, installed, or placed on real property by man including, but not limited to buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead lines. 
"Structure, accessory" means a detached subordinate structure located on the same site with the main structure or main use, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main structure or the main use of the land. 
"Structure, main" means a structure housing the principal use of site or functioning as the principal use. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.	Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or; 
2.	Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
"Target households" means very low income, low income, or senior citizen households. 
"Tent revival" means a religious meeting or series of meetings which are often evangelistic in nature and are conducted within a non-permanent structure such as, but not limited to, a collapsible shelter of canvas or other material stretched and sustained by poles. 
"Traffic safety sight area" (see Exhibit 72-3 for illustration) means that portion of both public and private property located at any corner and bounded by the curb line or edge of roadway of the intersecting streets and a line joining points on the curb or edge of roadway forty-five (45) feet from the point of intersection of the extended curb lines or edges of roadway. 
Exhibit 72-3: Traffic Safety Sight Area
  
"Travel trailer" means a vehicle other than a motor vehicle, which is designed or used for human habitation and which may be moved upon a public highway without a permit or chauffer's license or both, without violating any provision of the California Vehicle Code. 
"Urbanization" means the development of land for non-agricultural purposes, including but not limited to, residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional land uses. 
"Use." The word "use" shall mean the purpose for which land or structures thereon is designed, arranged or intended to be occupied or used or for which it is occupied, maintained, rented or leased. 
"Utility runway" means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum and less. 
"Very low income household" means those units targeted for this category of household that shall be affordable at a rent that does not exceed thirty (30) percent of fifty (50) percent of the Woodlake County median income. 
"Visual runway" means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA approval airport layout plan, a military service's approved military airport layout plan or by any planning document submitted to the FAA by competent authority. 
"Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
"Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel, or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
"Wireless communication facility" means a facility containing communication towers and/or antennas and any related equipment for the purpose of transmitting or receiving electromagnetic radio frequency waves. 
"Yard" means an open space on the same site as a structure other than a court unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this title. 
"Yard, front" (see Exhibit 72-4 for illustration of yard types) means a yard extending across the full width of the site or lot between the front lot line and the nearest line or point of the main structure. 
"Yard, rear" means a yard extending across the full width of the side of lot between the rear lot line and the nearest line or point of the main structure. 
"Yard, side" means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the side lot line and the nearest line or point of the main structure. 
"Zoning" means the division of a municipality into districts, and the regulation within those districts of the height, appearance, and bulk of buildings and structures; the area of a lot which may be occupied and the size of required open spaces; the density of population; and the use or buildings and land for commercial, agricultural, industrial, residential or other purposes. The term "zoning" shall be synonymous with the term "classification" and the term "zone" shall be synonymous with the term "district." 
Exhibit 72-4: Yard Types
  
(Ord. No.599 § 3, 12-14-2015)  
Chapter 17.74 - SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS 
Sections: 
 
17.74.010 - Purpose. 
The city seeks to implement Assembly Bill 2188 (2014) through the creation of an expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter shall also be known and may be cited as the "small residential rooftop solar chapter." 
(Ord. No.599 § 3, 12-14-2015)  
17.74.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply solely to this chapter of the municipal Code: 
"Solar energy system" shall have the same meaning set forth in Civil Code section 801.5(a)(1) and (a)(2) or successor statute, as amended from time to time. 
"Small residential rooftop solar energy system" shall have the same meaning set forth in Government Code section 65850.5(j)(3) or successor statute, as amended from time to time. 
"Electronic submittal" means the utilization of facsimile. 
An "association" means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. 
A "common interest development" means any of the following: 
A.	A community apartment project;
B.	A condominium project;
C.	A planned development; or
D.	A stock cooperative.
"Specific, adverse impact" shall have the same meaning set forth in Government Code section 65850.5(j)(5) or successor statute, as amended from time to time. 
"Planning director" shall mean the planning director as set forth within Title 17, including Chapter 17.03, of the City Code and shall also refer to the planning director's designee, if any. 
"Building official" shall mean the head building official as set forth within Title 17, including Chapter 17.03, of the City Code and shall also refer to the building official's designee, if any. 
(Ord. No.599 § 3, 12-14-2015)  
17.74.030 - Applicability of chapter. 
(a)	This chapter of the City's Code applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city. 
(b)	Small residential rooftop solar energy systems lawfully established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter of the City's Code are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the wattage, size, type or components thereof which shall require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacement of existing components shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No.599 § 3, 12-14-2015)  
17.74.040 - Compliance with state and local requirements. 
In order for a valid permit to be issued, the proposed solar energy system must satisfy all applicable health and safety standards and requirements enacted by the state and the city. 
(Ord. No.599 § 3, 12-14-2015)  
17.74.050 - Duties of planning director. 
(a)	In accordance with Government Code section 65850.5(g)(1), the city's planning director shall prepare and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply in order to be eligible for expedited review and an accurate application which satisfies those requirements shall be deemed complete. All requirements in the checklist and any procedures identified therein must conform to the minimum standards and requirements found in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook published by the governor's office of planning and research. 
(b)	In accordance with Government Code section 65850.5(g)(2), the planning director must ensure the checklist and all document forms required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application are publicly accessible on a city webpage during such times as the city has an operative Internet website. 
(c)	In connection with small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applications, and in addition to an applicant's original wet signatures thereon, the planning director shall alternatively accept an electronic signature and submittal of the required permit application and documents by facsimile. The planning director may also elect to accept any additional form of electronic signatures specified in Government Code section 65850.5(g)(2) provided that the planning director has sufficient equipment, software and other technical and human resources capable of reliably doing so for all applicants so desiring. 
(d)	In accordance with Civil Code section 714(e)(1) and Government Code Section 65850.5(b), an application for approval to install a solar energy system shall be processed by the planning director in the same manner as an application for approval of an architectural modification to the property, and must not be willfully avoided or delayed, provided that such review process shall be administrative, nondiscretionary and similar to approval of building permits. The planning director's approval shall be, and is, contingent upon valid issuance of a building permit by the city's building official. 
(e)	The planning director and building official must ensure that all fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems comply with all laws, including Government Code Sections 65850.55, 66015 and 66016 and Health and Safety Code Section 17951, to the extent applicable. 
(Ord. No.599 § 3, 12-14-2015)  
17.74.060 - Conditional use permits. 
(a)	To the extend not otherwise prohibited by Government Code Section 65850.5(b), a conditional use permit shall be required if the city's building official makes a finding, based upon substantial evidence, that the proposed solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. A conditional use permit to install a solar energy system must and shall be denied if, based on substantial evidence, the city finds that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the same. 
(b)	The city may impose any condition within a conditional use permit which is designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
(Ord. No.599 § 3, 12-14-2015)  
17.74.070 - Inspections; issuance of building permit. 
(a)	In connection with small residential rooftop solar energy systems which qualify for expedited review, only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building official except that a separate fire safety inspection may be performed whenever the city does not have an agreement with a local fire authority to conduct a fire safety inspection on behalf of the fire authority. In accordance with Government Code Section 65850.5(h), if a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails an inspection, a subsequent inspection must be scheduled which need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)	An inspection under this chapter must be performed in a timely manner and whenever reasonably possible, building official and fire safety inspections should be consolidated. Unless extraordinary circumstances exist, an inspection will be scheduled within five business days after a written request is received by the city and the applicant must be provided with a three-hour inspection window. 
(c)	The building official shall issue or deny a building permit within two business days after completing the inspection of a small residential rooftop solar energy system or within two business days after the completion of a fire safety inspection, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No.599 § 3, 12-14-2015)  
17.74.080 - Appeals. 
The denial of a permit which is governed by this chapter shall be appealable to the planning commission. The procedures and deadlines governing such appeal shall be the same procedures and deadlines prescribed in the City's Code for appeals to the city council in connection with the denial of a conditional use permit except that in its sole and absolute discretion the city council (or its designee) reserves the right to hear or decline a request to hear an appeal of the planning commission's decision. If the city council agrees to hear an appeal from the planning commission, the decision of the city council (or its designee) shall be final and supersede the decision of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No.599 § 3, 12-14-2015) 
