
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 TELECOMMUNICATIONS REGULATIONS
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 ANIMALS
Title 7 RESERVED
Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 RESERVED
Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Title 14 RESERVED
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
DEVELOPMENT CODE

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.08 ELECTIONS
Chapter 1.12 GENERAL PENALTY
Chapter 1.13 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010 Adoption.
     There is hereby adopted the Yucaipa Municipal Code, as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 172 § 1, 1997)

 

1.01.020 Title—Citation—Reference.
     This code shall be known as the Yucaipa Municipal Code and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the Yucaipa Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Yucaipa Municipal Code. References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Yucaipa Municipal Code and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. (Ord. 172 § 2, 1997)

 

1.01.030 Reference applies to all amendments.
     Whenever a references is made to this code as the Yucaipa Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Yucaipa, California, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 172 § 3, 1997)

 

1.01.040 Title, chapter and section headings.
     Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 172 § 4, 1997)

 

1.01.050 Reference to specific ordinances.
     The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 172 § 5, 1997)

 

1.01.060 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
     The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 168, passed July 28, 1997. Ordinance No. 169, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 168, but prior to adoption of this code, is hereby adopted and made a part of this code. (Ord. 172 § 6, 1997)

 

1.01.070 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
     The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. (Ord. 172 § 7, 1997)

 

1.01.080 Constitutionality.
     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. (Ord. 172 § 8, 1997)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city of Yucaipa, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

     “City” means the city of Yucaipa, county of San Bernardino, and such territory outside the city, over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.

     “Council” means the city council of the city of Yucaipa. “All its members” or “all councilmembers” means the total number of councilmembers holding office.

     “County” means the county of San Bernardino, California, or the area within the limits of San Bernardino County, and such territory outside of San Bernardino County over which the county has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.

     “Fiscal year” means from July 1st of any given year through June 30th of the following year.

     “Law” denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statues of the state of California, the ordinances of the city of Yucaipa, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

     “May” is permissive.

     “Month” means a calendar month, unless otherwise expressed.

     “Must” and “shall” are each mandatory.

     “Oath” includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”

     “Official time standard” means standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current use in the city.

     “Owner” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building of land.

     “Person” includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

     “Personal property” includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.

     “Police,” “police chief or “chief of police” means the agency which performs the appropriate law enforcement function for the city, and the head of the agency or division thereof which at the time involved has responsibility for performing the police function for, or within the city.

     “Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.

     “Property” includes real and personal property.

     “Quarterly,” where used to designate a period of time, means the first three calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of three calendar months.

     “Real property” includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.

     “Sale” includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale.

     “Shall” is mandatory.

     “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

     “State” means the state of California.

     “Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.

     “Tenant” or “occupant,” applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

     “Written” includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.

     “Year” means a calendar year. (Ord. 156 §1, 1996)

 

1.04.020 Title of office.
     Use of the title of any office, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city of Yucaipa. (Ord. 156 § 2, 1996)

 

1.04.030 Interpretation of language.
     All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 156 § 3, 1996)

 

1.04.040 Grammatical interpretation.
     The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city of Yucaipa, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:

     A.    Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.

     B.     Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

     C.     Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vise versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 156 § 4, 1996)

 

1.04.050 Acts by deputies or agents.
     When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent or deputy as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent or deputy. Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless an ordinance of the city expressly provides otherwise. (Ord. 156 § 5, 1996)

 

1.04.060 Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.
     Whenever in the ordinances of the city of Yucaipa, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 156 § 6, 1996)

 

1.04.070 Computation of time.
     Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. (Ord. 156 § 7, 1996)

 

1.04.080 Construction.
     The provisions of the ordinances of the city of Yucaipa, and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 156 § 8, 1996)

 

1.04.090 Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.
     The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 156 § 9, 1996)

 

1.04.100 Local signification.
     All references in the ordinances of the city of Yucaipa to places, acts, persons or things and all else in relation to the ordinances of the city shall be construed to mean that the same are applicable to the city, whether the city is mentioned in each particular section or not. Portions of the ordinances of the city have been adopted from the San Bernardino County Code. To the extent that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the ordinances of the city is in conflict with the San Bernardino County Code provisions so adopted, the later adopted portion of the city ordinance shall control and shall take precedence over the inconsistent portion or portions of the San Bernardino County Code. (Ord. 156 § 10, 1996)

 

1.04.110 Statute of limitations.
     When a limitation or period of time prescribed in any existing ordinance, or statute for acquiring a right or barring a remedy, or for any other purpose, has begun to run shall be deemed a part of the time prescribed as such limitation. (Ord. 156 § 11, 1996)

 

1.04.120 Violation of administrative provisions.
     The violation of, or the failure or omission or perform in accordance with, any administrative provision of the ordinances of the city of Yucaipa by any officer or employee of the city shall generally not be considered a criminal act, but may be deemed a failure to perform the duties or to observe the rules or regulations of the department, office, commission or board within the meaning of the rules and regulations of the city, or of the civil service regulations of the city if applicable. (Ord. 156 § 15, 1996)

 

1.04.130 Appeal of administrative actions.
     Unless otherwise specifically provided, a person aggrieved by an administrative action taken by any officer of the city under an ordinance of the city of Yucaipa may appeal from the action to the city council. A written notice of appeal concisely stating the facts of the case and the grounds of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days of the action appealed from. The city clerk shall have the matter set for hearing at a regular meeting of the city council and shall give the appellant written notice of the time and place of hearing at least five days before the hearing. The decision of the city council taken after the appellant has had an opportunity to be heard is final. (Ord. 156 § 16, 1996)

Chapter 1.08 ELECTIONS
1.08.010 General municipal election date.
     The general municipal election date of the city shall coincide with that of the statewide general election (i.e., the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November in each even-numbered year). This chapter shall apply to general municipal elections held in 1991 and subsequent years; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall limit or otherwise affect the authority of the city council to change the day of the general municipal election in the manner permitted by Government Code Section 36503.5, or any other relevant statute. (Ord. 157 § 2, 1996: Ord. 85 § 2, 1991)

 

1.08.020 By-district electoral system.
     A.    Pursuant to California Government Code Section 34886, members of the city council of the city of Yucaipa shall be elected by-district in five single-member districts.

     1.     Beginning with the General Municipal Election in November 2016, members of the city council shall be elected in the electoral districts established by Section 1.08.030 and subsequently reapportioned as provided by state law. Elections shall take place “by-district” as that term is defined in California Government Code Section 34871, meaning one member of the city council shall be elected from each district, by the voters of that district alone. Each member of the city council shall serve a four-year term until his or her successor is qualified.

     2.     Except during the transition period as provided in subdivision (4) of this subsection, the council member elected or appointed to represent a district must reside in that district and be a registered voter in that district, and any candidate for city council must reside in, and be a registered voter in, the district in which he or she seeks election at the time nomination papers are issued pursuant to California Government Code Section 34882 and Elections Code Section 10227.

     3.     Termination of residency in a district by a council member shall create a vacancy for that council district unless a substitute residence within the district is immediately declared and established by the council member within thirty (30) days after the termination of residency. If a substitute residence is not established within thirty (30) days after the termination of residency, the thirty-first (31st) day after the termination of residency by the council member shall be deemed “commencement of a vacancy.” Notwithstanding the previous sentence, if the council member who terminates residency in a district submits a letter of resignation effective immediately, or the city council declares the existence of a vacancy and the commencement thereof by a resolution reciting the circumstances creating the vacancy and the date on which the vacancy commences, the com-

mencement of the vacancy shall begin as and when set forth in the letter of the council member or the resolution of the city council.

     4.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the council members in office at the time this chapter takes effect shall continue in office until the expiration of the full four-year term to which he or she was elected and until his or her successor is qualified. At the end of the full four-year term of each council member, that council member or that council member’s successor shall be elected on a by-district basis in the districts established in Section 1.08.030 and as provided in Section 1.08.040. In 2016, the full four-year term of three council members expires and said council members or their successors shall be elected by-district. In 2018, the full four-year term of two council members expires and said council members or their successors shall be elected by-district. In the event a vacancy occurs in a city council office before the expiration of the full four-year term of a city council office in 2018, a person who is appointed to fill such vacancy may reside anywhere within the corporate boundaries of the city. In the event a vacancy occurs in a city council office before the expiration of the full four-year term of a city council office in 2018, a person who is elected to fill such vacancy may reside anywhere within the corporate boundaries of the city and shall be elected at-large by all the voters of the city. A person appointed or elected to fill such a vacancy shall hold the office for the remainder of the term of that office pursuant to Government Code Section 36512 and subject to Section 1.08.040. (Ord. 348 § 1, 2016)

 

1.08.030 Establishment of city council electoral districts.
     A.    Five members of the city council shall be elected on a “by-district” basis from the council districts described as follows:

     1.     Council District 1 shall comprise all that portion of the city beginning at the point of intersection of the city’s eastern border and Oak Glen Road; thence proceeding westerly and southwesterly along Oak Glen Road to Chapman Heights Road; thence proceeding westerly along Chapman Heights Road to 13th Street; thence proceeding southerly along 13th Street to Yucaipa Boulevard; thence proceeding westerly along Yucaipa Boulevard to 14th Street; thence proceeding southerly along 14th Street to Kentucky Street; thence proceeding westerly along Kentucky Street to Dunlap Boulevard; thence proceeding northwesterly along Dunlap Boulevard to 16th Street; thence proceeding southwesterly along 16th Street to the Outer 10 Highway South; thence proceeding northwesterly along Outer 10 Highway South to 17th Street; thence proceeding southerly along 17th Street to the city border; thence proceeding clockwise along the city border to the point of origin.

     2.     Council District 2 shall comprise all that portion of the city beginning at the point of intersection of the city’s southern border, County Line Road, and 5th Street; thence proceeding northerly along 5th Street to Wildwood Canyon Road; thence proceeding westerly along Wildwood Canyon Road to 6th Street; thence proceeding northerly along 6th Street to Yucaipa Boulevard; thence proceeding westerly along Yucaipa Boulevard to Oak Glen Road; thence proceeding northeasterly along Oak Glen Road to Chapman

Heights Road; thence proceeding westerly along Chapman Heights Road to 13th Street; thence proceeding southerly along 13th Street to Yucaipa Boulevard; thence proceeding westerly along Yucaipa Boulevard to 14th Street; thence proceeding southerly along 14th Street to Kentucky Street; thence proceeding westerly along Kentucky Street to Dunlap Boulevard; thence proceeding northwesterly along Dunlap Boulevard to 16th Street; thence proceeding southwesterly along 16th Street to the Outer 10 Highway South; thence proceeding northwesterly along Outer 10 Highway South to 17th Street; thence proceeding southerly along 17th Street to the city border; thence proceeding counter-clockwise along the city border to the point of origin.

     3.     Council District 3 shall comprise all that portion of the city beginning at the point of intersection of Wildwood Canyon Road and 6th Street; thence proceeding northerly along 6th Street to Yucaipa Boulevard; thence proceeding easterly along Yucaipa Boulevard to 2nd Street; thence proceeding southerly along 2nd Street to Avenue B; thence proceeding easterly along Avenue B to Bryant Street; thence proceeding southerly along Bryant Street to Avenue E; thence proceeding easterly along Avenue E to Douglas Street; thence proceeding southerly along Douglas Street to Wildwood Canyon Road; thence proceeding westerly along Wildwood Canyon Road to the point of origin.

     4.     Council District 4 shall comprise all that portion of the city beginning at the point of intersection of Oak Glen Road and Pendleton Road; thence proceeding southerly and westerly along Pendleton Road to Fremont Street; thence proceeding southerly along Fremont Street to Avenue E; thence proceeding westerly along Avenue E to Bryant Street; thence proceeding northerly along Bryant Street to Avenue B; thence proceeding westerly along Avenue B to 2nd Street; thence proceeding northerly along 2nd Street to Yucaipa Boulevard; thence proceeding westerly along Yucaipa Boulevard to Oak Glen Road; thence proceeding northeasterly along Oak Glen Road to the point of origin.

5.   Council District 5 shall comprise all that portion of the city beginning at the point of intersection of the city’s eastern border and Oak Glen Road; thence proceeding westerly and southwesterly along Oak Glen Road to Pendleton Road; thence proceeding southerly and westerly along Pendleton Road to Fremont Street; thence proceeding southerly along Fremont Street to Avenue E; thence proceeding westerly along Avenue E to Douglas Street; thence proceeding southerly along Douglas Street to Wildwood Canyon Road; thence proceeding westerly along Wildwood Canyon Road to 5th Street; thence proceeding southerly along 5th Street to the city border; thence proceeding counter-clockwise along the city border to the point of origin.

     B.     The council districts specified in subsection A shall continue in effect until they are amended or repealed in accordance with law. (Ord. 348 § 1, 2016)

 

1.08.040 Election schedule.
     Council members shall be elected in Council Districts 3, 4, and 5 beginning at the General Municipal Election in November 2016, and every four years thereafter. Council members shall be elected from Council Districts 1 and 2 beginning at the General Municipal Election in November 2018, and every four years thereafter. (Ord. 348 § 1, 2016)

1.08.050 Implementation.
A map showing the districts described in the ordinance codified in this chapter is attached hereto as Exhibit 1 and incorporated by this reference. To the extent there is a conflict between the descriptions contained in the ordinance codified in this chapter and the map incorporated herein, the map shall prevail.

     If necessary to facilitate the implementation of this chapter, the city clerk is authorized to make technical adjustments to the district boundaries that do not substantively affect the populations in the districts, the eligibility of candidates, or the residence of elected officials within any district. The city clerk shall consult with the city manager and city attorney concerning any technical adjustments deemed necessary and shall advise the city council of any such adjustments required in the implementation of the districts. (Ord. 348 § 1, 2016)

 

1.08.060 Adjustment of boundaries.
     Pursuant to Elections Code Section 21601, as it may be amended, the city council shall adjust the boundaries of any or all of the districts following each decennial federal census. Using the census as a basis, the city council shall adjust the boundaries so that the districts shall be as nearly equal in population as practicable and in compliance with all applicable provisions of law. Any adjustment of district boundaries shall be made by ordinance adopted by the city council before the first day of November of the year following the year in which each decennial federal census is taken. Prior to the public hearing approving the adjustment of the district boundaries, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed district boundaries as required by Election Code Section 21607.

     At the time of any annexation of territory to the city, the city council shall designate, by resolution adopted by a vote of at least a majority of the city council, the contiguous district to which the annexed territory shall be a part and shall amend the district boundaries if necessary in accordance with Election Code Section 21603, as it may be amended.

     Pursuant to Elections Code Section 21606, the term of office of any council member who has been elected and whose term of office has not expired shall not be affected by any change in the boundaries of the district from which he or she was elected. At the first election for council following adjustment of the boundaries of the districts, a person meeting the requirements of Government Code Section 34882 shall be elected to the city council for each district under the readjusted district plan that has the same district number as a district whose incumbent’s term on the council is due to expire. (Ord. 348 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 1.12 GENERAL PENALTY
1.12.010 Violation—Misdemeanor.
     A.    Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless the violation is made an infraction by ordinance.

     B.     Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he shall be punishable accordingly.

     C.     Any provision or requirement of an ordinance of the city, the violation of which or the failure to comply with which, is designated as an infraction, shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor upon a third violation or failure to comply, and may be prosecuted originally as a misdemeanor in the discretion of the city attorney or the district attorney, upon a showing by the enforcing agency of the seriousness of the particular alleged violation. (Ord. 156 § 12, 1996)

 

1.12.020 Establishment of offenses as infractions.
     Any violation expressly declared to be punishable, in the discretion of the court, by either a fine, or by a fine or imprisonment, or both, shall become an infraction for all purposes under any of the following circumstances:

     A.    Where a judgment imposes a punishment of a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) in the case of a first offense; or

     B.     When the court grants probation to a defendant without the imposition of a sentence and, at the time of granting probation, or an application of the defendant or probation officer thereafter, the court declares the offense to be an infraction; or

     C.     When the city attorney or the district attorney files in a court having jurisdiction over misdemeanor offenses a complaint specifying that the offense is an infraction. (Ord. 156 § 13, 1996)

 

1.12.030 Penalties.
     A.    Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of an ordinance of the city shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

     B.     Any person convicted of an infraction for violation of an ordinance of the city, is punishable by: (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year.

     C.     The prevailing party in any proceeding associated with the abatement of a public nuisance, or where a violation of any provision of the municipal code (Volumes I and II) has been declared a public nuisance, shall be entitled to recovery of attorneys’ fees incurred in any such proceeding, where the city has elected, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees. In no action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. (Ord. 221 § 2, 2002; Ord. 156 § 14, 1996)

Chapter 1.13 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
1.13.010 Applicability.
     A.    This chapter provides for administrative remedies for any violation of the Yucaipa Municipal Code. The city’s use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city and is one of several remedial tools and processes that the city has to address violations of the Yucaipa Municipal Code. By adopting this chapter, the city does not intend to limit its discretion or ability to utilize any criminal, civil or other remedies, or any combination thereof, to address any violation of the city’s laws. The city attorney, or his or her assistants, has sole discretion to determine whether a violation shall be prosecuted criminally. If a violation is not criminally prosecuted, the city may proceed with administrative proceedings pursuant to this chapter.

     B.     This chapter makes any violation of the provisions of the Yucaipa Municipal Code subject to a civil fine.

     C.     This chapter establishes the administrative procedures for the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of civil fines pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4.

     D.    As provided in this chapter, a civil fine shall be imposed by means of an administrative citation issued by an enforcement official, and shall be paid directly to the city of Yucaipa but it does not excuse a failure to correct a violation nor does it bar further enforcement action by the city.

     E.     The city attorney and city manager shall promulgate procedural rules and guidelines governing the implementation of the provisions of this chapter.

     F.     For the purpose of issuing administrative citations for violations of the animal control provisions set forth in Chapters 6.04 and 6.08 of this code, the enforcement official shall use the procedures stated in Section 6.04.200(E) and 6.08.240 of this code. (Ord. 302 § 1, 2010; Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

1.13.020 Definitions.
     A.    “Citation” means an administrative citation that is issued to a responsible person pursuant to this chapter.

     B.     “Citee” means a responsible person to whom a citation is issued.

     C.     “City” means the city of Yucaipa, California.

     D.    “City manager” means the chief administrative official of the city as appointed by the city council.

     E.     “Civil fine” means the monetary sanction established by resolution of the city council that is imposed by a citation.

     F.     “Code” means the entire Yucaipa Municipal Code, including all San Bernardino County and state codes adopted by reference into the Yucaipa Municipal Code, and any uncodified ordinance adopted by the city.

     G.    “Courtesy notice” means a written notice to a responsible person that a violation of this code has occurred. This notice shall constitute and state that the responsible person is being warned that a citation assessing a fine may be issued if the violation is not terminated or abated.

     H.    “Enforcement official” means any city employee with obligations under Section 1.13.050 to enforce the code and any employee of another public agency that is contracted to provide services to the city and authorized to enforce provisions of the code. The city manager may designate additional persons to act as enforcement officials for purposes of implementing the provisions of this chapter.

     I.      “Hearing officer” means and includes a public entity, organization, association or person, or a public official, or duly constituted reviewing authority or commission that is designated by the city manager pursuant to the standards contained in Section 1.13.120 of this chapter.

     J.      “Order” means the hearing officer’s written decision to uphold or cancel the citation.

     K.    “Owner” means and includes any person having legal title to, or who leases, rents, occupies or has charge, control or possession of, or responsibility for, any real property in the city, including all persons identified as owners of record on the last equalized assessment roll of the San Bernardino County assessor’s office. An owner of personal property or animals shall be any person who has legal title, charge, control or possession of, or responsibility for, the personal property. An owner may include an agent, manager or representative thereof.

     L.     “Person” means and includes any individual, partnership of any kind, a corporation of any kind, limited liability company, association, joint venture or other organization or entity, however formed, as well as fiduciaries, trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, or any combination of such persons. “Person” also includes any public entity or agency that acts as an owner in the city.

     M.    “Property” means any real property, or improvements thereon, or portions thereof, as the case may be. “Property” includes any parkway or unimproved public easement abutting such real property. “Property” shall also include all forms of personal property or animals, where applicable.

     N.    “Responsible person” means any person or legal entity whom the enforcement official determines is responsible for causing or maintaining a violation of the code. The term “responsible person” includes, but is not limited to, an owner, tenant, or person in possession of real property; or an owner or authorized agent of any business, company or entity, or the holder or the agent of the holder of any permit or entitlement.

     O.    “Violation” means an act or omission of any act, or use or condition that constitutes an offense of the code, as well as a breach or violation of any condition of a permit, approval or license issued pursuant to the code. A “transient” violation is one that is brief or spontaneous in its commission, or that is not typically confined to a fixed location. A “non-transient” violation is continuing in nature and generally present at one location. (Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

1.13.030 Administrative citation.
     A.    Any responsible person who violates any section of this code, or who breaches or violates any condition of a permit, approval or license issued pursuant to this code, may be issued a citation by an enforcement official as provided in this chapter.

     B.     If the violation pertains to building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or zoning issues that do not create an immediate danger to health and safety, then the responsible person shall be issued a courtesy notice only on the first violation. The courtesy notice shall advise the responsible person of the nature of the violation and the date upon which the violation shall be corrected. The time within which the responsible person is required to correct the violation shall be specified in the courtesy notice. The minimum period of time provided to correct the violation is fifteen (15) days. If the violation is not corrected within the time provided on the courtesy notice, a citation shall be issued. If the violation is corrected, no further action shall be taken against the responsible person. The enforcement official may extend the time in which to correct the violation. (Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

1.13.040 Contents of administrative citation.
     Each citation shall contain the following information:

     A.    The name and mailing address of the responsible person, to the extent such information is known to the city.

     B.     The date and location of the violation and the approximate time the violation occurred or was detected.

     C.     The code section violated and a description of the violation.

     D.    The amount of the civil fine imposed for each violation, and the procedure and place to pay the civil fine, and any late charge(s), if not timely paid.

     E.     The action(s) required to correct the violation, if applicable, and the date by which such action(s) must be completed.

     F.     A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which to contest the citation and the place from which to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the citation or civil fine.

     G.    The name and signature of the citing Enforcement official, and the signature of the citee, if he or she is physically present and will sign the citation at the time of its issuance. The refusal of a citee to sign a citation shall not affect its validity or any related subsequent proceeding, nor shall signing a citation constitute an admission that a person committed a violation of the code.

     H.    Any other information deemed necessary by the city manager. (Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

1.13.050 Service of citation.
     A.    A citation may be issued to the responsible person by an enforcement official for violations of the code in the following manner:

     1.     Personal Service. The enforcement official shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person, provided the city has reason to believe that the citee resides, is employed or is engaged in on-going business activities in the city. The city shall also, if possible, obtain the signature of the responsible person on the citation. If the responsible person served refuses or fails to sign the citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the citation or of subsequent proceedings.

     2.     Service by Mail. If the enforcement official is unable to locate the responsible person in the city, the citation shall be mailed by certified mail, returned receipt requested, to the last known business or residence address as shown on public records or as known to the city. Simultaneously, the citation may be sent by first class mail to the same location. Service of the citation by certified mail is deemed complete on the date the recipient signs the return receipt. Service of the citation by first class mail is deemed complete on the date of deposit with the United States Postal Service, provided the citation sent by first class mail is not returned. The date the citation is personally served or the date a citation is deposited with the United States Postal Service shall constitute the issuance date of the citation.

     3.     If an agent, manager or representative of a responsible person is personally served with a citation, a copy thereof shall also be served by certified mail to the responsible person at his or her last-known business or residence address as the same appears in public records of the city. In such instances, the date a copy of the citation is deposited with the United States Postal Service shall constitute the issuance date of a citation.

     4.     If service cannot be accomplished personally or by mail, the enforcement official shall post the citation on the property of the responsible person. The date of posting shall constitute the issuance date of a citation.

     5.     If the enforcement official does not succeed in serving the responsible person personally, by certified or regular mail, or by posting the citation on the responsible person’s property, the enforcement official shall cause the citation to be published once a week for four successive weeks in a local newspaper published at least once a week.

     B.     Failure of a responsible person to receive a citation or any notice specified in this chapter, shall not invalidate any civil fine, late charge, action or proceeding, if service was given in a manner stated in this chapter. The enforcement official or other city employee shall complete a declaration of service. (Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

1.13.060 Civil fine and late payment fees.
     A. 1. The civil fine imposed pursuant to this chapter for a particular violation shall be set forth in the administrative citation schedule established by resolution of the city council, provided that if a violation is classified as an infraction in the code, such civil fine shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense within one year, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third offense within one year as provided by subdivision (b) of Section 25132 and subdivision (b) of Section 36900 of the California Government Code. The administrative citation schedule shall specify the amount of any late payment charges imposed for failure to timely pay the fine. The city may impose a lesser fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second offense within one year, and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a third offense within one year if it is determined that the responsible person has not committed the same offense within a five-year period.

     2.     The civil fine imposed pursuant to this chapter for a particular violation of Section 8.16.080 (“Commercial poultry ranches—Public nuisance”) of Chapter 8.16 (“Nuisances”) of Title 8 (“Health and Safety”) of the Yucaipa Municipal Code shall be set forth in the administrative citation schedule established by resolution of the city council, provided that if a violation is classified as an infraction in the code, such civil fine shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense within one year, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third offense, and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a fourth offense within one year as provided by subdivision (b) of Section 25132 and subdivision (b) of Section 36900 of the California Government Code. The administrative citation schedule shall specify the amount of any late payment charges imposed for failure to timely pay the fine. The city may impose a lesser fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second offense within one year, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a third offense, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a fourth offense within one year if it is determined that the responsible person has not committed the same offense within a five-year period.

     B.     Any person who fails to pay the city, on or before the due date, any civil fine imposed shall be liable for the payment of any applicable late payment charge as set forth in the administrative citation schedule established by a resolution of the city council. The amount of a late charge may be modified from time to time by a resolution of the city council.

     C.     Civil fines and any late charges due shall be made payable to the city and paid at such location or address as stated in the citation, or as may otherwise be designated by the city manager.

     D.    The due date for the city’s receipt of the civil fine shall be twenty-one (21) calendar days from the issuance of the citation. Thereafter, a late charge shall be due and owing.

     E.     Payment of a civil fine shall not excuse or discharge the responsible person from the duty to immediately abate a violation of the code, nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of the code.

     F.     Abatement of a violation shall not excuse the obligation of the responsible person to pay a civil fine, or any late charge imposed on that untimely payment of the civil fine.

     G.    No interest or penalties shall accrue during the pendency of any timely appeal of the citation. (Ord. 347 § 2, 2016; Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

1.13.070 Satisfaction of administrative citation.
     Upon service of a citation, the cited party shall do the following:

     A.    Pay the civil fine no later than twenty-one (21) days from the date of service of the citation. Payment of the civil fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city.

     B.     Comply with the compliance order to remedy the violation within the time specified on the citation. (Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

1.13.080 Extensions of time to abate.
     All requests for extensions must be made in writing and present a reasonable hardship. The enforcement official may grant a one-time extension at his or her discretion after payment of the civil fine due. The extension shall not exceed thirty (30) days unless the matter is referred to the community development director, or designee, for additional time. The community development director, or designee, may grant additional time as determined in his or her reasonable discretion, considering all relevant facts and circumstances of the hardship. If the case has been referred to the hearing officer, extensions may not be granted. (Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

1.13.090 Request for administrative hearing.
     A.    Any responsible person to whom a citation is issued may contest the citation or amount of the civil fine no later than twenty-one (21) days from the date of service of the citation by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the city together with either a deposit in the total amount of the civil fine or by providing notice that a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver (“hardship waiver”) was filed pursuant to Section 1.13.100. All requests for hearings, deposits, requests for hardship waivers, and any other documents, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk at Yucaipa City Hall, 34272 Yucaipa Boulevard, Yucaipa, California 92399. The civil fine that is deposited with the city shall not accrue interest. The civil fine deposited shall be returned to the person tendering the civil fine in the event a citation or amount of the civil fine is overturned.

     B.     Failure to timely contest the citation or amount of the civil fine as provided for in subsection A, shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal and to seek judicial review.

     C.     A timely request for a hearing shall not excuse the responsible person from the duty to immediately abate the violation for which the citation was issued, nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of the code.

     D.    A request for a hearing shall contain the following:

     1.     The citation number;

     2.     The name, address, telephone and any facsimile numbers of each person contesting the citation;

     3.     A statement of the reason(s) why a citation and/or civil fine is being contested;

     4.     The date and signature of the citee(s). (Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

 

1.13.100 Advance hardship waiver.
     A.    Any person who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the civil fine as required by Section 1.13.090 may request an advance deposit hardship waiver by completing a written “hardship waiver form” which shall be filed together with the request for hearing within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date the administrative citation is served. The hardship waiver form, the request for a hearing, and all required accompanying documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk at Yucaipa City Hall, 34272 Yucaipa Boulevard, Yucaipa, California 92399.

     B.     To be considered for a hardship Waiver, the application form must be complete, signed, and accompanied by documents that enable the city to reasonably determine the person’s inability to deposit the civil fine. Documents suitable for consideration, may include, without limitation, accurate, complete and legible copies of state and federal income tax returns and all schedules for the preceding tax year, financial statements, loan applications, bank account records, income and expense records for twelve (12) months preceding submittal of the hardship waiver form, as well as other documentation demonstrating the citee’s financial hardship. The city may, at a time chosen in its sole discretion and after a citation is final or confirmed, destroy or discard the documents submitted by a citee for a hardship waiver without prior notice to the citee.

     C.     The city shall issue a written decision specifying the reason for issuing or not issuing the hardship waiver. This decision is final and non-appealable. The decision shall be served upon the person requesting the hardship waiver by first class mail.

     D.    If the city determines that the waiver is not warranted, the person shall remit the full amount of the civil fine to the office of the city clerk of the city within seven calendar days of the date the decision is deposited in the mail. In the event the city does not receive the full amount of the civil fine in the required period, the request for a hearing is rendered incomplete and untimely, and the responsible person shall have waived the right to a hearing and the citation shall be deemed final. (Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

1.13.110 Time for administrative hearing.
     A.    Only after a request for hearing form is filed, and the responsible person requesting the hearing has either deposited the civil fine in full or obtained a hardship waiver, shall the city set the date and time for the administrative hearing. The hearing shall be conducted within sixty (60) days after the request for hearing form is filed and the civil fine is deposited with the city or hardship waiver is issued. The city shall send notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing to the person requesting the hearing at least ten calendar days before the date of the hearing. The failure of the citee to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate the citation, the amount of the civil fine or any hearing, city action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter.

     B.     If the enforcement official submits any written report concerning the administrative citation for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of that report shall also be served by first class mail on the person requesting a administrative hearing no less than three calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Failure to receive said report shall not invalidate the citation, the hearing, or any other action conducted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

1.13.120 Appointment of hearing officer.
     The city manager shall establish procedures for the selection of an administrative hearing officer. A hearing officer shall be selected in a manner that avoids the potential for pecuniary or other bias and in no event shall the enforcement official who issued the citation be the administrative hearing officer. (Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

1.13.130 Procedures at administrative hearing.
     A.    Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. Each party shall have the opportunity to present evidence in support of his or her case and to cross-examine witnesses. The city bears the burden of proof to establish a violation of the code. The citation and any additional reports submitted by the enforcement official shall constitute prima-facie evidence of the facts contained in those documents. In the discretion of the hearing officer, the evidence submitted in the hearing before the hearing officer may be either in the form of written declarations or by way of oral testimony. The enforcement official who issued the citation is not required to attend or participate in the hearing. All written declarations shall be made under penalty of perjury in compliance with Section 2015.5 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. The responsible person may bring an interpreter to the hearing provided there is no expense to the city. The evidentiary standard to be used by the hearing officer in finding a violation of the code or of any fact at issue in the hearing is the preponderance of evidence standard.

     B.     If the responsible person fails to attend the scheduled hearing he or she shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing. In such instances, the hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and not render a decision. The citation shall be deemed final.

     C.     Hearings may be continued once at the request of a responsible person or the enforcement official who issued the citation. The hearing officer may also continue the hearing for cause. (Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

1.13.140 Hearing officer’s decision.
     No later than ten days after the date on which the administrative hearing concludes, the hearing officer shall issue an order to uphold or cancel the citation and/or civil fine and shall state the reasons for his or her decision. If the citation is upheld, the city shall retain the civil fine deposited by the responsible person. If the civil fine has not been deposited pursuant to a hardship waiver, the hearing officer shall specify in the order a payment schedule for the civil fine. The hearing officer’s decision shall be final and the order shall notify the responsible person of the right to appeal as provided in Section 1.13.150. The order shall be served by first class mail and shall be deemed to be served on the date the order is deposited with the United States Postal Service. The failure of the responsible person to receive a properly addressed order shall not invalidate the citation or the hearing officer’s order. (Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

1.13.150 Appeal of decision of hearing officer.
     A.    Within twenty (20) days after service of the hearing officer’s order upon the responsible person, he or she may seek review of the order by filing a notice of appeal with the Superior Court. The responsible person shall serve the notice of appeal upon the city clerk in person or by first class mail within five calendar days of the court filing. If the responsible person fails to timely file a notice of appeal, the hearing officer’s order shall be deemed confirmed.

     B.     The Superior Court is the sole reviewing authority and an appeal from a hearing officer’s decision is not appealable to the city council. If the responsible person prevails on appeal, the city shall reimburse his or her filing fee, as well as the civil fine deposited in accordance with the court judgment. These monies shall be mailed to the responsible person within thirty (30) calendar days of the city’s receipt of a notice of judgment or ruling from the Superior Court clerk. (Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

1.13.160 Failure to take corrective action.
     Failure of the responsible person to comply with a corrective action stated in any uncontested citation shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

1.13.170 Collection of civil fine.
     The failure of any person to pay the civil fine and/or late charges imposed by a citation shall constitute a debt that may be collected in any manner allowed by law, including by way of lien or special assessment. The city shall be entitled to recover its attorney fees and costs arising from an action to collect the civil fine and/or late charge if it is the prevailing party and provided it made the election to seek attorney fees at the commencement of the action. A responsible person shall be entitled to recover his or her attorney fees if the city made the election to seek attorney fees at the outset of the action and the responsible person prevails in that collection action.

     A.    Interest. The city may collect any past due civil fine, including a late payment fine, at the legal rate of interest compounding monthly, and costs of collection by all available legal means. Interest shall not accrue during the pendency of any timely appeal of a citation.

     B.     Liens.

     1.     The city may collect the civil fine by recording a lien against the property.

     2.     Prior to recording a lien against the property, the city manager shall prepare a report detailing the address, parcel number, and owner of record’s name and address, the amount of the civil fine and/or penalties, the date of the order or citation and the violations. The report shall include a statement that the city intends to place a lien against the property in the amount of the civil fine and/or penalties owed.

     3.     A notice of intent to record a lien shall be sent by certified mail, to the owner of record at the address shown on the current assessment roll and any other address shown in city records and to the holder of any recorded interest, whose address may be ascertained from title records or who is otherwise known to the enforcement official, with a notice of time and date on which the city council will hold a hearing to determine whether to record a lien against the property. If the owner of record cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the property is located pursuant to Government Code Section 6062. Notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the hearing and shall specify that objections may be presented at the hearing or filed in writing five days in advance of the hearing.

     4.     The city manager’s report shall be forwarded to the city council, which shall consider the report, together with any objections or protests that may be raised by any owner of record liable for the cost of a civil fine and/or penalty, the holder of any recorded interest in the property and any other responsible person. The city council may make such correction, revision or modification in the report as it may deem just. The report, as amended, shall be confirmed by resolution.

     5.     Immediately upon confirmation of the amount of the lien, the city clerk shall cause to be filed in the office of the county recorder of San Bernardino County a notice of lien stating that it is recorded pursuant to this section. The lien shall also include the parcel’s address, legal description, assessor’s parcel number, the owner of record’s name and address, the date of the citation or order, the amount of civil fine and/or penalties assessed, and the rate of interest. The form of the lien shall be approved by the city attorney.

     6.     In the event the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, the city shall record notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (B)(5) of this section.

     7.     The lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for money judgment.

     C.     Assessment.

     1.     The city may also collect the civil fine by way of a special assessment against the property.

     2.     The city manager shall prepare a report detailing the address, parcel number, owner of record’s name and address, the amount of the civil fine, the date of the order or citation and the violations. The report shall include a statement that the city intends to file a special assessment against the property in the amount of the civil fine and/or penalties owed.

     3.     A copy of the city manager’s report shall be sent to the owner of record, by certified mail, at the address shown on the current assessment roll and any other address shown in city records, to the holder of any recorded interest, whose address may be ascertained from title records or who is otherwise known to the enforcement official, with a notice of time and date on which the city council will hold a hearing to determine whether to file a special assessment against the property. If the owner of record cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the property is located pursuant to Government Code Section 6062. Notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the hearing and shall specify that objections may be presented at the hearing or filed in writing five days in advance of the hearing.

     4.     The city manager’s report shall be forwarded to the city council, which shall consider the report, together with any objections or protests that may be raised by any owner of record liable for the cost of a civil fine and/or penalty, the holder of any recorded interest in the property and any other responsible person. The city council may make such correction, revision or modification in the report as it may deem just. The report, as amended, shall be confirmed by resolution.

     5.     Upon confirmation of the special assessment, the city clerk shall cause to be filed in the office of the county recorder of San Bernardino County a notice of assessment stating that it is recorded pursuant to this section. The special assessment shall also include the parcel’s address, legal description, assessor’s parcel number, the record owner’s name and address, the date of the citation or order, the amount of civil fine and/or penalties assessed, and the rate of interest. The form of the special assessment shall be approved by the city attorney.

     6.     The city shall provide notice to the record owner at the time of imposing the assessment. The notice shall specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. If any real property to which the special assessment applies has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrance for value has been created and attached thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a special assessment against the property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.

     7.     The city clerk shall request that the county auditor enter the special assessment on the county tax roll against the property. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and procedure and sale in case of delinquency as is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment.

     8.     The city may, subject to the requirements applicable to the sale of property pursuant to Section 3691 of the Revenue and Taxation Code conduct a sale of vacant residential property for which the payment of a special assessment is delinquent. (Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

 

1.13.180 Remedies not exclusive.
     The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil or other remedies that may be simultaneously pursued. The use of this chapter shall be at the city’s sole discretion. (Ord. 283 § 2, 2008)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.12 PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Chapter 2.16 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2.20 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Chapter 2.24 PURCHASING SYSTEM
Chapter 2.28 CITY SERVICE FEES AND CHARGES
Chapter 2.32 MISCELLANEOUS ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Chapter 2.36 PERSONNEL SYSTEM

Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
2.04.010 Meetings.
     The regular meetings of the city council of Yucaipa shall be held at 34272 Yucaipa Boulevard, Yucaipa, California, 92399. The day and time of such meetings shall be as set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 26 § 2, 1990)

 

2.04.020 Compensation.
     A.    Purpose. The ordinance codified in this section is enacted pursuant to Section 36516 of the Government Code, which authorizes a city council to provide by ordinance that each member of the council may receive a compensation based upon the population of the city as determined by census or by a certified estimate made by the State Department of Finance.

     B.     Population. On the date the ordinance codified in this section is adopted, the latest estimate of population of the city of Yucaipa made by the State Department of Finance is 51,784.

     C.     Compensation. Each member of the city council shall receive the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month. The compensation is payable at the same time and in the same manner as the compensation paid to each of the officers and employees of the city.

     D.    Increase or Decrease. Increases and decreases in the city council compensation shall be in conformance with Sections 36516 and 36516.5 of the Government Code. The effective date of an adjustment in the compensation of the city council members is delayed pursuant to Section 36516 until one council member commences a new term of office when such adjustment is by an ordinance adopted in accordance with this section and is based on an increase in the city’s population.

     E.     Reimbursement. The salaries prescribed by this section are exclusive of any other amount payable to a member of the city council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by him or her in the performance of his or her official duties. (Ord. 270 §§ 1—5, 2007)

Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
2.08.010 Office created.
     The office of the city manager of the city is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. (Ord. 5 § 1, 1989)

 

2.08.020 Eligibility.
     No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such council member shall have ceased to be a member of the city council. (Ord. 5 § 2, 1989)

 

2.08.030 Bond.
     The city manager and acting city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager and acting city manager as herein prescribed. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. (Ord. 5 § 3, 1989)

 

2.08.040 Acting city manager.
     The assistant city manager shall serve as manager pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In the event there is no assistant city manager, the city manager, by filing a written notice with the city clerk, shall designate a qualified city employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during his or her temporary absence or disability. In the event the city manager’s absence or disability extends over a two-month period, the city council may, after the two-month period, appoint an acting city manager. (Ord. 5 § 4, 1989)

 

2.08.050 Compensation.
     The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from time to time determine. In addition, the city manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred by him or her in the performance of his or her official duties. (Ord. 5 § 5, 1989)

 

2.08.060 Power and duties.
     The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He or she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his or her control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her duty and he or she shall have the powers set forth in the following subsections.

     A.    Law Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed.

     B.     Authority Over Employees. It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he or she shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his or her jurisdiction through their department heads.

     C.     Power of Appointment and Removal. It shall be the duty of the city manager to, and he or she shall appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the city, except the city attorney and treasurer.

     D.    Administrative Reorganization of Offices. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to conduct studies and effect such administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units under his or her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city’s business.

     E.     Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary.

     F.     Attendance at Council Meetings. It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless at his or her request he or she is excused therefrom by the mayor individually or the city council, except when his or her removal is under consideration.

     G.    Financial Reports. It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city.

     H.    Budget. It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval.

     I.      Expenditure Control and Purchasing. It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on approval of the city manager or his or her authorized representative. The city manager, or his or her authorized representative, shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all departments or divisions of the city.

     J.      Investigations and Complaints. It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of the city. Further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city.

     K.    Public Buildings. It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council.

     L.     Additional Duties. It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the city council. (Ord. 225 § 2, 2003; Ord. 5 § 6, 1989)

2.08.070 Internal relations.
     A.    Council-Manager Relations. The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his or her orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the city council and no individual councilmember shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager.

     B.     Departmental Cooperation. It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city clerk, city treasurer and city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously.

     C.     Attendance at Commission Meetings. The city manager or authorized representatives may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission and any other commissions, boards or committees created by the city council, upon his or her own volition upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he or she shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address the members thereof, and he or she shall inform the members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council, and he or she shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council. (Ord. 5 § 7, 1989)

 

2.08.080 Removal procedure.
     A.    Removal of City Manager. The removal of the city manager may be effected, with or without cause, by a majority vote of the whole city council as then constituted, convened in a regular council meeting, subject, however, to the provisions of the next succeeding subsections. In case of his or her intended removal by the city council, the city manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council’s intention to remove him or her, at least thirty days before the effective date of his or her removal.

     B.     Discretion of Council. In removing the city manager, the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the city manager to present to the city council his or her grounds of opposition to his or her removal prior to its action.

     C.     Limitation on Removal. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section set forth, the city manager shall not be removed from office, other than for misconduct in office, during or within a period of ninety (90) days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the city council is elected or when a new city councilmember is appointed; the purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member of the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his or her office. After the expiration of the ninety (90) day period aforementioned, the provisions of this section as to the removal of the city manager shall apply and be effective. (Ord. 5 § 8, 1989)

 

2.08.090 Agreements on employment.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5 § 9, 1989)

Chapter 2.12 PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
2.12.010 Park and recreation commission created.
     There is created and established in the city a park and recreation commission. (Ord. 22 § 1, 1990)

 

2.12.020 Membership and term of office.
     The park and recreation commission shall consist of six members, five of which shall be appointed one by each city councilmember. The sixth member shall be a high school or college student, attending school in the city of Yucaipa, appointed by the city council as a body, upon recommendation of the remainder of the park and recreation commission. The terms of office and the expiration of the terms shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 334 § 1, 2015; Ord. 43 § 1, 1990: Ord. 22 § 1, 1990)

 

2.12.030 Membership—Position to be nonsalaried.
     Members of the park and recreation commission shall receive no salary; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall preclude reimbursement to any member of the park and recreation commission for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties by the commission on behalf of the city. (Ord. 22 § 1, 1990)

 

2.12.060 Powers and duties.
     The park and recreation commission shall have the following powers and duties:

     A.    Recommend policies and procedures to the city council for the operation, use and management of all recreation activities, facilities, parks, parkways, open space and trails;

     B.     Assist staff in drafting and submitting an annual budget for park and recreation activities, including a long range capital improvement program;

     C.     Assist staff in drafting and submitting an annual budget for park and recreation activities, including a long range capital improvement program;

     D.    Review joint use agreements for park and recreational facilities with the county, school district and other persons, organizations and agencies;

     E.     Recommend policies to the city council for the acquisition, development and improvement of city parks and recreational facilities;

     F.     Review and make recommendations to the city council regarding fees and charges for park and recreation services and the use of facilities;

     G.    Assist in the development of open space and public facilities elements of the city’s general plan;

     H.    Perform such other duties and undertake studies, as requested by the city council. (Ord. 22 § 1, 1990)

 

2.12.070 Secretary.
     The city manager, or designee, shall act as secretary to the park and recreation commission, and shall be the custodian of its records, conduct official correspondence, and coordinate the clerical and technical work of the commission in administering the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 22 § 1, 1990)

 

2.12.080 Chairperson and vice-chairperson—Selection and terms.
     The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint the first chairperson and vice-chairperson from among the commission members. The terms of office of the chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be for the calendar year, or that portion remaining after the chairperson or vice-chairperson is appointed or elected. Thereafter, when there is a vacancy in the office of a chairperson and/or vice-chairperson, the commission shall elect a chairperson and/or vice-chairperson from among its members. The chairperson shall preside at each meeting of the park and recreation commission and the vice-chairperson shall preside over such meetings in the absence of the chairperson. (Ord. 22 § 1, 1990)

 

2.12.090 Commission subcommittees.
     The park and recreation commission may form subcommittees of its own members, to deal with any issue within the powers and duties of the commission as defined by this chapter. (Ord. 22 § 1, 1990)

 

2.12.100 Meetings.
     Regular meetings of the park and recreation commission shall be scheduled at least once a month. (Ord. 22 § 1, 1990)

Chapter 2.16 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.16.010 Planning commission created.
     Pursuant to California Government Code Section 65100 et seq., a planning commission for the city is created. (Ord. 137 § 1, 1995)

 

2.16.020 Membership and term of office.
     The planning commission shall consist of seven members. The city council shall appoint one member who has been recommended and nominated by each of the councilmembers. The city council shall appoint two members to serve as members-at-large who may be recommended by any councilmember. Each appointment shall be by majority vote of the city council. The terms of office and the expiration of the terms shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 137 § 2, 1995)

 

2.16.030 Organization and meetings.
     The time, manner and location of meetings, and the selection of chairperson and vice chairperson of the planning commission shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 137 § 3, 1995)

 

2.16.040 Duties.
     The planning commission shall perform the duties and shall have all the rights, powers and privileges specified and provided by the ordinances and resolutions of the city or by state law. (Ord. 137 § 4, 1995)

 

2.16.050 Compensation.
     The members of the city planning commission shall be entitled to reimbursement for all necessary and proper expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of the planning commission. (Ord. 137 § 5, 1995)

Chapter 2.20 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
2.20.010 Established.
     It is found, determined and declared, pursuant to Section 33101 of the Community Redevelopment Law, that there is a need for the redevelopment agency created by Section 33100 of said law to function in the city and agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its powers pursuant to and under the provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law, being Division 24 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California. (Ord. 58 § 1, 1990)

 

2.20.020 Establishment of city council as the redevelopment agency.
     The city council, pursuant to Section 33200 of the Community Development Law, declares itself to be the redevelopment agency as provided in this chapter, and all rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested by the Community Redevelopment Law in such agency shall be, and are, vested in this body. The city council further finds that this action shall serve the public interest and promote the public safety and welfare in an effective manner. (Ord. 58 § 2, 1990)

Chapter 2.24 PURCHASING SYSTEM
2.24.010 Adoption of purchasing system.
     In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function, and to assure the quality of purchases, a centralized purchasing system is adopted and vested with the authority for the purchase of all city supplies, services and equipment. (Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

 

2.24.020 Purchasing officer—Duties and responsibilities.
     There is created the position of purchasing officer, who shall be appointed by the city manager. The purchasing officer shall be the head, and have the general supervision of all purchasing functions of the city. The duties of the purchasing officer maybe combined with those of any other office or position. Subject to supervision of the city manager, the purchasing officer shall have the authority to:

     A.    Purchase or contract for supplies, services and equipment required by any using agency, within the limits of the current budget approved by the city council, and in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed in this chapter, such administrative regulations as the purchasing officer shall adopt for the internal management and operation of the purchasing function, and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the city council or the city manager;

     B.     Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment;

     C.     Act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies, services and equipment at least expense to the city;

     D.    Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;

     E.     Prepare and recommend to the city manager for council approval, rules and procedures governing the purchase of supplies, services and equipment for the city and revisions and amendments to such rules and procedures;

     F.     Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products;

     G.    Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to conform to the requirements of this chapter and other rules and regulations;

     H.    Supervise the inspection of all supplies, services and equipment purchased to insure conformance with specifications;

     I.      Recommend to the city manager the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments and using agencies, as needed, and the sale of all supplies and equipment unsuitable for city use;

     J.      Maintain a bidders’ list, vendors’ file, and such other records as are needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing function. (Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

 

2.24.030 Exemptions from centralized purchasing.
     The purchasing officer, with approval of the city manager, may authorize, in writing, any agency to purchase or contract for specified supplies, services and equipment independent of the purchasing officer; but he or she shall require that such purchases or contracts be made in conformity with the procedures established by this chapter, and shall further require periodic reports from the agency on the purchases and contracts made under such written authorization. The purchasing officer may also rescind such authorization with written notice to the agency concerned. (Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

 

2.24.040 Estimates of requirements.
     All using agencies shall file detailed estimates of their requirements for supplies, services and equipment in such manner, at such times, and for such future periods as set forth in rules prescribed by the city manager. (Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

 

2.24.050 Requisitions.
     All using agencies shall submit requests for supplies, services and equipment to the purchasing officer by standard requisition forms according to the rules prescribed by the city manager. (Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

 

2.24.060 Bidding.
     Purchases of supplies, services and equipment and the sale of personal property shall be by bid procedures, pursuant to Sections 2.24.120, 2.24.130 and 2.24.170 of this chapter. With the exception of purchases covered by Article 4 of Chapter 1 of Part 3 of the State Public Contracts Code, bidding may be dispensed with when an emergency requires that an order be placed with the nearest available source of supply, when the amount involved is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or when the commodity is a sole source item which can be obtained from only one vendor. Sole source items shall include purchases of items where there are restrictions in specifications due to the need for standardization. The city council may also, by majority vote of its entire membership, dispense with such bidding and other procedures required by this chapter in any individual instance upon finding that it would be impracticable, useless or uneconomical in such instance to follow such procedures, and that the public welfare would be promoted by dispensing with the same. (Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

 

2.24.070 Confidentiality of bids.
     Any bid received pursuant to the procedures of this chapter shall not be disclosed directly or indirectly to any other bidder until the bidding is closed. (Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

 

2.24.080 Award of contracts to local vendors.
     A “local vendor” means a firm or individual that maintains a place of business in, or maintains an inventory of merchandise for sale in, and who pays appropriate business permit/license fees to the city. With respect to those bids relating to the purchase of items subject to state sales tax, the term “lowest responsible bidder” shall be deemed to include a five percent discount for local vendors in the computation of bids in order to reflect the financial advantages that accrue to the city by the award of a bid to a local vendor and to encourage businesses to locate, remain and expand in the city. The city shall also consider the cost to the city to pick up supplies and equipment at some distance from the city, to obtain parts and supplies, and to transport such items for repair and maintenance in the computation used to award contracts.

     To qualify for the preference, the local vendor shall:

     A.    Hold a valid business licensed issued by the city of Yucaipa;

     B.     Where sales tax will be paid for the purchase, possess a valid resale license from the State Board of Equalization showing evidence of a local business address within the city of Yucaipa; and

     C.     Have paid all business and/or real property tax due to the city of Yucaipa for the most recent year. This provision shall not apply to businesses that were not established at that time or where no taxes were due. (Ord. 321 § 1, 2012; Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

 

2.24.090 Purchase orders.
     Purchases of supplies, services and equipment shall be made only by purchase order, unless otherwise authorized by formal administrative procedure or in writing by the city manager. (Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

 

2.24.100 Purchasing agreements with other agencies.
     The purchasing officer may enter into purchasing agreements with other governmental agencies, such as the county of San Bernardino and the state of California, for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment. In such instances, the procedures of that agency shall satisfy all city requirements for the bid and award of purchase contracts. (Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

 

2.24.110 Encumbrance of funds.
     Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order for supplies, services or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which said purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

 

2.24.120 Formal contract procedure.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, purchases and contracts for supplies, services and equipment of a value greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be by written purchase order to the lowest responsible bidder, pursuant to the procedures prescribed herein:

     A.    Lowest Responsible Bidder. The term “lowest responsible bidder” means that bidder which best responds in price, quality, service, fitness or capacity to the particular requirements of the city. Price alone shall not be the sole determining factor, but shall be considered along with other factors, including, but not limited to, the ability of the bidder to deliver, availability of parts and services on a timely basis, prior experience with the bidder, and other factors relating to the particular needs of the city for the supplies, equipment or services.

     B.     Notice Inviting Bids. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the services or articles to be purchased, shall state where bid forms and specifications may be obtained, and the time and place for opening bids.

     1.     Published Notice. Notice inviting bids shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days before the date of the opening of the bid. The purchasing officer may waive the necessity to publish the invitation to bid if a source of supply is not available in the local area.

     2.     Bidders List. The purchasing officer shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on a bidders’ list or who have requested to have their names added thereto.

     3.     Posting. The purchasing officer shall also advertise such pending purchases by a notice posted on a public bulletin board at city hall at least ten days prior to bid opening.

     C.     Bidders’ Security. When considered necessary by the purchasing officer, bidders’ security may be prescribed in the public notice inviting bids.        Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security upon completion of the bid process; provided, however, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the purchase agreement within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is solely responsible for the delay. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the purchase agreement, award a contract to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the city council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. If the city rejects all other bids presented and readvertises, the amount of the lowest bidders security may be used to offset the cost of receiving new bids, as well as the difference between the new low bid the former low bid.

     D.    Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer and shall be identified as a “bid” on each envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the appropriate public notice and/or invitation to bid. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the bid opening.

     E.     Rejection of Bids. Incomplete bids may be rejected by the purchasing officer or may be referred to the city council with a request to waive irregularities. The city council shall reserve the right to reject any and all bids in whole or in part, and may waive any irregularities in any bids when the public interest will be served thereby. At its discretion, the city council may readvertise for bids, pursuant to the procedures hereinabove described.

     F.     Award of Purchase or Contract. Purchases or contracts shall be awarded by a majority vote of the city council to the lowest responsible bidder, except as otherwise provided herein.

     G.    Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest would not be promoted by readvertising for bids, the city council may accept the low bid it chooses, or may accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of the bid opening. In the case of a tie, preference shall be given to responsible local bidders.

 

     H.    Performance Bonds. The purchasing officer shall have the authority to require a performance bond before entering into a contract, in such amount as he/she shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If a performance bond is required, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. (Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

 

2.24.130 Public works contract procedure.
     When the expenditure required for a public works project exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), it shall be contracted for and let to the lowest responsible bidder after notice, in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 of the California Public Contracts Code.

     A.    Public Works Projects. As used in this section, “public works project” means:

     1.     A project for the erection, improvement, painting or repair of public buildings and works;

     2.     Work in or about streams, bays, waterfronts, embankments, or other work for protection against overflow;

     3.     Street or sewer work except maintenance or repair;

     4.     Furnishing supplies and materials for any such project, including maintenance or repair of streets or sewers.

     B.     Splitting Work Orders. It is unlawful to split or separate into smaller work orders or projects any public works project for the purpose of evading the provisions of this section.

     C.     Notice Inviting Bids. The notice inviting bids shall set a date for the opening of bids. Notices shall be published at least twice, not less than five days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city, or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three public places in the city that have been designated by ordinance as the places for posting public notices. The notice shall distinctly state the project to be done.

     D.    Rejection of Bids and Readvertisement. At its discretion, the city council may reject any bids presented and readvertise. If two or more bids are the same, the city council may accept the one it chooses. If no bids are received, the city council may direct the purchasing officer to have the project completed with no further compliance with this section.

     E.     Performance of Project After Rejection of Bids. After rejecting bids, the city council may pass a resolution by a four-fifths vote of its members declaring that the project can be performed more economically by day labor, or the material or supplies furnished at a lower price in the open market. Upon the adoption of such a resolution, the city council may direct the purchasing officer to have the project completed in the manner stated with no further compliance with this section.

     F.     Presentation of Bids. All bids shall be presented under sealed cover and accompanied by one of the following forms of bidders’ security:

     1.     Cash;

     2.     Cashiers check made payable to the city;

     3.     A certified check made payable to the city;

     4.     A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the city.

 

 

     G.    Amount of Bidder’s Security. Security shall be in an amount equal to at least ten percent of the amount of the bid. A bid shall not be considered unless one of the forms of bidder’s security is enclosed with it.

     H.    Forfeiture of Security. If the successful bidder fails to execute the contract, the amount of the bidder’s security shall be forfeited to the city. The city council may award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder, and the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid. The surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder if cash or a check is used, or to the surety on the bidder’s bond if a bond is used.

     I.      Calamities or Emergencies. If there is a great public calamity, such as an extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic or other disaster, or if it is necessary to do emergency work to prepare for national or local defense, the city council may pass a resolution by four-fifths vote of its members declaring that the public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health or property. Upon the adoption of such a resolution, the city council may direct the purchasing officer to expend any sum required in the emergency with no further compliance with this section. (Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

 

2.24.140 Open market purchases.
     Purchase of supplies and equipment of an estimated value of less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), not subject to the conditions specified in Section 2.24.130, may be made by the city manager and/or the purchasing officer in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section, without compliance with the formal contract procedure set forth in Section 2.40.120. The purchasing officer shall solicit competitive bids for all such purchases pursuant to the procedures described herein:

     A.    For a purchase in an amount less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) and more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), it is expected that three or more bids/quotes will be requested, wherever practicable; and all such purchases shall be approved by the city manager.

     B.     For purchases in an amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or less, but more than seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00), bids may be verbal or written, and shall be made at the discretion of the purchasing officer. Wherever practicable, it is expected that three or more bids/quotes will be requested.

     C.     The purchasing officer shall keep a record of all open market orders and bids for a period of one year after the submission of bids or placing of orders, to include the name of the companies or individuals contacted and the prices bid. This record shall be open to the public during normal business hours.

     D.    The competitive bidding procedures set forth in this section may be waived by the city manager in instances of valid emergencies or sole source, or when it is determined that the public interest would not be best served by competitive bidding. All such instances shall be fully recorded. (Ord. 374 § 1, 2019; Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

 

2.24.150 Contracts for professional services.
     The award of contracts for professional services shall be exempt from the bidding and award requirements of this chapter.

     A.    Professional Services. In general, the term “professional services” means professional contractual services performed by a member(s) of a profession. “Profession” shall include, but not be limited to, the following: accountants, appraisers, architects, attorneys, computer consultants, economic and finance consultants, health and insurance consultants, engineers, geologists, inspectors, marketing and media consultants and planners.

     B.     Authorization to Execute Contracts. The city manager shall be authorized to solicit proposals and contract for professional contractual services in the following instances:

     1.     Funds have been approved in the budget for a specific type of professional services or specific project; and the contract is not anticipated to exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00); or

     2.     Funds are generally available in the budget, and the contract does not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).

     All contracts which are anticipated to exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be approved by a majority vote of the city council.

     C.     Process for Award of Contracts. The city manager shall attempt to assure that all qualified and interested consultants have the opportunity to provide proposals for the provision of city services. The selection of consultants for specific projects shall be based on a variety of factors, including consultant’s experience, approach, availability and knowledge of the subject area; fee for services shall be considered, but shall not be an overriding consideration.

     1.     In contracts which are anticipated to exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), the city manager shall cause a request for proposal (RFP) or request for qualifications (RFQ) to be prepared, which shall be mailed to all qualified consultants whose names are on file with the city, or who request a copy of the RFP or RFQ. Proposals need not be sealed and opened in a formal bid opening process, and are subject to negotiation of both scope and fee. The city manager shall screen proposals and make a recommendation to the city council for contract award. The city council, if it finds that the public interest will not best be served by a formal proposal process, may waive the solicitation of requests for proposal and/or request for qualifications, and may award contracts for professional services based on a single proposal.

     2.     Contracts which are not anticipated to exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) may be awarded without a formal request for proposal or request for qualifications process, based on the particular requirements of the service to be provided and the experience and availability of the individual consultant(s). All contracts for services which are anticipated to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be let based on a written proposal which shall include the scope of services to be provided and the fee schedule for services. The city manager shall provide to the city council, at least on a quarterly basis, a summary of all contracts he or she has let which exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). (Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

 

2.24.160 Inspection and testing.
     The purchasing officer shall inspect supplies, materials and equipment delivered, to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the purchase order or contract. The purchasing officer shall have the authority to require chemical and physical tests, or the report of the testing, of samples submitted with bid and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. (Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

 

2.24.170 Surplus supplies and equipment.
     All using agencies shall submit to the purchasing officer, at such times and in such form as he or she shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies, materials and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out.

     A.    The purchasing officer shall have authority to sell as surplus all supplies, materials and equipment which can not be used by any agency or which have become unsuitable for city use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new supplies, materials and equipment.

     1.     The sale of surplus supplies and equipment shall be made pursuant to rules prescribed by the city manager, and only after authorization from the city council as to any items of an estimated value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more.

     2.     Surplus supplies and equipment may be sold to the public if so prescribed by the city manager and/or the city council. City officials and employees, and their immediate families, however, shall be ineligible to purchase such surplus items. (Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

2.24.180 Unlawful purchases.
     If any person or agency purchases or contracts for any supplies, materials, equipment or services contrary to the provisions of this chapter, such purchase order or contract shall be void and of no effect. The head of the agency making such a purchase transaction shall be personally liable for the amount of such purchase order or contract, and, if already paid out of city funds, the amount thereof may be recovered in the name of the city in an appropriate action therefor. It is unlawful for any agency to split its requirements for supplies, material, equipment or services to wilfully evade any requirement of this chapter. (Ord. 42 § 1, 1990)

Chapter 2.28 CITY SERVICE FEES AND CHARGES
2.28.010 Findings and intent.
     The city council finds as follows:

     A.    The fee and service charge revenue cost comparison system set forth in this chapter provides a mechanism for ensuring that fees adopted by the city for services rendered do not exceed the reasonable estimated cost for providing the services for which the fees are charged.

     B.     The adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq.), because it approves and sets forth a procedure for determining fees for the purpose of meeting the operating expenses of city departments, as set forth in Public Resources Code Section 21080 (b) (8) (1).

     C.     Pursuant to Article XIIIB of the California Constitution, it is the intent of the city council to require the ascertainment and recovery of costs reasonably borne from fees and charges levied therefor in providing the regulation, products or services hereinafter enumerated in this chapter. (Ord. 100 § 1, 1992)

 

2.28.020 Delegation of authority and direction to city manager.
     The city manager is delegated the authority and directed to review and make recommendation to the city council for the adjustment of fees and charges to recover the percentage of costs reasonably borne in providing the regulation, products or services enumerated in this chapter in the percentage of costs reasonably borne and on the schedule of fee and service charge rate review and revision as hereinafter established in this chapter.

     “Costs reasonably borne” shall be as defined in Section 2.28.030. In making his recommendations for the adjustment of fees and charges, the city manager shall consider only the standards and criteria established by this chapter. (Ord. 100 § 2, 1992)

 

2.28.030 Costs reasonably borne defined.
     “Costs reasonably borne”, as used and ordered to be applied by this chapter are to consist of the following elements:

     A.    All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to, salaries, wages, overtime, employee fringe benefits, services and supplies, maintenance and operation expenses, contract-

ed services, special supplies, and any other direct expense incurred.

     B.     All applicable indirect costs including, but not restricted to, building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance and operations, communications expenses, computer costs, printing and reproduction, and like expenses when distributed on an accounted and documented rational proration system.

     C.     Fixed assets recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of fixed assets and additional fixed asset expense recovery charges calculated on the current estimated cost of replacement, divided by the approximate life expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the difference between book value depreciation not previously recovered and reserved in cash and the full cost of replacement, which also shall be calculated and considered a cost so as to recover such unrecovered costs between book value and the cost of replacement over the remaining life of the asset.

     D.    General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the city council, city manager, city clerk, elections, finance department, city attorney, un-allocated non-departmental expenses, and all other staff and support service provided to the entire city organization as now organized and as it may be reorganized at any time in the future.

     Overhead shall be prorated between tax-finance services and fee-financed services on the basis of said percentage so that each of taxes, fees and charges shall proportionately defray such overhead costs.

     E.     Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each department head and his or her supporting expenses as enumerated in subsections A, B and C of this section.

     F.     Debt service costs, consisting of repayment of principal, payment of interest, and trustee fees and administrative expenses for all applicable bond, certificate or securities issues or loans. Any required coverage factors of added reserves beyond basic debt service costs also shall be considered a cost if required by covenant within any securities, ordinance, resolution, indenture or general law applicable to the city. (Ord. 100 § 3, 1992)

 

2.28.040 Schedule of fees and service charges, and providing for their adoption by resolution upon recommendation of the city manager.
     The city manager and each city department head, under the direction of the city manager, shall review the fees and service charges listed as follows, on the schedule of frequency listed in this section, and make written recommendations to the city council regarding the setting and adjustment of the fee or charge schedule so as to recover the listed percentage of costs reasonably borne necessary to provide the listed regulation, products or services, and to take all actions necessary to accomplish and to carry out the policy of the city council established by this chapter. The fees or charges set pursuant to this chapter shall be set by resolution of the city council.

 


Regulation, Product or Service

Percentage of Costs Reasonably Borne To Be Recovered

Review Schedule

 

 

 

Building Plan Checking

100%

Annual

Construction Inspection

100%

Annual

Hazardous Building/Nuisance

 

 

    Abatement

100%

Annual

Enforcement of Zoning Codes

100%

Annual

General Plan Review

100%

Annual

Zone Change Review

100%

Annual

Zoning Code Amendment Review

100%

Annual

Conditional Use Review

100%

Annual

Minor Deviation Review

100%

Annual

Major Deviation Review

100%

Annual

Home Occupation Review

100%

Annual

Field Inspection Review

100%

Annual

Specific Plan Review

100%

Annual

Architectural Design Review

100%

Annual

CC&R Review

100%

Annual

Preliminary Project Review

100%

Annual

Environmental Assessment Review

100%

Annual

Environmental Impact Report Review

100%

Annual

Focused EIR Review

100%

Annual

EIR Amendment Review

100%

Annual

Single Unit Housing Plan Review

100%

Annual

Tentative Tract Map Review

100%

Annual

Tentative Parcel Map Review

100%

Annual

Development Agreement Review

100%

Annual

Overlay Design Review

100%

Annual

Lot Line Adjustment Review

100%

Annual

Sign Plan Review

100%

Annual

Special Event Review

100%

Annual

Temporary Sign Review

100%

Annual

Certificate of Compliance Review

100%

Annual

Parcel Merger review

100%

Annual

Appeal on Staff Planning Decision

 

 

    Owner-occupied single-family

 

 

    dwelling units or no financial

 

 

    benefit

025%

Annual

    All Others

100%

Annual

Minor Tract/Parcel Map revision

100%

Annual

Sign Permit (Code Biannual Review)

100%

Annual

ABC Affidavit Review

100%

Annual

Plot Plan Review

100%

Annual

Property Information Preparation

100%

Annual

Grading Plan Check

100%

Annual

Grading Inspection

100%

Annual

Final Tract Map Processing

100%

Annual

Final Parcel Map Processing

100%

Annual

Street Improvement Plan Check

100%

Annual

Excavation Inspection

100%

Annual

Public Works Construction Plan Check

100%

Annual

Public Works Construction Inspection

100%

Annual

Street Vacation Review

100%

Annual

Annexation Landscape Maintenance

 

 

Annexation District Proceedings

100%

Annual

Annexation Territorial Proceedings

100%

Annual

Security Processing Per Tract

100%

Annual

Professional Report Preparation

100%

Annual

Business Licensing Processing

100%

Annual

New Business License Application

 

 

    and Review

100%

Annual

Business Regulation

100%

Annual

Bingo Permit Review

100%

Annual

Yard and Garage Sale Review

100%

Annual

False Alarm Response

100%

Annual

Public Property Auto Abatement

100%

Annual

Special Traffic Marking

100%

Annual

Emergency Services to Contractors

100%

Annual

Spilled Load Clean Up Charges

100%

Annual

Records Research

100%

Annual

Document Printing and Copying

100%

Annual

Copy Service

100%

Annual

Agenda and Minute Mailing

100%

Annual

Document Certification

100%

Annual

Tape Copying

100%

Annual

Appeal of Planning Commission

 

 

    Owner-occupied single-family dwelling units or no

 

    financial benefit

025%

Annual

    All Others

100%

Annual

Requested Study Session Preparation

100%

Annual

Receiving/Processing Faxed Material

100%

Annual

Public Notary Services

025%

Annual

Recordation of Documents

100%

Annual

 

 

     All fees and charges set pursuant to this section shall take effect as provided by law, and as more specifically provided by resolution of the city council.

     The schedule of frequency of rate adjustments and review may be varied by the city manager to adjust revenues sufficient to meet debt service coverage requirements of any bond, certificate or ordinance, resolution, indenture, contract or action under which securities have been issued by the city which contain any coverage factor requirements.

     The schedule of frequency of rate adjustments may be varied by the city manager if, in his judgment and that of the requesting department, a gross inequity would be perpetrated by the existing rate schedule on a new and unanticipated event. (Ord. 100 § 4, 1992)

 

2.28.050 Actual cost, deposits, collection of additional money and refunds.
     A.    Actual cost for a project is determined by the affected department heads, based upon the criteria set forth in Section 2.28.030.

     B.     Initial deposits are determined by the amount of time historically spent on similar projects. Whenever seventy-five percent (75%) of a deposit has been expended and the department determines that the estimated actual cost of the job will exceed the amount deposited, additional deposit of such estimated excess amount shall be required. Notification of additional deposit required will be mailed to the applicant, who shall deposit such additional moneys prior to the date specified in the notice. When additional deposit has been requested, work will be suspended on the project when ninety-five percent (95%) of the deposit previously received has been expended. Projects will not be completed with money due. If the additional deposit is not made by the date specified in the notice the project shall be deemed denied on the date specified without further action on the part of the city.

     C.     If the department head determines that the estimated actual cost of a job will be less than the initial deposit, a deposit may be required which equals the estimated action cost of the job in lieu of the initial deposit. (Ord. 100 § 5, 1992)

 

2.28.060 Refund policy.
     The city council shall, by council resolution, set forth its policy for refund of fees and charges collected pursuant to this chapter. These policies may be reviewed from time to time and may be revised periodically by council resolution with this chapter being considered as enabling and directive. (Ord. 100 § 7, 1992)

 

2.28.070 Violations—Penalties.
     If any person shall violate any of the provision of this chapter, or fail to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter, he shall be guilty of an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of a city ordinance shall be punishable by:

     A.    A fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; and

     B.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; and

     C.     A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year.

     Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during such portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided by this chapter. “Person” shall be defined as any person, company, corporation or entity. (Ord. 100 § 10, 1992)

Chapter 2.32 MISCELLANEOUS ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
2.32.010 Enforcement of city ordinances.
     The ordinances of the city shall be enforced by the officers and authorized representatives of the city charged with the responsibility of administering, implementing and ensuring compliance with the provisions of those ordinances. Amongst these, but not limited to, are the following designated enforcement officers of the city who are authorized to enforce compliance with and issue citations for violations of city ordinances, codified or non-codified, at the direction of and under the authorization of the city manager:

     A.    City manager;

     B.     Building official;

     C.     Community development director;

     D.    Code enforcement officers;

     E.     Assistant to the city manager;

     F.     Such others as the city manager shall appoint and authorize from time to time.

     The authorization granted herein shall not supersede or in any way affect the authority and responsibility granted to others pursuant to contracts with the city, and shall specifically not affect or supersede the authority granted for the provision of police, fire, or certain nuisance abatement services. (Ord. 62 § 1, 1990)

 

2.32.020 Filing of matters in small claims court.
     The filing of matters in small claims court on behalf of the city shall be the duty of the following designated officers and designated representatives of the city:

     A.    City manager;

     B.     Assistant city manager;

     C.     Such others as the city manager shall appoint and authorize from time to time. (Ord. 75 § 1, 1991)

 

2.32.030 Payment of fee for public services.
     A.    Pursuant to Section 6151.5 of the California Government Code whenever payment for public services in the form of taxes, permits, fee, fines or any other obligation owing to the city is payable by a negotiable instrument, it may be paid by check, draft or money order payable to the office, agency or board to whom the obligation is owing.

     B.     Pursuant to Section 6157 of the California Government Code, if any personal check offered for payment of any obligation as authorized in the foregoing subsection A of this section is returned without payment, for any reason, a reasonable charge may be imposed for the returned check and cannot exceed the actual cost incurred by the city. The charge may be added to and become part of any underlying obligation other than an obligation which constitutes a lien on real property, and a different method of payment for that payment and future payments by such person may be prescribed. (Ord. 157 § 6, 1996; Ord. 44 § 1, 1990)

Chapter 2.36 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
2.36.010 Adoption.
     In order to establish an equitable and uniform system for dealing with personnel matters, and to comply with applicable laws relating to the administration of the personnel process, the following personnel system is adopted. (Ord. 31 § 1, 1990)

 

2.36.020 Definitions.
     The terms used to administer the personnel system shall be defined in the personnel rules. (Ord. 31 § 3, 1990)

 

2.36.030 Administration.
     The city manager shall administer the city personnel system and may delegate any of the powers and duties to a personnel officer or may delegate the appointing authority granted by the city council to any other officer or employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in Section 2.36.140. The city manager shall:

     A.    Act as the appointing authority for the city;

     B.     Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the city council;

     C.     Prepare and recommend to the city council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules;

     D.    Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan;

     E.     Have the authority to discipline employees in accordance with this chapter and the personnel rules of the city;

     F.     Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of tests for positions in the competitive service; the receiving of applications therefor; the conducting and grading of tests; the certification of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the competitive service; and performing any other duty that may be required to administer the personnel system. (Ord. 31 § 4, 1990)

 

2.36.040 Competitive service.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the city, except:

     A.    Elective officers;

     B.     The city manager and any assistants to the city manager;

     C.     The city attorney and any assistant or deputy city attorneys;

     D.    Members of appointive boards, commissions, and committees;

     E.     All department directors;

     F.     Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or any other services;

     G.    Volunteer personnel;

     H.    All council-appointed city officers;

     I.      Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood or earthquake which threatens life or property;

     J.      Limited-term contract employees;

     K.    Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not regularly employed in permanent positions. “Regularly employed in permanent positions” means an employee hired for an indefinite term into a budgeted position, who is regularly scheduled to work no less than one thousand forty (1040) hours per year, and has successful completed the probationary period and been retained as provided in this chapter and the personnel rules;

     L.     Any position primarily funded under a state or federal employment program;

     M.    Employees not included in the competitive service under this section shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. (Ord. 31 § 5, 1990)

 

2.36.050 Adoption and amendment of rules.
     Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. The rules may establish regulations governing the personnel system, including:

     A.    Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class;

     B.     Appropriate announcement of the selection process and acceptance of applications for employment;

     C.     Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment;

     D.    Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional appointments;

     E.     Establishment of probationary testing periods;

     F.     Evaluation of employees during the probationary testing period and thereafter;     G.     Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the competitive service;

     H.    Separation of employees from the city service;

     I.      The establishment and maintenance of adequate personnel records for purposes of accounting and legal requirements.

     J.      The establishment of any necessary appeal procedures. (Ord. 31 § 6, 1990)

 

2.36.060 Appointments.
     Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as practicable by competitive examination. Examinations may be used and conducted to aid the selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates such as achievement and aptitude tests, written tests, personal interview, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples or any combinations of these or other tests. The probationary period shall be considered an extension of the examination process. Physical, medical and psychological tests may be given as a part of any examination.

     In an examination the city manager or designee may include, in addition to competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum standards therefor.

     The appointing authority of employees in the competitive service is the city manager. The city manager may delegate the appointing authority to any other officer or employee of the city. (Ord. 31 § 7, 1990)

 

2.36.070 Probationary period.
     All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period of not less than six months. The appointing authority may extend such probationary period up to six additional months. The probationary period shall commence from the date of appointment. In the event of illness or injury requiring absence from work the number of days absent shall be added to the length of the probationary period. During the probationary period, the employee may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal, hearing or any grievance procedure.

     If the service of the probationary employee has been satisfactory to the appointing authority, then the appointing authority shall file with the city manager or designee, a statement in writing to such effect and stating that the retention of such employee in the service is desired. If such a statement is not filed, the employee will be deemed to be unsatisfactory and his employment terminated at the expiration of the probationary period. Where a statement of satisfactory service has not been filed, notice of the termination shall be served on the terminated employee by the city manager or designee after the expiration of the period.

     An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which he has been promoted shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he was promoted, provided he had successfully completed the probationary period for such prior class, unless he is discharged from the city service as provided in the personnel rules. If no vacancy exists in such position, he shall be placed on a re-employment list as provided in the personnel rules. (Ord. 31 § 8, 1990)

 

2.36.080 Status of present employees.
     Any person holding a position included in the competitive service who, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the competitive service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for his class, shall assume regular status in the competitive service in the position held on such effective date without a qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter and personnel rules.

     Any other persons holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment. (Ord. 31 § 9, 1990)

 

2.36.090 Demotion, dismissal, reduction in pay, suspension and reprimand.
     The city manager or any appointing power shall have the authority to demote, discharge, reprimand, reduce in pay, or suspend, any regular employee for cause in accordance with procedures included in the personnel rules. (Ord. 31 § 10, 1990)

 

2.36.100 Right of appeal.
     Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal a demotion, reduction in pay, suspension, or discharge for disciplinary or medical reasons, except in those instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this chapter or the rules adopted thereunder.

     All appeals shall be processed in accordance with the requirements and procedures as set forth in the personnel rules adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 31 § 11, 1990)

 

2.36.110 Lay-off and re-employment.
     Lay-off and re-employment actions shall follow the process outlined in the personnel rules. (Ord. 31 § 12, 1990)

 

2.36.120 Political activity.
     The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state law and any local provision adopted pursuant to state law. (Ord. 31 § 13, 1990)

 

2.36.130 Contracts for special service.
     The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The city council may contract with any qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter:

     A.    The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

     B.     The preparation of a position classification plan, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

     C.     The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests;

     D.    The conduct of employee training programs;

     E.     Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration. (Ord. 31 § 14, 1990)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 TRANSFER OF ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY
Chapter 3.08 CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
Chapter 3.12 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 3.16 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.20 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 3.24 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.28 COST RECOVERY SYSTEM FOR BOOKING FEE COLLECTIONS

Chapter 3.04 TRANSFER OF ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY
3.04.010 Assessor and tax collector.
     Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51501 of the Government Code of the state of California, the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the city assessor and tax collector are transferred to the assessor and tax collector of the county of San Bernardino. (Ord. 8 § 1, 1989)

Chapter 3.08 CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
3.08.010 Purpose.
     The city desires to adopt procedures relative to the fiscal affairs of the new city and to provide for the payment of its debts as they come due. (Ord. 9 § 1, 1989)

 

3.08.020 General governance of procedures.
     The provisions of this chapter recognize that the general claim procedures applicable to local public agencies, including this city, are governed by the provisions of Chapter 1 of Division 3.6 of the Government Code of the state, commencing with Section 900 and following. (Ord. 9 § 2, 1989)

 

3.08.030 Special claims procedures.
     Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 935 of the Government Code of the state, the following claims procedures are established for those claims against the city for money or damages not now governed by state or local laws:

     A.    Employee Claims. Notwithstanding the exceptions contained in Section 905 of the Government Code of the state, all claims by public officers or employees for fees, salaries, wages, overtime pay, holiday pay, compensating time off, vacation pay, sick leave pay, and any other expenses or allowances claimed due from the city, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by state or local laws, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Sections 910 through 915.2 of the Government Code of the state. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Section 945.4 of the Government Code of the state relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action thereon by the council.

     B.     Contract and Other Claims. In addition to the requirements of subsection A of this section, and notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in Section 905 of the Government Code of the state, all claims against the city for damages or money, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by state or local laws, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Section 910 through 915.2 of the Government Code of the state. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Section 945.4 of the Government Code of the state relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action thereon by the council. (Ord. 9 § 3, 1989)

 

3.08.040 Filing.
     All claims or demands against the city shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be presented by the city clerk to the council at the next regular meeting thereof for approval or rejection, whether in whole or in part, if such presentation is required by law. (Ord. 9 § 4, 1989)

 

3.08.050 Claims covered by insurance.
     All claims filed with the city clerk, which claims are covered by insurance shall be forwarded by the city clerk after action thereon by the council to the appropriate insurance carrier for handling and/further processing. (Ord. 9 § 5, 1989)

 

3.08.060 Purchases, supplies or services.
     A.    All demands, invoices or claims for purchases, supplies or services included within budgetary appropriations shall be presented in writing to the city manager. All such demands, invoices or claims shall be fully itemized and verified as just and correct by the claimant or his authorized agent.

     B.     Each demand shall bear the number of the purchase order issued for the materials or services rendered.

     C.     Such demands, invoices or claims shall be audited by the city manager, who shall prepare a register of audited demands. The affidavit of the city manager shall be attached to such register, certifying to the accuracy of the register.

     D.    Such demands, invoices, or claims shall be approved by the city manager and a finance committee consisting of two designated members of the city council.

     E.     All claims approved shall be paid by checks drawn upon the city treasurer signed by the person(s) designated by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 9 § 6, 1989)

Chapter 3.12 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
3.12.010 Short title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Yucaipa.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. (Ord. 10 § 1, 1989)

 

3.12.020 Imposition.
     There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($0.27 1/2)for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 10 § 2, 1989)

 

3.12.030 Payment.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.12.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 10 § 3, 1989)

 

3.12.040 Exemptions.
     The tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to:

     A.    Instruments given to secure a debt (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11921);

     B.     Instruments of the United States or agencies or instrumentalities thereof (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11922);

     C.     Conveyances under reorganization or adjustment plans (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11923);

     D.    Conveyances under order of Securities and Exchange Commission (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11924);

     E.     Transfers of certain partnership property (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11925);

     F.     Instruments taken in lieu of foreclosure (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11926);

     G.    Deed, instrument or other writing which purports to transfer, divide or allocate property assets between spouses under judgment of dissolution or marriage, separation or agreement in contemplation of judgment or order (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11927);

     H.    Deed, instrument or other writing for conveyance of realty by state or political subdivision or agency with agreement for purchaser to reconvey (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11928);

     I.      Deed, instrument or other writing for conveyance by state, political subdivision or agency of realty financed by obligations issued by nonprofit corporation. (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11929);

As these sections of the Revenue and Taxation Code may be from time to time amended. (Ord. 157 § 5, 1996; Ord. 10 § 4, 1989)

 

3.12.050 Administration.
     The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 10 § 5, 1989)

 

3.12.060 Claims for refund.
     Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. (Ord. 10 § 6, 1989)

Chapter 3.16 SALES AND USE TAX
3.16.010 Short title.
      This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of the City.” (Ord. 11 § 1, 1989)

 

3.16.020 Rate.
     The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1989)

 

3.16.030 Purpose.
     The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

     A.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, commencing with Section 7200, as it may from time to time be amended;

     B.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

     C.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adopts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

     D.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 11 § 3, 1989)

 

3.16.040 Contract with state.
     Prior to the operative date (November 27, 1989) this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 11 § 5, 1989)

 

3.16.050 Sales tax.
     For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.16.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. (Ord. 11 § 6, 1989)

 

3.16.060 Place of sale.
     For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 11 § 7, 1989)

 

3.16.070 Use tax.
     An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use and other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.16.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 11 § 8, 1989)

 

3.16.080 Adoption of provisions of state law.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions in Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 11 § 9, 1989)

 

3.16.090 Limitations on adoption of state law.
     In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is used as part of the title of the state Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use of other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, sue or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Section 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 11 § 10, 1989)

 

3.16.100 Permit not required.
     If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 11 § 11, 1989)

 

3.16.110 Exclusions and exemptions.
     A.    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

     B.     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

     C.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government.

     D.    In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 14 § 1, 1990; Ord. 11 § 12, 1989)

 

3.16.120 Amendments.
     All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. This chapter shall be deemed to adopt by reference the provisions of Sections 7202 to 7203, inclusive, of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as now in effect or as later amended, which are required to be included in this chapter. (Ord. 11 § 13, 1989)

 

3.16.130 Enjoining collection forbidden.
     No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 11 § 14, 1989)

 

3.16.140 Violations—Penalties.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1000.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 11 § 15, 1989)

Chapter 3.20 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3.20.010 Short title.
     This chapter is known as the “Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax of the City of Yucaipa.” (Ord. 189 § 1, 1999: Ord. 12 § 1, 1989)

 

3.20.020 Definitions.
     Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter.

     “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, bed and breakfast lodge, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.

     “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

     “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent also is an operator for the purposes of this chapter and has the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent is, however, considered to be compliance by both.

     “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

     “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

     “Tax administrator” means the administrative services officer.

     “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel is a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted period of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. Transient shall not include a person exercising occupancy by virtue of a fee interest, or the resident manager or operator of a hotel. (Ord. 345 § 11, 2016; Ord. 189 § 1, 1999: Ord. 12 § 2, 1989)

 

3.20.030 Tax imposed—Rate.
     For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of seven percent of the rent charged by the operator. This tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax is due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If, for any reason, the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. 189 § 1, 1999: Ord. 12 § 3, 1989)

 

3.20.040 Exemptions.
     No tax shall be imposed upon:

     A.    Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided in this chapter;

     B.     Any officer or employee of the United States Government or the state of California for lodging obtained by that officer or employee in the discharge of official government business;

     C.     Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty;

     D.    Room rental paid to any hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, foster home or home for aged people; or to any asylum, jail, prison or other facility in which human beings are detained and housed under legal restraint; or to housing operated or used exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes by any organization having qualifications for exemption from property taxes under the laws of California;

     No exemption is granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Ord. 189 § 1, 1999: Ord. 12 § 4, 1989)

 

3.20.050 Operator’s duties.
     Each operator collects the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax is separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any portion thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in Section 3.20.140 herein. (Ord. 189 § 1, 1999: Ord. 12 § 5, 1989)

 

3.20.060 Registration.
     A.    Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the tax administrator and shall obtain a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. This certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

     1.     The name of the operator and any name(s) under which the operator transacts or intends to transact business;

     2.     The name and address of the hotel;

     3.     The date upon which the certificate was issued; and

     4.     That “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any unlawful business or conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit.”

     B.     The issuance of a certificate pursuant to this chapter shall not be evidence of compliance with applicable zoning or construction standards, or any other regulations applicable to the business, nor shall the certificate constitute a permit to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the city. (Ord. 189 § 1, 1999: Ord. 12 § 6, 1989)

 

3.20.070 Reporting and remitting.
     Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, upon such forms and setting forth such information as the tax administrator may prescribe and require, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. Each such return shall contain a declaration under penalty of perjury, executed by the operator or authorized agent, that to the best of the signer’s knowledge, the statements in the return are true, correct and complete. Amounts claimed on the return as exempt from the tax shall be fully itemized and explained on the return or supporting schedule. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected is remitted to the tax administrator. If the remittance is by check or money order, the same shall be payable to the city. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he or she may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter are held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator.

     B.     All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be and remain public money, the property of the city and shall be held in trust for the account of the city until remittance thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Ord. 189 § 1, 1999: Ord. 12 § 1, 1989)

 

3.20.080 Cessation of Business.
     Each operator shall notify the tax administrator at least ten (10) days prior to the sale or cessation of business for any reason, and returns and remittances are due immediately upon the sale or cessation of business. (Ord. 189 § 1, 1999: Ord. 12 § 8, 1989)

 

3.20.090 Delinquent payments—Penalties and interest.
     A.    Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required for the tax to be collected and remitted to the city, shall pay penalties of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax due.

     B.     Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first becomes delinquent shall pay a delinquency penalty often percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the penalty first imposed.

     C.     Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

     D.    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

     E.     Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 189 § 1, 1999: Ord. 12 § 9, 1989)

 

3.20.100 Failure to collect and report tax.
     A.    If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he deems best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter.

 

     B.     In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address.

     C.     Such operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator becomes final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and placed fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed.

     D.    After such hearing, the tax administrator shall determine the property tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the operator in the manner prescribed in this section of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.20.110. (Ord. 189 § 1, 1999: Ord. 12 § 10, 1989)

 

3.20.110 Appeal.
     Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the city council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 189 § 1, 1999: Ord. 12 § 11, 1989)

 

3.20.120 Registration cards and daily summary sheets.
     Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall commence reporting and accounting practices as set forth hereinbelow:

     A.    Registration Cards. The operator shall, as each room in a hotel is rented to a transient, fill out and maintain on file a registration card which contains, at a minimum, the following information:

     1.     The name of at least one individual who will occupy, or who is entitled to occupy, the room;

     2.     The total number of individuals who will occupy or who are entitled to occupy, the room;

     3.     The identification of room by number;

     4.     The date the occupancy commences and the expected date of the departure of the transient(s); and

     5.     The daily rate charged and amount collected as and for rental of the room.

     6.     Registration cards shall bear consecutive numbers which shall be preprinted on the registration cards by a print shop or manufacturer of the cards. Voided cards shall also be kept for audit purposes.

     B.     Daily Summary Sheets. The operator of each hotel within the city shall maintain a daily summary sheet for each day the hotel is open for business containing, at a minimum, the following information:

     1.     The name of at least one individual entitled to occupancy of each room which is rented or occupied that day;

     2.     The room number;

     3.     The daily rate and amount paid for the rental of the room; and

     4.     The number of the registration card applicable to the rental of the room. (Ord. 189 § 1, 1999: Ord. 12 § 12, 1989)

 

3.20.130 Retention and examination of records.
     A.    Every operator shall keep and preserve, for a period of three years, those records, receipts, invoices, registration cards, daily summary sheets and other pertinent papers as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, in such form as the tax administrator may require.

     B.     The tax administrator, or any person authorized in writing by the tax administrator may examine the books, papers, records, registration cards or other pertinent papers of any operator and may investigate the character of the business of the operator in order to verify the accuracy of the return made, or, if no return has been made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. (Ord. 189 § 1, 1999: Ord. 12 § 13, 1989)

 

3.20.140 Refunds.
     A.    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

     B.     An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit is allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

     C.     A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (A) of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

     D.    No refund shall be paid under the provision of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 189 § 1, 1999: Ord. 12 § 14, 1989)

 

3.20.150 Actions to collect.
     A.    Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter is a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city is a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter is liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount.

     B.     Obligation of the Operator. Each operator shall be obligated to pay to the city all taxes actually collected, as well as the amount of taxes which were lawfully imposed pursuant to this chapter, but which, for any reason, were not collected from the transient(s) by the operator. The operator’s obligation to pay such taxes to the city shall include the obligation to pay the city all penalties and interest due with respect to such taxes as provided by applicable law, including this chapter. (Ord. 189 § 1, 1999)

 

3.20.160 Violation—Misdemeanor.
     A.    No operator or other person shall fail or refuse to register as required by this chapter, or to prepare or furnish any report or record required to be made, or shall fail or refuse to furnish other data or information required by the tax administrator, or shall render a false or fraudulent report or claim. No operator or other person who is required to make, render, sign or verify any report, record or claim shall make any false or fraudulent report or claim with the intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due in accordance with this chapter.

     B.     Any operator or other person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or record who makes any fraudulent return, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount required by law is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in subsection (C) herein.

     C.     Any operator or other person who willfully aids or assists in, or procures, counsels or advises in, the preparation or presentation, in connection with any matter arising under this chapter, of a return, affidavit, claim, or document that is fraudulent or false as to any material matter, whether or not the falsity or fraud is with the knowledge or consent of the operator or person authorized or required to present the return, affidavit, claim or document, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in subsection (C) herein.

     D.    A violation of section 3.20.160(A) through (C) is a misdemeanor. Each offense shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both the fine and the imprisonment. (Ord. 189 § 1, 1999)

Chapter 3.24 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.24.010 Created.
     A.    To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code and to avail itself of its benefits of Sections 2106 and 2107 thereof, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.”

     B.     All moneys received by the city from the state of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein or for engineering or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways by the city, and all interest received from the investment thereof, shall be paid into the fund. (Ord. 6 §§ 1, 2, 1989)

 

3.24.020 Use of funds.
     All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 6 § 3, 1989)

Chapter 3.28 COST RECOVERY SYSTEM FOR BOOKING FEE COLLECTIONS
3.28.010 Authority and scope.
     This chapter is adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 29550.1, et seq., as the same may now exist or hereafter be amended. (Ord. 174 § 1, 1997)

 

3.28.020 Purpose.
     The proceeds from this program shall be used to reimburse the city’s general fund for costs charged by the county for the booking or other processing of persons arrested and other costs incurred in connection therewith. (Ord. 174 § 1, 1997)

 

3.28.030 Definitions.
     Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter:

     “City” means the city of Yucaipa.

     “County” means the county of San Bernardino. (Ord. 174 § 1, 1997)

 

3.28.040 Cost recovery system.
     The mayor is hereby authorized to enter into an agreement with an outside agency to provide for the recovery of city’s costs and the charged imposed by the County for criminal justice administrative fees. (Ord. 174 § 1, 1997)

 

3.28.050 Amount of fees collected.
     Fees collected shall be limited to those provided under Government Code Section 29550.1, et seq. The actual cost of recovery over and above the criminal justice administrative fee shall be charged to the person convicted if applicable. (Ord. 174 § 1, 1997)

 

3.28.060 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, part, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter of the application thereof is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter, the application thereof, and the fee imposed shall not be effected thereby but shall remain in full force and effect, it being the intention of the city council to adopt each and every section, subsection, part, clause, sentence, or phrase regardless of whether any section, part, clause, sentence, or phrase or the application thereof is held to be invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 174 § 1, 1997)

Title 4 TELECOMMUNICATIONS REGULATIONS
Chapter 4.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 4.20 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS

Chapter 4.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4.10.100.1 Findings and purpose.
     A.    The city council finds and determines as follows:

     1.     The development of cable television and other telecommunications systems may provide significant benefits for the residents of the city.

     2.     Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with telecommunications services and systems, the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers to be exercised by the city.

     3.     The ordinance codified in this title is intended to establish regulatory provisions that authorize the city to regulate telecommunications services and systems to the extent authorized by federal and state law, including, but not limited to, the Federal Communications Act of 1934, the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Federal Cable Television Consumer and Competition Act of 1992, the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, and applicable California statutes and regulations.

     4.     Pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 21000 ex. seq., the adoption of this ordinance is not a project, and therefore, it is not subject to the environmental review procedures contained in the California Environmental Quality Act.

     B.     The goals, purpose and intent of the ordinance codified in this title are to provide for the attainment of the following objectives:

     1.     To enable the city to discharge its public trust in a manner consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development.

     2.     To authorize and to manage reasonable access to the city’s public rights-of-way and public property for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis.

     3.     To obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the city and its residents for authorizing the private use of the public rights-of-way and public property.

     4.     To promote competition in telecommunications services, minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications service providers, and encourage the delivery of advanced and competitive telecommunications services on the broadest possible basis to local government and to the businesses, institutions, and residents of the city.

     5.     To establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of telecommunications service providers.

     6.     To encourage the profitable deployment of advanced telecommunications infrastructures that satisfy local needs, deliver enhanced government services and provide informed consumer choices in an evolving telecommunications market. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.10.100.2 Title.
     The ordinance codified in this title may be known and cited as the “Telecommunications Ordinance” of the city of Yucaipa. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.10.100.3 Construction.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter and Title 4, shall be construed in accordance with the applicable federal and state laws governing telecommunications services and systems. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.10.100.4 Scope.
     The ordinance codified in this title shall apply within the geographical limits of the city, including any areas subsequently annexed by the city, unless state law prescribes otherwise, or in some fashion restricts or alters the effect of the ordinance codified in this title to a subsequently annexed area of the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.10.100.5 Severability.
     If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection or other portion of the ordinance codified in this title, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is declared void, unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, then such word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection or other portion, or the proscribed application therefor, shall be severable, and the remaining provisions of the ordinance codified in this title, and all applications thereof, not having been declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid, shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

Chapter 4.20 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
Article I Controlling Authority.
4.20.100.1 Agreement is subject to provisions of applicable city ordinances and amendments thereto.
     A.    Franchise agreements are subject to and shall be governed by all terms, conditions and provisions of the ordinance codified in this title and any future amendments thereto; provided, however, any such future amendments which materially alter the terms and conditions of a franchise agreement shall not be applicable to the franchise agreement unless one of the following apply:

     1.     The franchisee under the applicable franchise agreement shall have consented thereto;

     2.     Such amendments implement changes in applicable federal or state laws; or

     3.     Such amendments are for the purposes of protecting the public health, safety and welfare.

     B.     Any amendment to the ordinance codified in this title which either: (i) does not materially alter the terms or conditions of a franchise agreement, or (ii) materially alter the material terms and conditions of a franchise agreement but which otherwise apply to the franchise agreement pursuant to either 1, 2 or 3 above, shall be hereinafter collectively referred to as a “applicable amendment.” In the event of any conflict between a franchise agreement and the ordinance codified in this title (including any applicable amendments), the ordinance codified in this title and the applicable amendments shall control.

     C.     The foregoing paragraph notwithstanding, a franchise agreement may contain express provisions that it terms supersede one or more provisions of the ordinance codified in this title and, in such case, the provisions of the franchise agreement shall control; provided, however, that any applicable amendments to such superseded provisions of the ordinance codified in this title shall govern over any franchise agreement superseding provision. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.100.2 Ordinance and agreement are subject to requirements of Communications Act of 1934 and amendments thereto.
     The ordinance codified in this title and any franchise agreements are subject to and shall be governed by all applicable requirements of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and other applicable federal and state laws, statutes and regulations. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.100.3 Regulatory authority.
     The city may exercise its regulatory authority to the fullest extent permitted by the ordinance codified in this title and applicable law. If the franchisee also serves contiguous or neighboring communities, city may, at its sole option, participate in a joint regulatory agency, with delegated responsibility in the area of cable service or other communications services. Such a joint regulatory agency, however, shall have no rights over a franchisee which are greater than or different from those provided in the ordinance codified in this title and franchise agreement with respect to franchisee’s service area affected by the ordinance codified in this title and franchise’ agreement without the consent of the franchisee. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.100.4 Communications with federal and state regulatory organizations—Franchisee to provide city with copies/notice of all communications with federal/state court or regulatory agencies.
     The franchisee shall, in a timely manner, provide the city with copies of all pleadings, petitions, applications, reports and documents of any kind submitted by or on behalf of the franchisee to the FCC or any other federal or state regulatory commissions, agencies or courts having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting construction operation or regulation of a cable television system, or affecting the services provided through such a system, where such documents, in the reasonable judgment of the franchisee, address issues which directly affect the operation of franchise’s system with the city. Such issues include, but are not limited to, issues which effect the franchisee’s system capabilities, systems operations, system performance, customer service and customer service standards, programming, and cable rates and other cable service-related fees and charges. Copies of such responses, decisions or any other communications from the regulatory agencies or courts to a franchisee or its agent, including franchisee’s corporate parent, attorney, or consultants, relative to its cable service within the city, shall likewise be filed immediately on receipt with the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.100.5 Failure to follow federal, state and local laws and regulations.
     Failure to follow federal, state, and local laws and regulations is a violation of the ordinance codified in this title. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article II Scope of Ordinance.
4.20.101.1 Master ordinance.
     4.20.101.1.1.           The ordinance codified in this title constitutes the master ordinance setting forth the terms and conditions under which a cable system service provider (“franchisee”) is hereby granted a right nonexclusive of other operators to enter the city to construct, install and maintain facilities and equipment; to utilize specific city property, and to solicit subscribers for the sole purpose of providing cable services.

     4.20.101.1.2.           The ordinance codified in this title in no way obligates the city at any time to reimburse the franchisee for any costs, fixed or otherwise, required to put a cable system into operation in the city; for the provision of cable system services to any category of subscribers; or for loss, damage or destruction to the cable system. The city is not responsible for any damage to the cable system caused by the negligence of its agents except to the extent required under law. Subscribers are not deemed agents of the city.

     4.20.101.1.3.           Liability for user and connection fees for the provision of services to subscribers shall be established by separate agreements between the franchisee and the subscribers.

     4.20.101.1.4.           The ordinance codified in this title shall in no way prevent the city or any person from using a city or privately-owned cable system or master antenna system, where it so desires, or from expanding an existing system, or repairing existing television antennas. Nor shall the ordinance codified in this title in any way prevent any person from using any off-the-air television reception system. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.101.2 Authorization to engage in business and to use city streets.
     4.20.101.2.1.           Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of the ordinance codified in this title shall authorize and permit the franchisee to engage in the business of operating and providing a cable system in the city, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, rebuild, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any city streets such poles, wires, cable, fiber, conductors, duets, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, bridgers, line extenders, power supplies, optical devices, opto-electronic equipment, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary or appurtenant to the cable system; and in addition, so to use, operate, and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, including but not limited to any public utility or other franchisee franchised or permitted to do business in the city.

     4.20.101.2.2.           A franchise shall also confer upon the franchisee the right or privilege to enter the city streets and city service easements within the scope hereof, and through city and city service easements within the franchise area and which have been dedicated to the city for street purposes or are otherwise dedicated to or used for other compatible uses; provided, however, that the franchisee has obtained an encroachment/construction permit from the city where required. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.101.3 Grant of authority shall not be exclusive.
     A grant of authority to operate a cable system in the city and the right to use and occupy the city and streets for the purposes herein set forth shall not be exclusive. The city reserves the right, at its discretion, to grant cable service provider franchises for the same service area to other franchisees without limitation. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.101.4 All operations of the franchisee upon city property must be approved.
     All operations of the franchisee (including storage of materials) in city-owned buildings or upon city-owned property shall be confined to areas authorized or approved by the cable administrator. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.101.5 Violations for not having a franchise—Authorized connections—Tampering.
     4.20.101.5.1.           From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, it shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate, or to carry on a business of distributing to any persons on this city any television, radio, video, voice, telephony, data signals or other communications services by means of a cable system or to construct, install or maintain within any city street, or within any other city property, or within any privately-owned area within the city, any equipment or facilities for distributing any such services through a cable system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of the ordinance codified in this title or a preexisting city action, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect; provided, however, that this provision shall only apply to the extent that the city has the power under federal anchor state law to issue such a franchise for the distribution of such services.

     4.20.101.5.2.           It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of a franchisee, willfully to tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires, equipment or any other property of the franchisee used for distribution of cable services or other communications services through a cable system.

     4.20.101.5.3.           Any person violating any part of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.101.6 Applications to be submitted to city for initial franchise.
     An application for an initial cable service provider franchise shall be submitted to the city, on a written application form furnished by the city, and in accordance with the procedures, schedule and non-refundable application fee established by the city to determine the legal, financial, technical, character and other qualifications of an applicant to provide cable service. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.101.7 Franchisee to obtain all permits, licenses required within 90 days.
     Within ninety (90) days after the effective date of a franchise, a franchisee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain, at its own costs all necessary permits, licenses, and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business including, but not limited to, any business license, utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of cable systems, or their associated microwave transmission facilities. A franchisee shall have such permits and licenses prior to the commencement of its cable system operations. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.101.8 Franchisee to comply with nondiscrimination and affirmative action requirements.
     A franchisee shall comply with all applicable nondiscrimination and affirmative action requirements of any laws, regulations, and executive directives of the state of California. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.101.9 Franchisee shall not discriminate in its employment practices.
     A franchisee shall not discriminate in its employment practices against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, age, or disability. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

 

4.20.101.10 Franchisee shall annually submit copy of its EEO filing with the FCC.
     Immediately after the effective date of a franchise agreement, if available, and annually thereafter, a franchisee shall submit to the city a copy of its FCC Form 395-A, “Annual Employment Report,” or any equivalent form. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.101.11 Franchisee shall provide opportunities for small business, minority business, and women-owned businesses as required by law.
     To the extent required by law, a franchisee shall provide opportunities for small businesses, minority-owned businesses, and women-owned businesses to participate in procurement under the agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.101.12 Use of real property, city support.
     4.20.101.12.1.         The city has no obligation to provide any property or support for the franchisee’s cable system other than that specified in the agreement. The city may grant the franchisee nonexclusive use of its utility poles, rights-of-way, duct space, head end space and antenna support structures subject to such terms and conditions as the city may impose. No warranties are expressed or implied as to the suitability of either the facilities or any existing cable system equipment. Rights to non-city owned property, such as easements over private, state or federally-owned lands required to install and to operate the system shall be acquired at the expense and solely through the efforts of the franchisee or its agents. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.101.13 Complimentary installation and basic service.
     Cable service providers shall provide complimentary installation and basic cable and other communication services to locations specified in the renewal proposal or agreement, if any. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.101.14 Safety requirements.
     The franchisee agrees to conduct all of its construction, installation and maintenance activities in accordance with the health, fire and safety regulations and policies of the city and all other applicable local, state and federal statutes and regulations. The applicable regulations shall be made available for review in the office of the cable administrator. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.101.15 Allowed systems.
     4.20.101.15.1.         The use of privately-owned systems: The city or any subscriber may use a privately owned television or radio reception systems for reception of any signals without interference from the franchisee. This includes DBS, STV, MDS or other alternative services. Nothing in the ordinance codified in this title shall prevent subscribers from purchasing their own cable system converters.

     4.20.101.15.2.         Existing city-owned cable, systems: Existing city-owned cable systems are not affected by the ordinance codified in this title nor does the ordinance codified in this title preclude the installation and operation of future city or privately-owned and franchised cable TV systems. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.101.16 Activity regulations.
     The franchisee and all employees will obey all city regulations while on city property. The city will supply, upon written request, a copy of applicable regulations. The city will enforce regulations, regardless of whether or not the franchisee has requested copies. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.101.17 Disclaimer of official sanction.
     In soliciting subscribers following execution of the ordinance codified in this title, the franchisee shall under no circumstances purport to offer its services as an officially sanctioned or recommended benefit or in any other way convey the impression that subscription is anything other than totally voluntary on behalf of subscribers. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article III Definitions.
4.20.102 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with their context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined herein shall be defined in accordance with Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and all subsequent amendments. Where words are not defined as outlined above, words shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.1 A/B switch.
     “A/B switch” shall mean a device, which permits a cable subscriber to select one of two incoming cable television, recorded, or off-the-air television signals for output to a recording device and/or television. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.2 Access channel.
     “Access channel” shall mean a channel dedicated in whole or in part for programming which is not originated or controlled by a cable service provider, including but not limited to public, educational or governmental access programming (sometimes referred to as “PEG” access) or leased access programming. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.3 Access corporation.
     “Access corporation” shall mean the nonprofit corporation or other entity which may be designated by the city and operated for the purpose of coordinating the provision of public, educational, and governmental access programming and providing other services within a franchise area. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.4 Agreement or franchise agreement.
     “Agreement” or “franchise agreement” shall mean a separate contractual agreement that is entered into between the city and a franchisee, together with the appendices thereto to the extent expressly incorporated therein, and all amendments or renewals thereof. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.5 Alternative administrative charge.
     “Alternative administrative charge” means a charge used in place of a franchise fee. An alternative administrative charge is not based on a cable service provider’s gross annual revenues (as is the case in a franchise fee), but rather is based on the cost to administer and enforce the ordinance codified in this title. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.6 Auxiliary equipment.
     “Auxiliary equipment” means equipment supplied by the cable service provider (such as a converter, remote control unit or device, digital tuner, or input selector switch), which is used to enhance or assist in the reception or provision of cable service. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.7 Basic service.
     “Basic service” shall mean any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and PEG access channels. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.8 Cable act.
     “Cable act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. §521 et seq., as from time to time amended. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.9 Cable administrator.
     “Cable administrator” shall mean the individual appointed by the city council who will serve as the technical and administrative liaison or representative of the city with subscribers in matters dealing with customer service and repair operations, adequacy of signal quality, service areas, reception problems, compliance, performance reviews, etc., and rate increase requests, if applicable, and all other matters touching or concerning the administration of franchise agreements granted pursuant to the ordinance codified in this title. Pursuant to the ordinance codified in this title, the cable administrator is designated as the point of contact for all matters relating to a franchise or a franchisee. It shall be presumed that the cable administrator is acting as the city’s designee and under the city’s direction. The city manager (or designee) shall serve as cable administrator unless a different appointment is made by the city council. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.10 Cable operator.
     “Cable operator” means a cable service provider or any person or group of persons who provides cable television or video subscription service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates own a significant interest in such cable system; or otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.11 Channel.
     “Channel” or “cable channel” means a portion of the electronic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel (television channel is defined by the FCC by regulation). “Channel” shall also mean discrete segments of bandwidth reserved for cable services, data transmissions or other communications services, but not including video signals. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.12 City.
     “City” shall mean the geographic areas within the boundaries of the city of Yucaipa, San Bernardino County, California.

     “City” shall also mean that person or persons designated and authorized by the city council to act on behalf of the residents of the city of Yucaipa in connection with this ordinance and any franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.13 Collection charge.
     “Collection charge” means a charge or fee imposed on a customer by a cable service provider for such provider’s efforts at collecting, or attempting to collect, a past due and/or delinquent account. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.14 Complaint.
     “Complaint” shall mean any verbal or written allegation or assertion of dissatisfaction with the cable services, other communications services or operations of the franchisee, including but not limited to issues of signal quality and customer billing, made by a person to either the franchisee or the cable administrator, which requests or requires (i) corrective action by the franchisee to its cable services, other communications services or operations over the cable system or to the system or any portion thereof; or (ii) any subsequent investigation, research and/or service call (such as delivery or exchange of a converter box) to be undertaken by a franchisee, its employees or agents. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.15 Construction.
     The terms “completion of construction or reconstruction,” “complete system construction,” “satisfactorily complete,” “upgrade,” “rebuild,” and “fully activate” apply to both initial cable system construction as well as any upgrade or rebuild of an existing cable system and shall mean that in each instance that strand has been put up and all necessary wiring (including trunk and feeder cable) has been lashed; or, for underground construction, that all cable has been laid and trenches refilled, all road surfaces restored and landscaping restored; that, all amplifier housings and modules have been installed (including modules for return path signals if proposed); that primary and backup power supplies have been installed and operated properly, and all bonding and grounding has been completed; that construction or reconstruction of the headwinds or hubs has been completed and all necessary processing equipment has been installed; and that any and all other construction or reconstruction necessary for the cable system to deliver cable service to subscribers has been completed, including cable drops to each and every subscriber unit passed pursuant to the plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the city. Before connecting new or technically upgraded service to any subscriber, franchisee shall satisfactorily complete proof of performance tests on each new or technically upgraded segment of the cable system in compliance with the FCC’s technical standards. Cable services provided to segments of less than the entire cable system will be activated when the proof is completed. Construction, reconstruction, upgrade, or rebuild of any segment or of the entire cable system will not be considered complete until proof of performance tests have been conducted on such segment (or in the case of the entire cable system, on all segments of the cable system) in accordance with the signal quality requirements of the FCC’s technical standards and any performance characteristics of such segment which are found not to comply with such technical standards have been corrected. The term “completion of construction or reconstruction” does not include marketing and installation of subscriber service. Construction, reconstruction, upgrade, or rebuild is not complete until every customer in any construction, reconstruction, upgrade, or rebuild area is capable of receiving cable services. Construction, reconstruction, upgrade, or rebuild is not complete until the wreck-out of the old segments of the cable system has been completed to the satisfaction of the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.16 Consumer.
     See “Subscriber.”

(Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.17 Council.
     See “Cable service provider oversight council.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.18 CSR.
     “CSR” shall mean customer service representative. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.19 Customer.
     See “Subscriber.”

(Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.20 Day.
     For purposes of the ordinance codified in this title, whenever reference is made to a number of days without qualification as to business or calendar days, such number of days shall be deemed to be calendar days. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.21 FCC.
     “FCC” shall mean the Federal Communications Commission, its successor or such other administrative agency or agencies to which its duties are transferred. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.22 FCC rules.
     “FCC rules” shall mean the rules and regulations adopted from time to time by the Federal Communications Commission pursuant to the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, or other federal law. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.23 FCC technical standards.
     “FCC technical standards” shall mean the technical standards of the Federal Communications Commission as set forth in 47 C.F.R. Part 76, Subpart K [Technical Standards] of the FCC’s Rules, 76 C.F.R. Sections 76.601 et seq., as from time to time amended. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.24 Franchisee or franchisees.
     “Franchisee” or “franchisees” shall mean a cable service provider that has been granted a valid franchise agreement by the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.25 Franchise administrator.
     See “cable administrator.”

(Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.26 Gross revenues.
     “Gross revenues” shall mean and include all amounts which are actually received, directly or, indirectly, by a franchisee from or in connection with the operation of the cable system, or any part of the system, located within the borders of the city and utilizing city streets and rights-of-way, or any other communications services, including but not limited to:

     4.20.102.26.1.         Any revenue (including franchise fees) received from subscribers for cable service, including but not limited to revenue for basic service, tier service, additional outlets, audio service, commercial service, premium service, pay-per-view service and related per-event services, or data transmission services, or for the distribution of any cable service over the system;

     4.20.102.26.2.         Any revenue received from subscribers for installation, change in service and reconnection charges and similar fees;

     4.20.102.26.3          Any revenue received from subscribers for converters, remote controls, modems, or other equipment leased or rented to subscribers in connection with the delivery of cable services to such subscribers;

     4.20.102.26.4.         Any revenue received from subscribers for service charges and late fees attributable to delinquent accounts;

     4.20.102.26.5.         Any revenue received from service related activities, including but not limited to revenue received from leased access programmers and other users, and revenue derived from or equivalent to the fair market value of trades and barters;

     4.20.102.26.6.         Any revenue, payment or consideration collected by the franchisee from subscribers for direct payment to a third party as a cost of doing business (including, but not limited to, copyright fees, program license fees and subscriber payments for PEG access, but excluding payments for leased access programming where franchisee serves as a collection agent and passes through leased access fees directly to leased access programmers without deducting franchisee’s billing fees), and such revenue, payment or consideration shall be included in, and not deducted from, the total gross revenue figure on which franchise fees are to be paid;

     4.20.102.26.7.         Any revenue of any other person which is derived directly or indirectly from or in connection with the operation of a cable system within the city, including but not limited to revenue or compensation paid directly by such cable system subscribers or users, advertisers on such cable system or others:

     4.20.102.26.7.1.       To the suppliers of programming on such cable system,

     4.20.102.26.7.2.       To home shopping services in connection with the sales of products or services derived from programming over such a cable system, or

     4.20.102.26.7.3.       To leased access programmers for programming transmitted over such a cable system; provided, however, that the franchisee shall not be required to collect, and shall not be liable for, franchise fees based on such revenues from such other persons to the extent that such revenues are not collected by the franchisee, or, if they are collected by the franchisee such revenues are retransmitted directly to such other persons without the deduction of any billing or other fees by the franchisee;

     4.20.102.26.8.         Any revenue received by the franchisee from the delivery of other communications services over its cable system, including without limitation telephony, data transmission, interactive services and other broadband information services, to the extent that the inclusion of such revenue is not prohibited by law; and

     4.20.102.26.9.         Any revenue of any other person which is derived or received with the purpose or effect of excluding such revenue from the computation of the franchise fee otherwise due and payable to the city in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the franchisee’s franchise agreement;

     4.20.102.26.10.        There shall be deducted from gross revenues:

     4.20.102.26.10.1. Bad debts written off by franchisee in the normal course of its business, provided, however, that bad debt recoveries shall be included in gross revenue; and

     4.20.102.26.10.2. Refunds made to subscribers or other third parties;

     4.20.102.26.11. Gross revenues shall not include any revenue specifically exempted by the cable act, or by federal or state judicial ruling, or by specific FCC ruling. For any revenue the cable service provider seeks to exempt, the cable service provider shall have the burden of proving to the city that any revenue that is excluded from the computation is specifically exempted by the cable act or by federal or state judicial ruling, or by specific FCC ruling. In addition to the above, gross revenues shall also not include the following:

     4.20.102.26.11.1. Any tax of general applicability imposed upon a franchisee or upon the franchisee’s subscribers by state, federal or any other governmental entity and required to be collected by the franchisee and passed through to the taxing entity (including, but not limited to, user taxes, service taxes and communications taxes), provided such taxes are identified as a separate line item on subscriber statements;

     4.20.102.26.11.2. Any revenue received by the franchisee from any person for services not attributable in whole or in part to its cable system or to other communications services serving the city, including, but not limited to, revenue derived from electronics retailing, mall marketing or telephone answering services which do not rely upon the use of the franchisee’s cable system or other communications services, delivery services and video production services for programming or other communications services which are not transmitted over or used in connection with the system; and

     4.20.102.26.11.3. Any foregone revenue which franchisee chooses not to receive in exchange for its provision of free or reduced cost cable services or other communications services to any person, including without limitation employees of the franchisee, city institutions or other institutions designated in a franchise agreement; provided, however, that such foregone revenue which franchisee chooses not to receive in exchange for trades, barters, services or other items of value shall be included in gross revenues.

     4.20.102.26.12. In computing gross revenues from sources other than a franchisee’s subscribers, including, but not limited to, revenue derived from the sale of advertising, lists of the names and addresses of franchisee’s subscribers, home shopping services, guide sales, or the lease of channel capacity over its cable system, which revenue is attributable both to the operation of franchisee’s cable system inside the city and in areas outside the city, the aggregate revenue received by franchisee from such other sources shall first be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the number of franchisee’s subscribers in the city as of the last day of such period and the denominator of which shall be the number of subscribers within all areas served by franchisee as of the last day of such period, and then assessed for franchise fees. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.27 Initial activation or provision of cable service.
     “Initial activation of cable service,” or “initially providing cable service” shall mean with respect to a particular segment, group of segments or the entire cable system, as the case may be, that all proposed cable services and cable system capabilities as stated in a franchise agreement are available and/or in place, construction or reconstruction has been completed (see above definition of construction), and the completed segment or segments in question or the entire cable system, as the case may be, are capable of delivering cable services to every subscriber in every system segment pursuant to the plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.28 Installation charge or connection fee.
     “Installation charge” or “connection fee” means that charge, if any, imposed on a subscriber by the cable system provider for initial hookup, reconnect or relocation of equipment necessary to obtain or use cable services or other communication services. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.29 Reserved.
 

4.20.102.30 Ordinance.
     “Ordinance” shall mean this cable service provider ordinance including any subsequent amendments, updates, or revisions. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.31 Internet.
     The interconnected network of networks that grew from the original ARPANET experiment and the NSF-subsidized internet. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.32 Internet.
     An interconnection of networks joined by routers, bridges and switches that provides end-to-end communications or data transmissions. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.33 Internet-access.
     The provision of access between a subscriber and the internet. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.34 Internet-service.
     The provision of internet access plus value added services such as electronic mail boxes, WWW servers, file space, domain name service, etc. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.35 Leased access channel.
     “Leased access channel” shall mean the channel capacity a franchisee is required to designate for commercial use by persons unaffiliated with the franchisee in accordance with the provisions of Section 612 of the Communications Act of 1934. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.36 Local origination programming.
     “Local origination programming” shall mean programming produced locally by a franchisee, or on behalf of a franchisee at the franchisee’s request, on subjects of local interest and concern. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.37 Cable system.
     4.20102.37.1.          “Cable system” or “system” shall mean a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and/or return paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable services and other communications services, which are provided to multiple subscribers within a community; any and all reception, distribution and amplification equipment including but not limited to a head end antenna complex and related equipment; a system of microwave retransmitters, coaxial and/or fiber optic cables (including trunk, distribution and drop cables) or other electrical conductors; signal amplifiers; program origination and cable casting facilities; and other equipment utilized by a private operator to receive, to transmit or to retransmit television satellite or radio signals to subscribers who shall receive such signals in a fashion other than off-the-air.

     4.20.102.37.2.         “Cable system” does not include:

     4.20.102.37.2.1. A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; or

     4.20.102.37.2.2. A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or

     4.20.102.37.2.3. Any facility of an electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.38 Cable casting.
     “Cable casting” shall mean the transmission of programming carried on a cable system, exclusive of off-the-air broadcast signals, whether originated by the franchisee or any other party. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.39 Cable services.
     “Cable services” shall mean the transmission to and/or from subscribers of video programming and other programming services, and to the extent not prohibited by state or federal law, interactive services and other broadband information services (information that the franchisee makes available to subscribers generally) together with subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such programming; but “cable services” shall not include “other communications services” as defined in this section. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.40 Cable service provider.
     “Cable service provider” shall mean any person who provides cable services. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.41 Cable service provider oversight council.
     “Cable Service provider oversight council” shall mean the city council of the city for the purpose of providing a forum for due process to franchisees subject to adverse actions by the cable administrator and reviewing franchisee appeals of cable administrator decisions. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.42 Normal operating conditions.
     “Normal operating conditions” shall mean those service conditions which are within the control of the cable service provider. Those conditions which are not within the control of the cable service provider include, but are not limited to, strikes, labor strife, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, explosions, acts of public enemies, severe or unusual weather conditions, natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides and fires, large scale power or communication failures which exceed backup power supply capabilities, embargoes, quotas, rationing, material shortages, inability to secure materials or services or equipment from normal sources of supply following best efforts to do so. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable service provider include, but are not limited to, financial considerations, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system, or loss of standby power for the period of time of operation for which the standby power unit is rated or designated to perform by the manufacturer. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.43 Other communications services.
     “Other communications services” shall mean those services provided by the franchisee which do not involve the transmission to subscribers of video programming or other cable services as defined in this section, which other communications services shall include, but not be limited to, telephony, data transmission and voice services. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.44 Person.
     “Person” shall mean an individual, corporation or other entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but not the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.45 Proposal or application.
     “Proposal” or “application” shall mean a writing by a cable service provider to provide cable services to residents, businesses, industries, and institutions within the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.46 Property of franchisee.
     “Property of franchisee” shall mean all the tangible or intangible property owned, installed, rented, leased or used by a franchisee in the conduct of cable system business in the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.47 Scheduled outages.
     “Scheduled outages”, means any planned service interruption to one or more channels of any duration that has been requested in writing by the franchisee at least thirty (30) days in advance and has been approved in writing by the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.48 Section.
 

4.20.102.49 Service.
     “Service” means any cable service, whether or not originated by a franchisee, which are offered to any subscriber and are distributed or made available over the cable system or any part of that system. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.50 Service interruption or signal interruption.
     “Service interruption” or “signal interruption” shall mean the complete loss of cable service to any three or more subscribers (when normal operating conditions exist), including the loss of picture, sound, voice, or data on one or more channels regardless of the duration. Furthermore, failure to meet FCC technical standards at any location within the city shall also be deemed a service interruption during such time period where the cable service fails to comply with FCC technical standards. Any series of two or more service interruptions occurring within any twenty-four (24) consecutive hour period shall be deemed as a single, continuous complete loss of cable service. Any scheduled outage is not a service interruption. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.51 Service related activity.
     “Service related activity” means any activity or function for which a franchisee receives revenue from any user or person other than a subscriber and which is directly associated with the operation of the cable system, or the production or distribution of any cable service over the cable system, including, but not limited to, revenues from advertising sales, home shopping commissions, the sales of products or services, program guide payments, payments from the lessors or purchasers of leased access channel capacity, payments for studio and other facilities or equipment rentals, billing services, audience promotions or the installation, lease, rental or sale of equipment, provided that such revenues are derived from cable programming services transmitted over or used in connection with the cable system serving the city. “Service related activity” does not include a franchisee’s acting as a collection agent for leased access programmers in which it receives revenues from subscribers and retransmits such revenues directly to leased access programmers without deducting franchisee’s billing fees. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.52 Standard service drop.
     “Standard service drop” shall mean a wiring connection, either aerial or underground, that is made available to all subscribers at a uniform installation fee or hourly service charge. A standard service drop shall require no more than a one hundred fifty (150) foot aerial drop or a one hundred (100) foot underground drop measured from the nearest point of a subscriber’s residence or place of business to the nearest active tap on the cable system and shall involve one outlet and standard materials. A standard drop shall exclude custom installation work, including specific subscriber requested work that requires non-standard inventory or cable routing requiring construction methods exceeding reasonable underground or aerial work. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.53 State-of-the-art.
     “State-of-the-art” shall mean a cable system with production or other facilities, technical performance, capacity, equipment, components, and construction techniques equal to that which has been developed and demonstrated by existing cable television system operators and reputable equipment suppliers to be workable in the field, which is more modern and technologically advanced than generally in use, which is reasonably available and feasible to install, which is in use by at least two other cable systems in comparable areas of equivalent population, which customers have paid for in at least two other comparable markets for at least a year, which is based on a twelve (12) percent projected rate of return on investment derived from the additional or upgraded network capacity, and which investment can be amortized over a period of time which is both reasonable and customary in the cable television industry. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.54 Street or city street.
     “Street,” “city street” or “city right-of-way” shall mean only a street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, city service easement or drive which is owned by the city in fee or to which the city has been granted an easement or which has been dedicated for street purposes or other compatible uses, and with respect to which, and to the extent that, the city has a right to grant the use of the surface of, and space above and below, in connection with a franchise for a cable system or other compatible uses. For purposes of this definition, “other compatible uses” shall include easements dedicated for, or utilized in connection with, telephone, communications, electric, gas, water, sewer, cable television and similar purposes. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.55 Subscriber.
     “Subscriber” shall mean any customer, consumer, person, organization, or other person lawfully receiving or otherwise utilizing cable services delivered over the cable system of the franchisee. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.56 Two-way communication.
     “Two-way communication” shall mean the transmission of telecommunications signals, including without limitation video, audio, voice and data signals, from subscriber locations or other points throughout the cable system back to the cable system’s control center or head-end facility as well as transmission of video, audio, voice, and data signals from such control center or head-end facility to subscriber locations. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.57 Rate or user fee.
     “Rate” or “user fee” means the periodic service charge paid by a subscriber to the franchisee for cable system services or other communication services. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.58 User.
     “User” shall mean a party utilizing a cable system channel for purposes of production or transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with receipt in a subscriber capacity. A subscriber may be a user of the system when originating any transmission of any type which travels on the cable system. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.102.59 Miscellaneous terms.
     The terms “will be available,” “will be equipped,” “will use,” “will be designed,” “will perform,” “will be utilized,” “will permit,” “will allow,” “will be activated,” “will be initially connected,” “will be capable,”

“will provide,” “will include,” “will employ,” “will be established,” “will be able,” “will be implemented,” “will be delivered,” “will utilize,” and other similar uses of terms of a franchisee’s proposal denoting the activation of cable service (which proposal has been incorporated by reference in the franchisee’s franchise agreement) shall be interpreted to mean delivery or accomplishment at a date no later than the initial activation of cable service as defined in the ordinance codified in this title unless otherwise expressly and clearly stated or qualified in a franchisee’s proposal to mean a wore specific or different time.

     Approvals, consents, agreements, requirements, judgments or satisfactions shall, unless otherwise expressly provided in the ordinance codified in this title or the franchisee’s franchise agreement, not be unreasonably withheld by the person holding the right to approve, consent or agree or make a requirement or judgment or who must be satisfied. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article IV Disputes.
4.20.103.1 Cable administrator decisions.
     4.20.103.1.1            At the cable administrator’s election, the cable administrator or designee may hear and arbitrate all disputes between any franchisee and its subscribers. The decision of the cable administrator in such dispute shall be non-binding and shall not be deemed to limit any right or remedy the franchisee or subscriber may otherwise have. The cable administrator’s decision as to a dispute between a franchisee and its subscribers may not be appealed to the council.

     4.20.103.1.2            The cable administrator shall hear and decide all disputes concerning questions of fact or of the interpretation and enforcement of the ordinance codified in this title or of the agreement. The cable administrator shall put his or her decision in writing and mail a copy to the franchisee within thirty (30) days of reaching such decision. The franchisee may appeal the cable administrator’s decision to the council, on forms to be provided for that purpose by the city clerk. The franchisee shall provide the factual information and the theories supporting the franchisee’s position. The city clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the council for the purpose of hearing such appeal. Such public hearing shall be scheduled no less than thirty (30) days, nor any more than forty-five (45) days, from the date of the franchisee’s filing of its written appeal, unless there is no council meeting within such thirty (30) to forty-five (45) day period, in which case the public hearing shall be scheduled at the first regularly scheduled council meeting following the forty-five (45) day period. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.103.2 Council review of appeals from cable administrator’s decisions.
     4.20.103.2.1.           At the time appointed therefor, the council shall hear the appeal of the franchisee. The council shall allow the franchisee to present evidence and testimony on its behalf but the formal rules of evidence shall not be applicable to such evidence. A transcript of the hearing may be made either electronically, stenographically or videographically. The party desiring a copy of the transcript shall bear the cost of making and/or coping the transcript.

     4.20.103.2.2.           Upon hearing all of the evidence and testimony presented concerning the appeal, the council shall issue its decision on appeal. The council may either uphold the decision of the cable administrator in its entirety, may overrule or modify such decision in whole or in part or may refer the matter back to the cable administrator for further proceedings.

     4.20.103.2.3.           The council’s decision shall be final, subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 or, if applicable, federal statute. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article V Duration of Franchise and Renewals.
4.20.104.1 Term of franchise to be specified in franchise agreement.
     The duration of the rights, privileges and authorizations granted in a cable service provider franchise agreement shall be specified in each franchisee’s franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.104.2 Term of cable system franchise.
     Cable service provider franchise agreements shall continue in effect until expiration, termination, or revocation including any extensions thereto. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.104.3 City has right to grant or deny franchise renewal.
     The city shall have the right to grant or deny renewal of a franchise in accordance with the provisions of federal, state, and local law, including but not limited to Section 626 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. Section 546), if applicable, in its current or in any future amended form, or by procedures subsequently adopted by congress, or the city in accordance with federal law. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.104.4 Renegotiation may be done at any time.
     At any time prior to the expiration of the term of a franchise, the city and a franchisee may agree to renegotiate all or any part of an agreement. As a result of such renegotiation, the city may grant a renewal or a franchise for a specified period, subject to the terms and conditions as may be agreed upon by the patties. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.104.5 Franchise renewal.
     Renewal shall be conducted in accordance with the Cable Act. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.104.6 Franchise to be terminated if city decides not to grant a renewal.
     In the event that (i) the city denies a renewal of a franchise at expiration of the term of an agreement pursuant to a specific finding of non-renewal, the franchise term is not temporarily extended, and the franchisee has exhausted any good faith rights of appeal under federal, state or local law, or (ii) the agreement is terminated or the cable system abandoned prior to the expiration of the term thereof pursuant to the ordinance codified in this title, and, in either such case, the franchise has not been transferred to another person, then the franchise granted thereunder shall be revoked and terminated, and all rights of the city and a franchisee to the system or any part thereof, shall be determined as provided in the ordinance codified in this title; provided, however, that the franchisee’s franchise shall remain in effect during the time in which a renewal or termination proceeding or appeal therefrom remains pending. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.104.7 Reimbursement for costs associated with renewal.
     Any franchise agreement for renewal of a franchise may a provision providing for the franchisee’s payment to the city of an amount in consideration for the renewal of the franchise. Such amount may be used by the city to wholly or partially offset the city’s costs and expenses incurred in the renewal process. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article VI Effective Date.
4.20.105 Effective date.
     The ordinance codified in this title shall become effective in accordance with the California Government Code. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article VII Liability Upon Expiration, Termination, Revocation or Nonrenewal.
4.20.106.1 Expiration, termination, revocation or nonrenewal of franchise agreement.
     The city assumes no liability whatsoever to the franchisee for recovery of fixed costs required to install the cable system and to put it into operation or for any other expenses incurred by the franchisee as a result of the expiration, termination, revocation or nonrenewal of a franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.106.2 Permission for franchisee to sell cable system.
     Where negotiations for the award of a new cable system franchise agreement are made necessary by the expiration, termination, revocation or nonrenewal of a franchise agreement, the city shall, where feasible and where the equipment of the cable system has continued utility to the city, permit the incumbent franchisee to offer its installed facilities for sale to those who desire to submit proposals for a new cable system franchise agreement. Nothing contained herein shall in any way obligate the city to purchase or effectuate a sale for the benefit of the franchisee. In lieu of the above, the franchisee shall remove this equipment from the city as required in the section entitled “removal of facilities.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.106.3 Removal of facilities.
     The city reserves the right to require the franchisee to remove from the city at the franchisee’s expense, all equipment, facilities and materials of the cable system, and to restore affected areas to their former condition, within ninety (90) calendar days after expiration, termination, revocation, or nonrenewal of this franchise agreement and the final adjudication of any subsequent appeal thereof. In the event the franchisee shall fail to remove the aforesaid, it shall be deemed to have been abandoned by the franchisee. The franchisee shall reimburse the city for the cost, if any, incurred by the city in effecting removal or otherwise restoring its property to its former condition. Abandoned materials become the property of the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article VIII Protection of City Against Liability.
4.20.107.1 The franchisee to indemnify the city.
     4.20.107.1.1.           The franchisee hereby agrees to indemnify the city against any and all expenses, taxes, liabilities, and charges of whatever kind or nature that may arise as a result of the activities of the franchisee, whether said liability be tortious, contractual or other. The franchisee also agrees that it will, at its expense, repair or replace, at the city’s option, any city property that it may damage or destroy. If the franchisee fails or refuses to repair damaged city property in a timely manner, the city may effect repairs through other means and impose the costs of the repairs on the franchisee.

     4.20.107.1.2.           A franchisee by executing a franchise agreement shall protect, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, volunteers and employees against and from any and all alleged claims, demands, actions, suits, liabilities and judgments of every kind and nature and regardless of the merit of the same, arising out of or related to, and to the extent proximately caused by, the acts or omissions of the franchisee, its employees, contractors, volunteers or agents.

     4.20.107.1.3.           This indemnification shall include, without affecting the scope of the foregoing, and without being limited to the following: alleged claims, demands, actions, suits, liabilities and judgments arising in tort, contracts, infringements of constitutional rights, unfair competition, any infringement or violation, or alleged infringement or violation, of any copyright, whether common law or statutory, violations of statutes, ordinances or regulations, or failure of franchisee to secure consents from owners, authorizing distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by franchisee’s cable system.

     4.20.107.1.4.           The city shall make reasonable efforts to provide a franchisee with written notice within ten (10), but within not later than fifteen (15), days after being served with any lawsuit for which indemnification may be sought under this section.

     4.20.107.1.5.           The expiration or termination of a franchise agreement shall not relieve or exonerate the franchisee from its obligations to indemnify and defend the city pursuant to this Section 4.20.107.1 and Section 4.20.107.2, such obligations survive the expiration or termination of such franchise agreement as to acts, errors, or omissions of the franchisee occurring prior to such expiration or termination. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.107.2 Duty to defend.
     4.20.107.2.1.           Franchisee shall, upon demand of the city, or any other such indemnitee, appear in and defend the city, its officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, volunteers and employees against and from any and all alleged claims, demands, actions, suits, or other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative or otherwise, of every kind and nature and regardless of the merit of the same (collectively, “Liabilities”), arising out of or related to and to the extent proximately caused by the acts or omissions of the franchisee, its employees, contractors, volunteers or agents, regardless of any claimed or actual negligence or conduct of the city or any such indemnitee. The foregoing duty does not extend to liabilities based on the city’s sole negligence, as finally adjudicated.

     4.20.107.2.2.           Where franchisee has assumed the defense in any such proceeding, it may control the proceedings at issue, and the city may participate in such proceedings with counsel of its own choosing. The city will be responsible for all costs and expenses of such counsel, as well as for the city’s accounting fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per diem expenses, and travel and living expenses.

     4.20.107.2.3.           Should the franchisee fail to undertake the defense of such claim following demand of the city or any other such indemnitee, the city may undertake the defense of such claim, in which case the franchisee shall reimburse the city and any other indemnitee for any costs and expenses incurred in defending against such claim or demand or action, including any attorneys’ fees, accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per diem expenses, and travel and living expenses. The foregoing obligations shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by the amount of any bond, policy of insurance, deposit, undertaking or other security required hereunder.

     4.20.107.2.4.           The franchisee may settle, compromise, adjust or otherwise dispose of any such claim, provided that the franchisee shall not settle, compromise, adjust or dispose of any such claim which would impose any obligation upon the city, its officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, volunteers and employees without the city’s prior written consent, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.

     4.20.107.2.5.           Should the franchisee fail to defend any such claim, the city may settle, compromise, adjust or otherwise dispose of such claim on such terms as it may deem appropriate. The franchisee shall promptly reimburse the city for the amount of all settlement payments and expenses, legal and otherwise, incurred by the city in connection with the defense or settlement of such claim. If no settlement of such claim is made, then the franchisee shall satisfy any judgment rendered with respect to such claim before the city is required to do so, and pay all expense, legal or otherwise, incurred by the city in the defense of such claim.

     4.20.107.2.6.           Except as specifically set forth above, the city shall not have the right to settle, compromise, adjust or dispose of any claim without the approval of the franchisee, provided that if the franchisee disapproves of such settlement, then it must assume the defense of such claim and reimburse the city for all expenses of the city to the date of assumption.

     4.20.107.2.7.           If the city enters into any settlement, compromise, adjustment or other disposition of a claim for which indemnification is sought under the provisions of this section and the franchisee has not provided its approval of such settlement, the franchisee will be discharged from its obligations of indemnification under this section.

     4.20.107.2.8.           The party proposing a settlement, compromise, adjustment or other disposition of a claim shall give the other party ten days prior written notice of the proposed settlement, compromise, adjustment or other disposition for which indemnification is sought by the city under the provisions of this section. The party to whom such notice is given shall be required to accept, reject or modify the proposed settlement within such ten day period.

     4.20.107.2.9.           If the city has assumed its own defense in any action in which the city and the franchisee are co-defendants, then the franchisee shall reimburse the city, from the proceeds of any damage award received by the franchisee and after franchisee’s deduction therefrom of franchisee’s legal costs and expenses with respect to such action, for the attorneys’ fees, costs and other litigation expenses incurred by the city in its self-defense. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.107.3 Required insurance.
     4.20.107.3.1.           Within twenty (20) calendar days after receiving notice of award of a cable service provider franchise agreement or notice of renewal of a cable service provider franchise insurance policies. The franchisee shall procure and maintain during the entire period of the minimum insurance coverage’s:

 

 

 

 

Type of insurance

Per person

Per accident

Property

Comprehensive general liability

$1,000,000

$3,000,000

$1,000,000

Auto liability

$1,000,000

per occurrence

 

Workers’ compensation

As required by state law

 

 

Other

As required by state law

 

 

Umbrella liability

$5,000,000

 

 

 

 

 

 

     4.20.107.3.2.           The cable administrator shall be noted on the endorsements and shall receive revised copies as available as well as thirty (30) day minimum advance written notice from the insurance carrier regarding any intent to cancel or materially change terms or coverage. Policies shall be “occurrence,” not “claims made” type and shall be non-contributing with any insurance the city may elect to obtain. Coverage shall be obtained from carriers admitted to do business in California and holding a current best’s rating of A+ VII or better. Failure to maintain the required insurance or to comply with the requirements of this section shall be a violation of the ordinance codified in this title and subject the franchise agreement to termination. In addition to the right to terminate a franchise agreement for failure to maintain the required insurance, the city shall have the right to purchase insurance, sufficient to meet the requirements of this section. The franchisee shall be responsible for reimbursing the city the cost of the insurance and any additional administrative costs. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.107.4 Comprehensive general and automobile liability insurance.
     Upon acceptance of a franchise, the franchisee shall file with the cable administrator and shall thereafter during the entire term of such franchise maintain in full force and effect at its own expense an insurance policy or policies which shall insure franchisee and provide primary coverage for the city, its officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, volunteers and employees, against loss or liability for personal injury, death, property damage (both automobile and non-automobile cause), or other damages. Such policy or policies shall include insurance against damages from copyright infringement (common law or statutory) and a failure of franchisee to secure trademark rights, occasioned by any activity or operation of franchisee under a cable service provider franchise, and regardless of any claimed or actual activities of the city, its officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, volunteers and employees. The city may waive the requirement for insurance from one or more perils mentioned in the last preceding sentence upon a finding that such insurance cannot be procured or cannot be procured at a reasonable cost, and in connection therewith may reduce the otherwise required limits on coverage hereafter set forth. However, if such insurance cannot be procured, the franchisee’s insurance broker or agent must document its unavailability by showing a good faith effort to obtain such insurance. Such policy shall contain a cross-liability endorsement. Such policy or policies shall be issued by a company authorized to transact insurance business in the state of California and shall have a rating of “A+ VII” or better as set forth in the most current edition of “Bests Insurance Guide,” with minimum limits of coverage in the amounts set forth in Section 4.20.107.3.1, for bodily injury and property damage, including coverage for comprehensive general liability, contractual liability, owned automobiles, non-owned automobiles, and for-hire automobiles. Such limits of coverage may be subject to reasonable deductibles.

     The policy or policies shall name the city, its officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, volunteers and employees as additional insurers and contain a provision that a written notice of any cancellation or modification that relates to a diminution in the scope of coverage under this section or reduction in the limits of coverage of said policy shall be delivered to the cable administrator thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date thereof. The franchisee shall provide the cable administrator with certificates of insurance and any and all amendments thereto, including, but not limited to, all endorsements, exclusions and provisos. The cable administrator shall review such certificates of insurance and shall approve the same if the terms and conditions of the insurance represented thereby are consistent with the requirements of this section. If any such certificates of insurance and amendments, endorsements, exclusions and provisos thereto fall to evidence the coverage required under this section, the franchisee shall take such action as shall be necessary to secure such coverage within ten business days following receipt of notice thereof from the city. The city reserves the right to reject a specific policy if its terms, definitions and exclusions prohibit or diminish coverage and liability as required by the ordinance codified in this title. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.107.5 Required insurance against liability for workers’ compensation.
     Upon acceptance of a franchise, and annually thereafter, a franchisee shall provide the cable administrator with evidence that it has in effect employer liability insurance or workers’ compensation coverage and/or has undertaken self-insurance in accordance with the provisions of applicable state law and is maintaining a policy or policies of employers’ liability insurance with no less than the legal minimum limits. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.107.6 City reserves right to annually review and change amounts and types of insurance coverage.
     The city may review the insurance required herein during the term of the franchisee’s franchise and, based upon any material adverse changes in liability exposure or legal requirements, reserves the right at any time during the term of a franchise agreement to reasonably change, by increasing or decreasing, the amounts and types of insurance required thereunder by giving a franchisee ninety (90) days written notice. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.107.7 Failure by franchisee to maintain insurance coverage constitutes material breach.
     A franchisee’s failure to procure or maintain required insurance shall constitute a material breach of the ordinance codified in this title and a franchise agreement. Under such a circumstance, the city may, at its discretion, procure or renew such insurance to protect the city’s interests and pay any and all premiums in connection therewith and recover all moneys so paid from the franchisee, and assess liquidated damages for such a material breach and/or seek revocation or termination of the franchisee’s franchise. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.107.8 Additional requirements for insurance policies.
     4.20.107.8.1.           Franchisee’s insurance coverage shall be primary with respect to city, its officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, volunteers, and employees. Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the city shall apply in excess of and not contributory with insurance provided by franchisee’s policy.

     4.20.107.8.2.           Insurers shall have no right of recovery or subrogation against city except in matters of sole negligence on the part of the city, as finally adjudicated, (including its officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, employees, volunteers, and other agents and agencies); it shall be the intention of the city and the franchisee that the insurance policies so effected shall protect both parties and be primary coverage for any and all loss covered by the above-described insurance.

     4.20.107.8.3.           The insurance company issuing the policy or policies shall have no recourse against the city for payment of any premiums or for assessments under any form of policy.

     4.20.107.8.4.           Any and all deductibles in the above-described insurance policies shall be assumed by and be for the account of, and at the sole risk of, franchisee.

     4.20.107.8.5.           Any failure to comply with reporting provisions of the policies shall not affect coverage provided to the city, its officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, employees, consultants, agents, or volunteers.

     4.20.107.8.6            The limits of liabilities of the insurance policies set forth in Section 4.20.107.3.1 shall not define or limit the franchisee’s defense and indemnification obligations under the ordinance codified in this title or otherwise arising as a matter of law or equity. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.107.9 Conflict of law.
     4.20.107.9.1            The ordinance codified in this title and all franchise agreements are governed by the laws of the state of California, without regard to its conflicts of laws principles, except to the extent that California law is preempted by federal statutes or regulations.

     4.20.107.9.2            Any action or proceeding instituted by any franchisee against the city shall be instituted and prosecuted in the appropriate state court for the county of San Bernardino, California. By its acceptance of a franchise agreement and performance thereunder, a franchisee will be deemed to have waived the benefit of any statute or judicial decision (whether of federal or state origin) providing for a change of venue to either another state court or federal district court. The foregoing waiver includes, without implied limitation, any benefits provided to the franchisee pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 394 and all other federal or state statutes of similar effect, including, without implied limitation, any federal statute providing for federal district court jurisdiction due the diversity of citizenship between the city and any franchisee, or due to the fact that a question of federal law is alleged or involved. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article IX Liquidated Damages.
4.20.108.1 The city reserves the right to assess liquidated damages.
     In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the city, the city reserves the right to assess on behalf of its citizens and the franchisee’s subscribers liquidated damages in the event of a failure to comply with any time or performance requirements, or breach of a term or condition of such franchise, of this cable service provider ordinance, or of any federal, state, or local law or regulation pertaining to the provision of cable service, which failure has not been remedied following procedures set forth in the ordinance codified in this title. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.108.2 Parties shall agree to specific liquidated damages to be paid by franchisee for certain delays or nonperformance.
     Upon preparation and acceptance of a franchise agreement, a franchisee shall indicate it understands that failure to comply with any time and performance requirements, or breach of a term or condition of such franchise, of this cable service provider ordinance, or of any federal, state, or local law or regulation pertaining to the provision of cable service, as stipulated in the agreement or the ordinance codified in this title will result in damage to the city, and that in certain cases it is and will be impracticable to determine the actual amount of such damage in the event of delay or nonperformance of specified obligations. If the cable administrator elects to assess liquidated damages against the franchisee, such liquidated damages shall constitute the exclusive monetary remedy available to the city, and the city shall be entitled to no other monetary damages with the exception of claims sounding in fraud or tort, or defense and indemnity. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.108.3 Liquidated damages—Amounts.
     By acceptance of a franchise agreement, the franchisee understands and agrees that failure to comply with any time and performance requirement as stipulated in the franchise agreement or the ordinance codified in this title, absent good cause, will result in damage to the city. Liquidated damages shall continue to accrue, even during the appeals process, until such day as the liquidated damages payment is actually received by the city or waived by the city, or the appeal is sustained. Failure to pay liquidated damages within the time provided shall be a violation of the ordinance codified in this title and cause to proceed against either the letter of credit or bond or surety provided by the franchisee under the terms of the section entitled “letter of credit” or “construction bond.” The franchisee shall be charged no more than the following amounts in liquidated damages:

     4.20.108.3.1.           For failure to complete system construction or reconstruction in accordance with the franchise agreement; one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) for each day, or part thereof, the deficiency continues, assuming the timely grant to franchisee by the city of all permits and licenses and the supplying of all utilities and other required services to be supplied by the city.

     4.20.108.3.2.           For failure to provide any data, documents, response or information required by the franchise for the purpose of franchise monitoring and administration, or for failure to cooperate with the city during an application process or cable system review; fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day, or part thereof, the violation occurs or continues.

     4.20.108.3.3.           For failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system following a written request pursuant to the ordinance codified in this title or the agreement; fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day, or part thereof, that such non-compliance continues.

     4.20.108.3.4.           For failure to meet the customer service requirements of the ordinance codified in this title or the agreement; up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day, or part thereof, that such non-compliance continues.

     4.20.108.3.5.           For failure to meet any safety requirements of the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement one hundred dollars ($100.00), per failure, for each day, or part thereof that such noncompliance continues; provided, however, in the case of failures which do not, as determined by the city, pose a reasonable likelihood of causing bodily injury or property damage if not immediately repaired, the franchisee shall not be subject to the liquidated damages provided for in this subsection if the franchisee demonstrates to the city that it is working promptly, diligently and in good faith to correct such violations within a time frame to be determined by the city.

     4.20.108.3.6.           For failure to comply with any other section, subsection, or provision of the ordinance codified in this title, or a franchise agreement; fifty dollars ($50.00), per each instance of non-compliance, for each day, or part thereof, that such non-compliance continues. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article X Procedures for Assessing Liquidated Damages.
4.20.109.1 Requirement of notice and opportunity to cure—Reason for suspension of requirement.
     4.20.109.1.1.           The cable administrator shall provide notice and opportunity to cure for any time or performance requirement, or breach of, a term or condition of such franchise, of this cable service provider ordinance, or of any federal, state, or local law or regulation which the cable administrator deems sufficient to warrant assessment of liquidated damages. Force majeure is a defense to the application of this section.

     4.20.109.1.2.           Notice and the opportunity to cure shall be in writing, sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the franchisee’s local place of business or any other place reasonably calculated to provide such notice to the franchisee. The franchisee will be deemed to have cured any default and shall not be subject to the assessment of liquidated damages if the franchisee commences to cure such default within fifteen (15) days from the receipt of the city’s written notice and completes such cure within thirty (30) days following commencement or, if such default cannot reasonably be cured within said thirty (30) day period, the franchisee commences to cure such default within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the city’s written notice and diligently prosecutes such cure to completion within sixty (60) days thereafter.

     4.20.109.1.3.           A Notice of Intention to Assess Liquidated Damages may be issued concurrently with a Notice to Cure. If a notice of intention to assess liquidated damages is issued concurrently with a notice to cure, the franchisee understands and agrees that liquidated damages will be accruing at the end of the opportunity to cure period. The notice of intention to assess liquidated damages shall set forth the basis of the assessment, and shall inform the franchisee that liquidated damages will be assessed from the date of the notice, or the end of the opportunity to cure period, whichever is later.

     4.20.109.1.4.           If the franchisee desires to appeal the cable administrator’s assessment of liquidated damages, it may do so in accordance with Section 4.20.103. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.109.2 Other franchise violations—Procedures for remedying.
     Prior to imposing any penalty or sanction against the franchisee for failure to perform any of its obligations under the ordinance codified in this title or its franchise agreement, other than liquidated damages or termination (for which this section shall not apply), the cable administrator shall give the franchisee notice and opportunity to remedy such failure in accordance with the following procedures.

     4.20.109.2.1.           Notice and opportunity to cure. The cable administrator shall provide the franchisee with written notice specifying the nature of such failure. The franchisee will be deemed to have cured any default if the franchisee commences to cure such default within fifteen (15) days from the receipt of the city’s written notice and completes such cure within thirty (30) days following commencement or, if such default cannot reasonably be cured within said thirty (30) day period, the franchisee commences to cure such default within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the city’s written notice and diligently prosecutes such cure to completion within sixty (60) days thereafter.

     4.20.109.2.2.           Penalties and sanctions for failure to comply: in the event the cable administrator finds that the franchisee has failed to comply with any of its obligations under the ordinance codified in this title or the franchisee’s franchise agreement, and, further, that the franchisee has not remedied such failure within the period allowed therefor following receipt of written notice from the cable administrator, the cable administrator may impose such penalties or sanctions as are provided for under the ordinance codified in this title or the franchisee’s franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XI Complaint Procedures.
4.20.110.1 Supervision and regulation of franchise—Franchisee’s attendance at meetings.
     The city may do all things necessary and proper to supervise, inspect, and regulate the construction and operation of cable systems franchised under the ordinance codified in this title and implement complaint procedures. The responsibility for such supervision, inspection and regulation is hereby delegated to the cable administrator who is empowered, among other things, to adjust, settle or compromise any controversy arising from the operations of any franchisee, either on behalf of the city or any subscriber, in accordance with the best interests of the public, provided that any person aggrieved by a decision of the cable administrator may appeal the matter in accordance with the ordinance codified in this title for hearing and determination. The city council always reserves the right to reject or modify the decision of the cable administrator and may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy arising from the operation of a franchisee or from any provision of the ordinance codified in this title. At the request of the cable administrator, franchisees are encouraged to participate in any advisory committee meetings established by the cable administrator relating to cable service provider operations. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.110.2 Franchisee to maintain an office or service center in accordance with franchise agreement.
     Franchisee shall maintain a business office or customer service center within the franchise service area, or at such other location as is approved by the city in writing, and which shall be open during the business hours stated in the franchise agreement, and shall maintain a publicly-listed local and a toll-free telephone number and sufficient lines which shall be so operated and staffed to respond to customers in at least five ways: accept payments and resolve billing difficulties; give out and exchange or accept return of converters; schedule service or technician calls (or provide an on-site, toll-free telephone for customers to schedule such service calls); answer subscriber inquiries; and receive complaints and commence the resolution thereof. Subscribers shall be promptly notified of any change of address of such office or of telephone number(s). (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.110.3 Repair and maintenance crew to be maintained that is capable of responding to subscriber complaints.
     Franchisee shall maintain sufficient repair and maintenance crews capable of responding to subscriber complaints or requests for service in accordance with subscriber service standards described in the ordinance codified in this title, including, without implied limitation, any state law requirements concerning the same. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.110.4 Notice to be given subscribers regarding complaint handling procedures.
     A franchisee shall establish procedures for receiving, acting upon, and resolving subscriber complaints in conformance with the requirements of the ordinance codified in this title and the franchisee’s franchise agreement. Such procedures shall, at a minimum, contain the procedures set forth in the ordinance codified in this title. Adjustments to a subscriber’s billing statement, where appropriate, shall occur in the next statement issued to the subscriber. All complaints will be expeditiously addressed and, if reasonably possible, resolved within the requirements set forth in the ordinance codified in this title. A franchisee shall furnish a notice of such procedures to each subscriber at the time of initial subscription of the cable system, at least annually thereafter, and at anytime upon request. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.110.5 Cable service complaints to be logged, showing nature and disposition of each complaint.
     Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled “liquidated damages.” The franchisee shall institute a complaint logging procedure as follows:

     4.20.110.5.1.           The franchisee shall maintain a log of all installation and service requests which require a service call to the subscriber’s residence, place of business or other location as set forth in the ordinance codified in this title, together with a log of all complaints received requiring corrective action by the franchisee, whether such complaints are written, telephonic or otherwise. Franchisee’s logs shall include the identity and address of the subscriber, the date of the request for installation or service or of the complaint, a description of the nature of the service request or of the complaint, the date of the service request or complaint and a description of any response by franchisee to the service request or corrective action by franchisee to remedy the complaint, together with the report of the service representative dispatched to such service location, if applicable.

     4.20.110.5.2.           This log shall be available for inspection by the city. Regarding complaints of the same type of problem, which evidence a violation by the franchisee in its obligations under the ordinance codified in this title or its franchise agreement, the city may serve the franchisee with a notice to cure. If no, or inadequate, corrective action is taken by the franchisee, the cable administrator may institute an inspection of the franchisee’s system. If such inspection discloses a violation of any requirement of the ordinance codified in this title or the agreement, then the franchisee shall bear the costs of such inspection which are in excess of any liquidated damages assessed by the city for such violation. In the cable administrator’s discretion, repeated complaints or lack of corrective action may constitute cause for imposition of liquidated damages and/or termination of the franchisee’s franchise.

     4.20.110.5.3.           Upon request of the cable administrator, the franchisee shall, within ten (10) days after receiving such a request, send a written report to the cable administrator with respect to any such complaint and its disposition. Such report shall provide a full explanation of the investigation, findings and corrective steps taken by the franchisee.

     4.20.110.5.4.           Franchisee shall keep and retain on file a copy of such subscriber service and complaint logs for a period of one year. The franchisee shall submit to the cable administrator this log, including a summary, of the number and nature of requests for installation and service and complaints received as well as their disposition. A copy of the summary shall be completed for each six month period and submitted to city by the thirtieth day of the succeeding month. Copies of complaints received through the mail, together with copies of the franchisee’s responses (if any), shall also be retained and made available for inspection in the franchisee’s public file for not less than one year following the date of their receipt by the franchisee. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.110.6 Outage log to be maintained showing details of service failures.
     A franchisee shall maintain an outage log showing the date, approximate time, location, duration, estimated or actual number of subscribers affected, type and probable cause of all head-end, trunk, or distribution line service failures due to causes other than routine testing or maintenance at reasonable times. Upon request by the city, a copy of such log showing the “reliability criteria” (below) shall be filed with the cable administrator by the tenth day of every month and shall be retained by a franchisee for a period of three years. The franchisee will design, procure, install and maintain its equipment to meet, under normal operating conditions, a monthly average system availability criteria to subscribers of 99.5% measured as follows:

 

100-0.5

Power On-Outage Time

100

ON

 

     Franchisee may at any time propose a new reliability criteria standard for the city’s acceptance. The monthly average system availability criteria set forth above shall not included such outages as are caused by or attributable to failure of electrical power from an electric utility that provides electric service to the city which exceeds the operational capacity of the cable system’s backup generator and batteries. Where service interruptions or signal interruptions are the result of loss of electrical power from an electric utility and there are no backup generators or batteries or the backup generators or batteries fail to perform to their rated capacity, then the monthly average system availability criteria set forth above shall include such electrical outages. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XII Rate Regulation and Franchise Fees.
4.20.111.1 City may regulate rates if permitted by law.
     To the fullest extent permitted by federal, state and local law, the city reserves the right to regulate and may regulate a franchisee’s rates for cable service and other communication services and late fees for payments of bills. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.111.2 Current rate schedule to be filed with city—30 days notice required prior to rate change.
     4.20.111.2.1.           A franchisee, for information purposes, and for the city to ensure nondiscrimination, shall provide the city with a complete schedule of all current basic service and enhanced service rates and charges for cable services, including premium services TV and pay-per-view rates and charges, as of January 1st of every year.

     4.20.111.2.2.           Thirty (30) days prior to any price changes, the franchisee shall give notice to all affected subscribers of any pricing changes or additional charges, excluding temporary marketing and sales discounts or offers and pay-per-view events, which notice shall clearly state all price increases and/or decreases, provided that such pricing changes or additional charges are within the control of the franchisee. In those cases where such pricing changes or additional charges are not within the control of the franchisee, the franchisee shall provide such notice as is reasonable under the circumstances.

     4.20.111.2.3.           Forty-five (45) days before any price changes or additional charges are to take effect, a franchisee shall provide the city with a copy of the proposed notification for subscribers. The city may review the text of the notification and comment upon its form and content, provided it does so within five business days following receipt from the franchisee. The final form and content of such notice shall be within the discretion of the franchisee, provided that such notice clearly and accurately identifies any such price changes or additional charges. Nothing in this section shall be construed as diminishing the city’s powers to regulate a franchisee’s rates for cable service or other communication services. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.111.3 Subscriber rates.
     The franchisee agrees that installation (i.e., connection) and service fees shall be uniform as to all city subscribers within the categories (if any) set forth in the renewal proposal. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.111.4 Other rate matters.
     4.20.111.4.1.           The franchisee shall notify the cable administrator and subscribers in writing of any change in rates at least thirty (30) days prior to the change.

     4.20.111.4.2.           Where the franchisee operates a cable system in a nearby community, the franchisee agrees to make available to the cable administrator, at any time upon the latter’s demand, a schedule of its fees in other cities.

     4.20.111.4.3.           Official services purchased by the city will not be subject to a converter deposit; however, the city agrees to report and pay for missing or stolen converters utilized for official services. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.111.5 Franchisee to pay city five percent, or maximum permitted by law, of gross annual revenue as a franchise fee.
     4.20.111.5.1.           Because the streets and other city rights-of-way which are used by the franchisee in the operation of its cable system within the boundaries of the city are valuable city properties acquired and maintained by the city at great expense to taxpayers, and because the grant to the franchisee to use of said properties is a valuable property right without which the franchisee would be required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, and because the city will incur costs in regulating and administering a franchise, and to compensate the city for franchisee’s use of the city rights-of-way in which its cable system is located, which compensation may be used by the city:

     4.20.111.5.1.1. To regulate the construction, reconstruction, operation, maintenance, use and development of such a system on the city;

     4.20.111.5.1.2. For the costs of regulating and administering a franchise;

     4.20.111.5.1.3. For the development and use of access channels;

     4.20.111.5.1.4. For fair and just compensation for the use of city rights-of-way; and

     4.20.111.5.1.5. To the extent permitted by law, for other purposes whether or not such purposes are related to the regulation of cable systems in the city.

     4.20.111.5.2.           A franchisee shall be subject to and pay, to the extent not prohibited by applicable federal or state law, a franchise fee for the use of the property rights granted to the franchisee, i.e., the privilege of using the public rights-of-way or city property to, construct, maintain, and operate a cable system or any portion thereof, as a condition and requirement of each and every franchise. The franchise fee shall be in an amount equal to five percent, or the maximum permitted by law, of franchisee’s gross revenues, as defined in the section entitled “Definitions.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.111.6 Franchise fee also applies to any person distributing a service over the cable system.
     Consistent with Section 622(h) of the Cable Act, the city shall have the power to require any person, other than a cable service provider, who originates or controls the distribution of any service over the cable system and receives fees for such service, which fees are not received by or transmitted through the cable service provider, to pay the city a fee equal to five percent, or the maximum permitted by law, of the gross revenues of such person derived from the distribution of such service over the cable system, less any amounts directly paid to the cable system in compensation for the use of such cable system. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.111.7 Franchise fee to be paid quarterly along with statement verifying all collected gross revenues.
     The franchise fee assessed shall be payable quarterly to the city. The franchisee shall file a complete, accurate, and certified statement of all collected gross revenues within the city during the period for which said quarterly payment covers, and said payment shall be made to the city not later than thirty (30) days after the end of each quarter. The franchisee shall also provide annually within ninety (90) days after the end of the fiscal year a report certified by a certified public accountant, who may be an employee of franchisee, verifying all collected gross revenues. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.111.8 City may examine all franchisee’s records to determine accuracy of amounts payable to city.
     4.20.111.8.1.           The city shall have the right to inspect and examine all of a franchisee’s books of account, income records and other records and documents relevant to an accurate determination of the total amount of gross revenues derived by the franchisee from the provision of cable services on the city, including such income and subscriber records as may be necessary to determine the accuracy of the franchisee’s pro rata allocation of revenue to the franchise.

     4.20.111.8.2.           The city shall have the right to audit and to re-compute any amounts determined to be payable under a franchise agreement; provided, however, that such audit shall commence within thirty-six (36) months following the close of each of the franchisee’s fiscal years (unless subsequent information indicates fraud or improper withholding of information, in which case the thirty-six (36) month limitation shall not apply), and that the city shall not conduct such an audit more frequently than twice in one year (unless subsequent information indicates fraud or improper withholding of information). The franchisee shall make such records available the city within ten (10) days of request. Such records shall be available for inspection by the city upon ten days request during normal business hours and shall be retained by the franchisee for a period of three years.

     4.20.111.8.3.           The city will bear the cost of any such audit; provided, however, that if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of five percent or more of the amount due, franchisee shall assume all costs of such audit and pay such costs at such time as any proceedings contesting the city’s audit are completed.

     4.20.111.8.4.           Any additional amounts due to the city as a result of the audit shall automatically be paid within thirty (30) days following the completion of the audit. The franchisee shall be given a copy of the audit report.

     4.20.111.8.5.           The franchisee has the right to appeal the results of any audit conducted by the city; nevertheless, the franchisee shall remain liable and shall pay the city the amount owed according to the audit. Upon final determination of the audit appeal, if the franchisee has overpaid franchise fees, then the city will remit such overpayment within thirty (30) days of completion of the determination of overpayment. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.111.9 Acceptance by city.
     No acceptance by the city of any payment from franchisee shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under the ordinance codified in this title or for the performance of any other obligation of the franchisee. Acceptance of an accord and satisfaction or release shall not occur unless or until the city shall agree to such accord and satisfaction or release in a separate writing, signed by the city. There shall be an accord and satisfaction with respect to any payment not subject to audit within thirty-six (36) months following the close of the fiscal year to which such payment relates, unless there is subsequent evidence that franchisee has engaged in fraud or has improperly withheld relevant records which relate to such payments. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.111.10 Late payment of franchise fee to be charged interest and penalty.
     In the event that the franchisee does not make any franchise payment(s) or re-computed amount(s) on or before the applicable date(s) heretofore specified, then a late penalty shall accrue at a rate of one and one-half percent per month on the unpaid amount(s) from the date on which it was due. If the franchisee has not made a franchise payment or re-computed amount on or before the date that such payment or amount is otherwise due in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance codified in this title or the franchisee’s franchise agreement and such payment or re-computed amount is not made within five days after receipt of written notice from the city, franchisee shall pay an additional late penalty. Such a late penalty shall be an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the total unpaid amount including accrued interest. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.111.11 Alternative user charge.
     4.20.111.11.1. This section is applicable to any licensed but unfranchised cable service provider, and to any cable service provider who has had its franchise ruled unconstitutional, unenforceable, or invalid. This section also is applicable to a franchised cable service provider who has had its franchise fees ruled unconstitutional, unenforceable, or invalid.

     4.20.111.11.2. Where not specifically prohibited by federal or state law, and as an alternative to the imposition of a franchise fee as set forth in the ordinance codified in this title, the franchising authority may impose, extract and collect a charge from an affected cable service provider for the use by such provider of the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and right ways of the city.

     4.20.111.11.3. Such an alternative user charge shall be based on the value of the rights-of-way being used by the affected cable service provider as determined by the city. However, in no event, shall the alternative user charge exceed five percent, or the maximum permitted by law, of the affected cable service provider’s gross revenue for the reporting period.

     4.20.111.11.4. An alternative user charge is adopted in order to receive fair compensation for the affected cable service provider’s use of the public streets and public ways if such compensation cannot be obtained by imposing a flat percentage fee on such cable service provider’s annual gross revenue. However, an affected cable service provider may agree to an alternative charge that is based on a flat percentage of gross revenue, as long as that charge does not exceed five percent, or the maximum permitted by law, of an affected cable service provider’s annual gross revenue.

     4.20.111.11.5. It is expressly understood that a franchise fee and an alternative user charge will not be imposed on the same cable service provider at the same time, for the same period.

     4.20.111.11.6. An affected cable service provider shall at no time be charged or obligated to pay an alternative user charge that exceeds five percent, or the maximum permitted by law, of such provider’s gross revenue (as defined by the ordinance codified in this title) for any particular reporting period. In the event that the alternative user charge does exceed five percent, or the maximum permitted by law, of gross revenue, then such alternative user charge shall be reduced to reflect an amount not greater than the five percent, or other legal cap. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.111.12 Alternative user charge to be paid quarterly along with statement verifying gross revenues.
     The alternative user charge assessed shall be payable quarterly to the city. The cable service provider shall file a complete, accurate and certified statement of gross revenues within the city during the period for which said quarterly payment covers, and said payment shall be made to the city not later than thirty (30) days after the end of each quarter. The cable service provider shall also provide annually within ninety (90) days after the end of the fiscal year a report certified by a certified public accountant, who may be an employee of the cable service provider, verifying gross revenues. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.111.13 Franchise required—Exception.
     4.20.111.13.1. No person, or cable service provider shall be permitted to construct, operate or maintain a cable system which requires the laying or positioning or use of cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) across the rights-of-way of the city, without having first obtained a cable service franchise, unless such person or cable service provider is exempted under state law, or not required under the cable act.

     4.20.111.13.2. Consistent with the cable act, no franchise shall be required for the city to operate as cable service provider. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XIII Receivership and Foreclosure.
4.20.112.1 Any franchise granted shall, at the option of city, cease and terminate upon initiation of bankruptcy proceedings by a franchisee.
     Any franchise granted shall, at the option of city, cease and terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees to take over and conduct the business of franchisee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said me hundred twenty (120) days, or unless:

     4.20.112.1.1.           Such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred twenty (120) days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of the ordinance codified in this title and a franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees within said one hundred twenty (120) days shall have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and,

     4.20.112.1.2.           Such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred twenty (120) days after their election or appointment, executed an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction on the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision, and limitation of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.112.2 Foreclosure or other involuntary sale of any material property.
     In the case of a foreclosure or other involuntary sale of any material property of franchisee, or any part thereof, city may serve notice of termination upon franchisee and to the purchaser at such sale, that the franchise and rights and privileges of franchisee shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days after service of such notice unless:

     4.20.112.2.1.           City has approved the transfer of the franchise, in accordance with the ordinance codified in this title; and

     4.20.112.2.2.           Such successful purchaser shall have covenanted and agreed with city to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement and the ordinance codified in this title. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.112.3 Cable administrator as common agent.
     The cable administrator shall have primary responsibility for continuing administration of the ordinance codified in this title and all cable service provider franchise agreements. With regard to all questions or disputes concerning the performance of the franchisee under any of the terms or conditions of this agreement, the franchisee agrees to deal either with the cable administrator as common agent for the city subscribers or directly with the affected subscribers, at the option of the cable administrator. The cable administrator shall not act as collecting agent for fees due the franchisee for services provided. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XIV Access Channel Requirements.
4.20.113.1 All local cable systems shall interconnect their access channels.
     All franchisees providing cable service in the city shall, if so required by their franchise agreements, interconnect the access channels of their cable system with the access channels of all other local cable systems in order that Public, Education or Government (“PEG”) channel programming can universally be available on the same channel number to all cable subscribers on the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.113.2 Minimum channels required.
     The city may require in its request for proposals as a part of a new franchise, and may require as a part of a cable operator’s proposal for a franchise renewal, the following:

     4.20.113.2.1.           Two governmental access channels dedicated to use by the city (see Section 4.20.113.5);

     4.20.113.2.2.           One educational access channel dedicated to use by local educational institutions or a person designated by the city;

     4.20.113.2.3.           One public access channel; and

     4.20.113.2.4.           One regional governmental, and/or one regional educational and/or one regional public access channel, but a franchisee shall not be required to make available such regional PEG access channels unless a consortium of at least four cooperating cities requests one or more of such regional channels, the cooperating cities contribute a portion or all of one or more of their existing or legally accessible (under the triggering terms of their respective franchise agreements) PEG access channels toward the regional channel, and the cooperating cities are able to program such channels at least ten (10) hours a day, five days a week, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., for twelve (12) consecutive weeks.

     4.20.113.3.  Public and Educational Access Entity’s Responsibilities.

     4.20.113.3.1.           The person designated to operate, maintain and manage the equipment and facilities used to program such PEG access channels, and to schedule and coordinate the programming for such channels, which person may be the city, an entity designated by the city or, to the extent provided in the franchisee’s franchise agreement, the franchisee shall:

     4.20.113.3.1.1.        Bear sole responsibility for the costs and expenses of operating, administering and programming such channels, including without limitation all personnel required in connection with the use of the channels, all facilities, equipment and material necessary for the use of the channels and the carriage of all programming on the channels or the provision of such programming to a franchisee;

     4.20.113.3.1.2.        Subject to review and approval by the city, adopt guidelines for the use of such channel capacity and shall be responsible for the administration of all rules, regulations and procedures pertaining to such channels; and

     4.20.113.3.1.3.        Defend, indemnify and hold harmless a franchisee from and against any and all damages, liabilities and claims arising from or in any manner related to the use of such PEG access channels. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.113.3 Fee for support of PEG access facilities and activities.
     A.    A fee paid to the city is established for the support of public, educational, and governmental access facilities and activities within the city. Unless a higher percentage is authorized by applicable state or federal law, this fee shall be one percent of a franchise’s gross revenues, as that term is defined in Section 4.20.102.26, or in the franchisee’s franchise agreement, or in applicable provisions of state or federal law. This fee is also applicable to a state video franchise holder operating within the city, which shall pay to the city one percent of its gross revenues derived from the provision of video services within the city. The term “gross revenues” shall be defined as set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860.

     B.     The fee established by this section shall be remitted quarterly to the city of Yucaipa finance department and must be received no later than forty-five (45) days after the end of the preceding calendar quarter. The fee payment shall be accompanied by a summary that describes all sources of the gross revenues upon which the fee is based, which summary must be verified by a responsible financial officer or employee of the video service provider. (Ord. 265 § 1, 2007)

 

4.20.113.4 City’s responsibilities.
     4.20.113.4.1.           The city shall:

     4.20.113.4.1.1.        Bear sole responsibility for the costs and expenses of operating, administering and programming the governmental access channels, including without limitation all personnel required in connection with the use of such channels, all facilities, and material (but not equipment) necessary for the use of such channels and the carriage of all programming on such channels;

     4.20.113.4.1.2.        Adopt guidelines for the use of such channel capacity and shall be responsible for the administration of all roles, regulations and procedures pertaining to such channels; and

     4.20.113.4.1.3.        Defend, indemnify and hold harmless a franchisee from and against any and all damages, liabilities and claims arising from or in any manner related to the use of such PEG access channels. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.113.5 Franchisee’s responsibilities.
     4.20.113.5.1.           Unless modified by the franchise agreement, the franchisee will provide and maintain at no cost to the city through the life of the agreement two channels for exclusive city use. All subscribers will receive the city use channels. The franchisee shall designate Channels 3 and 12 for the city’s use. The franchisee may not use the assigned city channels without permission of the city.

     4.20.113.5.2.           The franchisee shall not interfere with any programming transmitted over the city channels. Franchisee shall assure high technical quality of access channels. The franchisee shall transmit or remit in their entirety all access channels and the programming contained on or supplied for such access channels. The signal for each access channel originated by the franchisee shall comply with the FCC’s technical standards and shall be of comparable quality with other programming carried over its cable system. For any access channel where the signal is not originated by the franchisee, the franchisee shall not materially degrade such signal as is distributed over its cable system. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.113.6 No lease or assignment.
     The city or other person responsible for the operation, administration and programming on each such PEG access channel shall in no manner lease, transfer, assign or divest itself of control of the use of such channel(s), or the availability of programming time over such channel(s), for any purpose to any other person, provided that the city may transfer management and control of such channel to a nonprofit person, including without limitation an access corporation, in which case such person shall be subject to each of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

 

4.20.113.7 Entities to administer channels.
     The city will exercise control over the operation of the PEG access channels. The city may create or designate one or more persons to be individually or jointly responsible for administering PEG access channels, including without limitation an access corporation. The city may delegate to such persons responsibility for the management, utilization, programming and scheduling of such PEG access channels. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.113.8 Program censorship prohibited.
     4.20.113.8.1.           Neither a franchisee, the city, nor any entity or entities designated by the city to administer the use of the PEG access channels, shall engage in any program censorship or other control of the content of the access programming on the system, except as otherwise required or permitted by law, provided that:

     4.20.113.8.1.1.        The city may exercise all program scheduling and editorial control over programming on the city PEG access channels; and

     4.20.113.8.1.2.        Any person designated or entity created to administer the PEG access channels may exercise control over program scheduling on those PEG access channels. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

 

 

4.20.113.9 Access channels part of basic service.
     All PEG access channels shall be a part of franchisee’s basic service provided, however, that such a level of basic service exists; if such a level of basic service does not exist and, for example, all channels are provided on a la carte basis, then all PEG access channels shall be provided to subscribers without charge unless federal or state regulations provide to the contrary. The location for access channels, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, shall be in the sole discretion of franchisee, provided that franchisee shall provide city or any person or access corporation designated by the city to operate such channels with at least ninety (90) days’ prior written notice of any change in channel assignment for such additional access channels. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.113.10 Limitation on commercial use of access channels.
     4.20.113.10.1.         The city or other person responsible for the operation, administration and programming of each such PEG access channel shall use such channels exclusively for purposes of access or, if so provided in the franchise agreement, local origination programming, and shall not use such channels for commercial purposes provided, however, that the programming for such channels may include:

     4.20.113.10.1.1. Fund-raising events or activities;

     4.20.113.10.1.2. Donor and underwriting announcements reflecting funding provided by for profit or non-profit entities for access programming carried over such channels in accordance with the provisions of 47 C.F.R. 73.621 of the FCC’s Rules; and

     4.20.113.10.1.3. To the extent permitted by law, a limited number of commercial announcements comprising no more than six minutes an hour.

     4.20.113.10.2. All revenue received with respect to such fund-raising, donor and underwriting recognition and commercial announcements shall be utilized exclusively for the administration, operation and programming of such channels in connection with PEG access programming. This section shall in no manner preclude the city or other person or persons designated by the city from receiving or securing funding from any other person, whether non-profit or for-profit, which results in the carriage of programming over such access channels in a manner consistent with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.113.11 PEG access equipment.
     4.20.113.11.11. All franchisees shall provide, at no cost to the city, production equipment for the purpose of programming the PEG access channels. Such equipment shall include: video cameras capable of generating live, on-air broadcasts, amplifiers, microphones, lights, videotape player/recorders, video and audio mixers, switchers, editing equipment, character generator and monitor, and other processing equipment, and other equipment including video graphics and monitors necessary to originate industrial standard quality color television or FM radio composite signals for transmission on the franchisee’s cable television system. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XV Cable System Construction Requirements.
4.20.114.1 Map and detailed plan to be provided within 90 days.
     If a major construction or reconstruction plan is required, including system upgrades or rebuilds but not line extensions and related activity, a franchisee shall submit such a plan within ninety (90) days before the start of construction unless such ninety (90) day time period shall be reasonably shortened by city. The plan shall include cable system design details, construction timetables, equipment specifications, and design performance criteria. The franchisee shall make all reasonable efforts to avoid negative aesthetic impacts in its plan. The plan shall also include a map of the entire franchise area and shall clearly delineate areas within the franchise area where the cable system will be available to subscribers, including a time schedule of proposed construction or reconstruction. The franchisee agrees to submit for approval as-built drawings contemporaneously with the proposed construction or reconstruction. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.2 City has power to review and approve construction plans.
     The city shall have the power to review and approve such plans, timetables and specifications, or any portion thereof, to avoid interference with the city rights-of-ways, traffic congestion or other negative aesthetic impacts and to assure that such plans, timetables and specifications are consistent with applicable statutes, ordinances, codes, regulations, determinations and rulings governing construction in the city including without limitation zoning ordinances and traffic safety/standards. Where such plans and specifications are not in compliance with such statutes, ordinances, codes, regulations, determinations and rulings, the franchisee shall modify or revise such plans and specifications so as to achieve such compliance. Franchisees must comply with the requirements of applicable federal, state and local statutes, ordinances, codes and regulations governing the location of subsurface installations including notification to or from a regional notification center (such as Underground Service Alert) concerning proposed excavation work. The franchisee agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city from and against any and all damages, liabilities and claims arising from or in any manner related to construction or reconstruction of a cable system including, but not limited to, any damage caused by excavation work. If, after construction begins, the planned placement of specific equipment by franchisee may cause a negative aesthetic impact, then the franchisee will make reasonable efforts to minimize such an impact provided, however, that the city shall have the final power to determine the placement of such equipment using its reasonable discretion in the application of its aesthetic standards. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.3 Franchise’s as-built drawings.
     The franchisee agrees to provide the cable administrator, prior to construction and upon completion and upon the latter’s request, with two copies of as-built drawings and one electronic copy in CAD format describing the location of all cable system equipment, cables, facilities and material that the franchisee will place or has placed in the city including antenna or microwave dish mounting details. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.4 Approval for construction or placement of equipment or facilities.
     4.20.114.4.1. The construction or placement of any equipment or facilities in the city by the franchisee (including temporary buildings, if needed), as well as any alterations or additions to existing city property, shall be approved in advance by the cable administrator. The franchisee shall provide the cable administrator thirty (30) days’ notice prior to the commencement of work. All pedestals of the cable system owned and maintained by the franchisee shall be clearly marked as part of the system and as property of the franchisee.

     4.20.114.4.2.           Approval of the placement or location of cable system equipment or facilities may be denied, withdrawn or modified at any time if essential to avoid or minimize interference with city operations or activities. The franchisee shall not be entitled to reimbursement for any expenses associated with relocation of any equipment or facilities required by the withdrawal or modification of approval. The cable administrator shall have the right to require the franchisee to restore a site to its condition prior to the placement of cable system equipment or facilities if withdrawal of approval for such placement is deemed essential. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.5 Construction and operation deadline.
     The franchisee shall accomplish all proposed construction, upgrades and rebuilds in accordance with the plan of action and milestones submitted as part of the initial or renewal proposal. Compliance with this construction schedule shall be determined by demonstrations of performance in accordance with the ordinance codified in this title. The franchisee may offer an alternate construction schedule as part of the proposal if deemed necessary. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.6 Delay in system construction.
     4.20.114.6.1.           Any delay in the cable system construction or reconstruction beyond the times specified in the plan timetable due to causes or events within the control of the franchisee, its agents or contractors shall require notification to and consent by the city. Any such delay beyond the terms of the construction timetable, unless approved by the city, will be considered a violation of the franchise for which the provisions of the ordinance codified in this title regarding assessing liquidated damages shall apply.

     4.20.114.6.2.           The city shall extend the period within which the franchisee is required to complete such construction or reconstruction by the period of any delay occasioned by any cause or event not within the franchisee’s control, provided that the franchisee gives city notice of, and an explanation for, the occurrence of such delay within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of it.

     4.20.114.6.3.           Nothing in this section shall prevent a franchisee from constructing or reconstructing the cable system earlier than planned. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.7 Failure to proceed with construction and/or reconstruction.
     Subject to the provisions of the ordinance codified in this title, construction or reconstruction in accordance with the plan submitted by a franchisee shall occur according to the time schedule set forth in the franchisee’s franchise agreement and shall commence as soon after the effective date of the franchise as is reasonably possible. Failure to complete such construction or reconstruction shall be grounds for termination of the franchise and/or liquidated damages for each day, or part thereof, that such construction or reconstruction remains uncompleted due to any cause or event within the franchisee’s control in addition to such other remedies as may be applicable under the provisions of the ordinance codified in this title. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.8 Service drops.
     4.20.114.8.1.           Franchisee shall make service available to any subscriber within the city upon subscriber’s request and at the standard connection charge if the connection requires no more than a one hundred fifty (150) foot aerial or one hundred (100) foot underground drop, measured from the demarcation point of subscriber’s residence or place of business to franchisee’s nearest activated coaxial distribution line, and includes one standard video outlet and standard materials.

     4.20.114.8.2.           If making service available requires more than a standard drop (such as a wall fish installation), franchisee may charge the subscriber (i) the standard connection charge; and (ii) an amount equal to the reasonable actual labor (including wages, benefits and payroll taxes), material and other costs incurred by franchisee for the additional facilities and work (including a reasonable allowance for overhead). In the alternative, franchisee may charge an appropriate hourly service charge for the entire installation.

     4.20.114.8.3.           Standard drops shall be accomplished, no less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the time measured on a quarterly basis, within seven calendar days of subscriber’s requested installation date and payment under normal operating conditions; a non-standard drop shall be accomplished within thirty (30) calendar days of a subscriber’s request and payment. The ability of franchisee to extend a drop within such time periods is predicated upon the assumptions that a franchisee is able to secure all necessary rights-of-way at the location of the drop upon reasonable terms and conditions, that the schedule or preferences of the person requesting the installation have not been responsible for delay, and that all applicable fees and charges have been timely paid and collected. Should franchisee or the city receive a complaint from any resident of the city that cable service was not installed for that resident within the time periods stated above, franchisee shall complete such installation within two business days after notice to franchisee of such complaint, subject to the provisions of this paragraph, and that resident shall be charged no installation fee for such installation. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.9 Aerial and underground drops in excess of 150 feet are not to exceed actual installation costs.
     4.20.114.9.1.           With respect to requests for connection requiring an aerial or underground drop line in excess of one hundred and fifty (150) feet or one hundred (100) feet, respectively, from the nearest activated distribution lines, a franchisee must extend and make available cable service to such subscribers at a connection fee not to exceed:

     4.20.114.9.1.1. The franchisee’s standard connection fee, if any, plus the actual installation costs incurred by the franchisee for the distance exceeding the standards set forth in the preceding subsection; or

     4.20.114.9.1.2. The franchisee’s hourly service charge for the entire installation, as the case maybe.

     4.20.114.9.2.           Actual installation costs include reasonable actual labor or hourly service charges (including wages, benefits and payroll taxes) and material costs incurred by franchisee for the additional work beyond, as applicable, one hundred fifty (150) feet or one hundred (100) feet, together with a reasonable charge for overhead. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.10 Underground installation not to exceed standard installation if subscriber provides trenching and conduit.
     In the event that a subscriber independently provides for his or her own trenching and conduit (including any necessary boring, backfilling, replacing and/or replanting), which trenching and conduit must comply with the city’s and franchisee’s construction standards, the installation charge shall be the same as for a standard installation, if such an installation is standardized, or at reasonable rate and charges provided, however, that the subscriber agrees in writing and in a form acceptable to the franchisee and the city to hold the franchisee and the city harmless for any injury, loss or damage caused by or related to the work so undertaken by the subscriber, and that the franchisee shall not be responsible for any service problems caused as a result of the work performed by the subscriber. In such case the installation by the franchisee will consist of a standard service drop. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.11 Installation of A/B switches.
     Franchisee shall offer new subscribers the option of having an A/B switch installed by franchisee at the time of installation of new cable service, and shall install A/B switches at the request of any subscriber who currently receives cable service for a reasonable fee. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.12 Reserved.
 

4.20.114.13 System construction and operation—Annual proof of performance tests—Independent tests.
     4.20.114.13.1. Franchisee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner such that it operates at all times consistent with all laws, ordinances and construction standards of the city and the FCC’s rules, which standards are incorporated by reference in the franchise agreement. In addition, a franchisee shall provide the cable administrator, upon five days’ advance notice from the franchisee, with the opportunity to observe the conduct of all the franchisee’s scheduled proof of performance tests and shall provide the cable administrator with written reports of the results of such tests within fifteen (15) days of the completion of such tests. In addition, the city may at any time conduct independent inspections or measurements of the system (e.g., measurements at subscriber terminals).

     4.20.114.13.2.         Where the city has reasonable evidence to conclude that franchisee’s system is not in technical compliance with all applicable standards, the city may require franchisee to allow the city to conduct the city’s own technical testing of the cable system. If franchisee’s cable system is not in technical compliance with applicable standards, a franchisee shall pay the costs incurred by the city for any technical assistance deemed necessary by the city for (i) observing franchisee’s annual performance tests, or (ii) obtaining independent verification of technical compliance with all standards. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.14 Additional specifications—Standby power—National, state and local code requirements.
     4.20.114.14.1.         A franchisee shall construct, install and maintain the cable system in an orderly and professional manner, using due diligence and materials of good and durable quality. All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with and in the same manner as electric and telephone lines on the same poles. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. Underground installations shall be in conformance with all applicable codes.

     4.20.114.14.2.         A franchisee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby power to be engaged automatically in the event of a power failure for twenty-four (24) hours at all headends serving the city including without limitation all switching facilities, towers, electronics and heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems, and equipment located at such headends and such switching facilities. The franchisee shall also maintain on its distribution system alternative power sources (e.g. battery back-up) so that both the subscriber and the institutional networks (where the franchisee is required to provide an institutional network under the terms of its franchise agreement and such institutional network resides within the same cable system as the franchisee’s subscriber network) may be maintained at full power for at least twenty-four (24) hours beyond the time when normal power sources serving the cable system have ceased.

     4.20.114.14.3.         A franchisee shall at all times comply with applicable sections of the following, all as from time to time amended and revised, and all other applicable rules and regulations now in effect or hereinafter adopted by the city:

     4.20.114.14.3.1. National Electrical Code (NEC) (edition most recently adopted by National Fire Protection Association) to the extent not preempted by state or local law or regulation;

     4.20.114.14.3.2. FCC’s Rules;

     4.20.114.14.3.3. National Electrical Safety Code (NESC);

     4.20.114.14.3.4. City Building Codes;

     4.20.114.14.3.5. City Subdivision Ordinances;

     4.20.114.14.3.6. City Encroachment Ordinances;

     4.20.114.14.3.7. City Road Standards;

     4.20.114.14.3.8. California Public Utilities Commission, General Order 95; and

     4.20.114.14.3.9. California Public Utilities Commission, General Order 128. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.15 Construction in city rights-of-way—Undergrounding—Relocation.
     The franchisee shall comply with all of the same standards, specifications and codes to construct and maintain its system in the city, as are required for the city’s streets. The franchisee shall also agree to and pay the costs of permitting and inspection to the same extent that permitting and inspection fees are required of other persons doing construction work in the city.

     The franchisee shall underground all new equipment installations, which are located in any public right-of-way. The franchisee shall also underground all existing cable system equipment which is located at any public right-of-way when any other utility provider having aboveground facilities elects or is required to underground that utility’s equipment.

     The franchisee shall also, at its sole cost and expense, relocate any of its equipment located in any public right-of-way when such relocation is necessary to accommodate any public works improvement project of the city or its constituent agencies. If such cable system equipment is located above ground, it shall be relocated underground. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.16 Construction or installation requires encroachment permit.
     Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits, service boxes or other properties of a franchisee to be constructed or installed in the city shall be so constructed or installed under an encroachment permit and only at such locations and in such manner as are consistent with the ordinance codified in this title, the franchisee’s franchise agreement, other ordinances, and written rulings and determinations of the city. The construction and installation of such poles, wires, cable lines and other properties of the franchisee upon aerial facilities owned or controlled by utilities providing electric or telephone service shall be consistent with the requirements of the city or, in the absence of such requirements, with the requirements of such utilities. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.17 Temporary buildings.
     Temporary buildings (storage sheds, shops, office, etc.) may be erected by the franchisee only with the prior approval of the cable administrator and shall be built with labor and materials furnished by the franchisee without expense to the city. Such temporary buildings and utilities shall remain the property of the franchisee and shall be removed by and at the expense of the franchisee upon the completion of work. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.18 Access to trenches.
     420114.18.1.           During cable system construction or rebuilding, the city shall have the right, and franchisee shall allow other entities including the city as determined by the city, to install and maintain compatible facilities in or upon the poles, transmitter towers, conduits, trenches constructed by the franchisee while they are open and/or other transmission facilities owned or controlled by franchisee provided that franchisee is the permitter as authorized by the city, and that franchisee determines in the exercise of its reasonable good faith discretion that no undue interference with its use or occupancy of such trenches or transmission facilities will result. For purposes of this section, it shall be presumed that there is no undue interference caused by co-location of services in the franchisee’s trenches.

     4.20.114.18.2.         Other users of such trenches or transmission facilities shall bear their pro rata share of the costs of constructing such trenches or transmission facilities, including design, redesign, permits, approvals, additional costs of providing wider or deeper trenches, or other modifications so as to accommodate such users. Such pro rata share of such costs shall be reasonably determined by the franchisee, and each such user must consent to such allocation of costs as a condition to the occupancy of those trenches or transmission facilities constructed by the franchisee.

     4.20.114.18.3.         Prior to any such co-location by any other user, such user and the franchisee must agree upon construction schedules, sequence of construction and such other matters as may affect the location of such user’s facilities in the franchisee’s trenches or on the franchisee’s transmission facilities, and such user must agree to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the franchisee, its affiliates and their respective officers, directors, shareholders and employees from and against any and all liabilities and obligations asserted or other claims, actions, judgments, assessments, taxes, charges, fines, penalties, damages, costs and expenses (including legal fees and disbursements) arising from or in any manner related to the location of such user’s facilities in the franchisee’s trenches or on franchisee’s transmission facilities except to the extent caused by the acts or omissions of the franchisee, its employees or contractors. Co-located users of trenches or other transmission facilities must not interfere with the functioning of other users of such trenches or transmission facilities. Other such users must obtain the necessary permits and approvals for such co-located facilities.

     4.20.114.18.4.         The franchisee shall notify the city and local utilities at least ninety (90) days prior to undertaking any underground construction. No more than sixty (60) days after submission of the construction plan for such construction or rebuilding in accordance with the ordinance codified in this title, written notice of such intended co-location shall be given to the franchisee by the city or any other potential co-located user of franchisee’s facilities together with system designs. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.19 Reserved.
 

4.20.114.20 Reciprocity.
     The obligations of each franchisee under this section shall be conditioned upon a reciprocal undertaking by each such entity allowing the franchisee to place its facilities in comparable trenches or transmission facilities constructed by or on behalf of such entity while they are open provided that such entity determines in the exercise of its reasonable good faith discretion that no undue interference with its use or occupancy of the trench or transmission facility will result. The provisions of this section shall apply to major construction and rebuild activity undertaken by the franchisee but shall not apply to maintenance and related activities undertaken by the franchisee with respect to its cable system. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.21 Availability and use of utility services.
     4.20.114.21.1.         The franchisee shall secure utility services from local, private or public sources.

     4.20.114.21.2.         With respect to city-owned buildings and facilities and the franchisee’s provision of cable service to the same, the city will make available to the franchisee reasonably required amounts of utilities from existing outlets. If the city is unable or does not provide such utility service, then the franchisee shall be excused from any obligation to provide cable service to that particular city-owned building or facility until such time as the city has made such utility service available. The franchisee will advise the cable administrator of the service requirements, location, building number and other information reasonably requested by the cable administrator.

     4.20.114.21.3.         The franchisee is responsible for all connections, maintenance and disconnection’s of utilities.

     4.20.114.21.4.         The franchisee, at its own expense and in a workmanlike manner satisfactory to the cable administrator, shall install and maintain all necessary connections and distribution lines for utilities. The franchisee shall remove the same in accordance with directions of the cable administrator upon termination or denial of franchise renewal. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.22 If city determines any part of facilities are harmful to health and safety of any person, franchisee shall promptly correct.
     If at any time it is determined by the city or any other agency or authority of competent jurisdiction, or it is discovered by a franchisee, that any part of the system facilities fails to comply with any technical, construction or maintenance requirement set forth in the ordinance codified in this title or the franchisee’s franchise agreement, including without limitation missing or cracked vault or pedestal covers, temporary drop cables which cross over walkways, driveways or other areas, improper grounding, and low cables, riser problems, or other violations of other laws, codes or ordinances, which are harmful to the health or safety of any person, then a franchisee shall be responsible for correcting and shall correct all such conditions at its own cost and expense immediately or in any event within twenty-four (24) hours of discovery or receipt of notice from the city or any other agency or authority of competent jurisdiction. Until such conditions are corrected, franchisee shall post or provide suitable warnings to ensure that the health and safety of those persons reasonably affected by such conditions is ensured, provided that franchisee has received notice from the city or others identifying such conditions or franchisee is otherwise aware of the health and safety standards of such conditions. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.23 Franchisee to maintain system in conformance with FCC signal leakage rules.
     A franchisee shall construct, operate and maintain the system in conformance with signal leakage requirements of the FCC’s rules to prevent interference with the transmission or reception of over-the-air broadcast signals by television receivers, cable services and other communication services. A franchisee shall not interfere with the ability of any subscriber to utilize his or her television receiver, computer, or other communication device for any lawful purpose. In the absence of federal or state rules to the contrary, the connection of any cable input selector device, converter or other device to a subscriber’s terminal shall not be considered as interference with the subscriber’s ability to utilize his or her television receiver, computer, or other communication device. However, the impairment of certain television receiver or VCR functions caused by such device (such as picture in-picture and the ability to view one premium channel while recording another) shall be deemed to constitute such interference, if violative of 47 C.F.R. Section 76.630 (compatibility with consumer electronics equipment). Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.24 Franchisee to take all reasonable steps to prevent accidents.
     A franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense, take all reasonable steps to prevent accidents at its work sites, including the placing and maintenance of necessary guards, fences, barricades and security personnel and, at night, suitable and sufficient lighting, except as otherwise explicitly directed by the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.25 Notice of cable construction/repair to subscribers.
     Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled “liquidated damages.”

     4.20.114.25.1.         Franchisee shall notify the city and residents or business owners on affected streets of any material construction, including rebuilds, upgrades, line extensions or substantial repair and maintenance activities, resulting in material interference with the use of local rights-of-way, or major repairs including any which require street or sidewalk trenching, but excluding routine repair and maintenance activities which do not cause material interference with the use of local rights-of-way, at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to commencement of such work. Notification may be provided on a phase-in basis to notify residents or business owners in areas immediately affected rather than to all residents or business owners generally.

     4.20.114.25.2.         Franchisee shall provide such notification, consistent with local law or regulation by either leaving one appropriate notice (e.g., a door hanger notice) at each affected residence or place of business or by sending one appropriate notice by first-class mail, whichever form of notification in the reasonable judgment of franchisee is more likely to reach all affected persons with adequate advance notice at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to work commencement.

     4.20.114.25.3. In the event of system rebuild affecting all or substantially all of the franchisee’s cable system or service, the franchisee shall notify all of its subscribers by first-class mail stating the scope and duration of the proposed construction or rebuild and its impacts at least fourteen (14) days prior to commencement of such work with a follow-up door hanger notice also being placed at subscribers’ residences or places of business no later than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the commencement of rebuild work affecting such subscribers. Such notice distributed by first-class mail may be included in subscriber statements.

     4.20.114.25.4. In the case of emergency repair or work on a system, such prior written notice shall not be required; however, in such circumstances, the franchisee shall, whenever reasonably possible, provide affected subscribers with such notice as may be appropriate under the circumstances including, but not limited to, contemporaneous written or telephonic notice (such as a recorded telephone message) as to the nature of the emergency and the expected duration of the repairs. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.26 Cable system design and architecture.
     The design, architecture and method of construction of the cable system shall not violate applicable statutes, ordinances, codes and regulations governing construction within the city. The city, or other city-designated person, shall, before the start of construction, approve such design and method of construction where it is consistent with such statutes, ordinances, codes, regulations and aesthetic standards. Should unforeseen questions of compliance with applicable statutes, ordinances, codes, regulations and standards arise after the city’s initial approval of the design and construction including, but not limited to, construction practices or installations of equipment which might create negative aesthetic impacts, the city and franchisee shall make reasonable good faith efforts to resolve such questions in a fair and equitable manner to all parties provided, however, that the city’s ultimate determination involving the franchisee’s compliance with applicable statutes, ordinances, codes, regulations and standards shall be determinative. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.27 Obstruction of city rights-of-way.
     In connection with the construction, reconstruction, operation, maintenance, repair, or removal of the system, a franchisee shall protect the aesthetics of the franchise areas and shall not obstruct, except in emergencies, the city rights-of-way, streets, railways, passenger travel, or other traffic to, from or within the city without prior consent of the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.28 Location of transmission and distribution structures.
     4.20.114.28.1. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by a franchisee within the city shall be so located as to minimize interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of housing residents who adjoin any streets or city right-of-way.

     4.20.114.28.2. In case of any direct or indirect disturbance caused by franchisee to any city or private right-of-way, street, easement, paved area or other property, a franchisee at its own cost and expense and in an expeditious manner and time period approved by the city, shall replace or repair and restore such city or private right-of-way, street, easement, paved area or other property to its prior condition or better as is reasonably possible consistent with applicable ordinances, codes and regulations of the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.29 Permits required to be obtained prior to any physical work being performed on city streets.
     A franchisee or its authorized contractors must obtain permits from the city prior to any physical work being performed on the city’s streets, or on city-owned property, involving the disturbance of city rights-of-way (including but not limited to excavation, cutting or boring). No permits will be required prior to the performance of emergency repair work provided, however, that a franchisee shall submit a permit request for such repair work to the city for record purposes within forty-eight (48) hours after a franchisee has performed such emergency work. Permits will be issued to a franchisee or its contractors only on plans approved by the city, which plans must be submitted for review before the request for the construction permit in accordance with the ordinance codified in this title. The city shall have no right to approve contractors utilized by the franchisee provided the contractors are properly licensed for the type Of work to be undertaken in the city possess appropriate business licenses, possess the appropriate experience, and possess workers’ compensation, liability insurance and any other necessary certificates or licenses required by applicable law. All work will be done in accordance with the city’s specifications and must comply with all applicable statutes, ordinances, codes and regulations governing construction in the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.30 Detailed maps of entire system required prior to issuance of construction permit—Maps also to be filed with affected utility companies.
     A franchisee shall cause detailed maps of the portions of the cable system to be constructed or reconstructed, including existing underground facilities on the street and materials showing construction, amplifier, and power supply locations, to be filed with the city prior to the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction. Prior to requesting the issuance of a permit for the installation of any facility or apparatus in accordance with the provisions of this section, a franchisee shall file such maps with all utility companies and public agencies where required by law or contract. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.31 Undergrounding of pedestals.
     The franchisee shall place underground all pedestals containing passive devices constructed after January 1, 1998, and shall replace any pedestal installed before January 1, 1998, with a flushmounted underground vault whenever such pedestal requires repair (such repair to be required, for example, when a pedestal itself is cracked or destroyed, but not when a pedestal lid is cracked and can be replaced), unless such obligation is waived in writing for specific locations by the city. The distribution facilities of a franchisee shall be installed underground where the distribution facilities of the utilities providing electric or telephone service are also located underground. Such underground construction shall be in accordance with such standards therefor as are from time to time established by the city (with respect to depth and location). Upon the undergrounding of electric or telephone utility lines, a franchisee shall concurrently (or earlier) place its above grade facilities underground at depths and locations approved by the city. All underground wires or cable of a franchisee installed after the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title shall be placed in conduits. Active electronic and optical components, including without limitation amplifiers, bridgers, line extenders, power supplies, lasers and opto-electronic devices, may be located above grade when cable plant is located underground provided that the above-grade placement of such components complies with all applicable ordinances and any future amendments. Franchisee may utilize existing active aerial facilities of electric and/or telephone companies where permitted by law or contract. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.32 Changes required by city improvements.
     4.20.114.32.1. Franchisee may be required to move its facilities to accommodate changes in city improvements. A franchisee shall protect, support, temporarily relocate, or temporarily or permanently, as may be required, remove or relocate without expense to the city or any other governmental entity any facilities installed, used, or maintained under a franchise if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any city street by the city or any other governmental entity or made necessary by any other city improvement or alteration in, under, on, upon, or about any city street or other city property whether such city improvement or alteration is made by the city or another governmental entity, and whether such improvement or alteration is for a governmental or proprietary function or made necessary by traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation or any other city project or purpose of the city or any other governmental entity.

     4.20.114.32.2. The city may at some future time to underground into conduit all aerial utilities and services in the city. The city grants franchisees permission to locate cable systems above ground until such undergrounding transpires provided, however, that if and when above ground utilities and services are relocated underground, the franchisee agrees to relocate its cable system underground. In consideration for the franchisee being allowed to install the franchisee’s cable system above ground, the franchisee agrees to relocate its cable services underground, contemporaneously with the undergrounding of all other utilities and services at no cost to the city. The franchisee agrees to bear all costs incurred in such underground relocation, removal or other work in consideration for being allowed to construct such cable system above ground using existing aerial supports. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.33 Altering city or other public facilities.
     In connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, or removal of the system, a franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the city or other public agency. A franchisee shall obtain the prior approval of the city before altering any water main; sewage or drainage system or any other structure in the city. Any such alteration shall be made by a franchisee at its sole cost and expense and in a manner reasonably prescribed by the city or other public agency whose facilities are affected. A franchisee shall also be liable at its own cost and expense to replace or repair and restore to its prior condition or better, as is reasonably possible consistent with applicable ordinances, codes and regulations of the city or other public agency, any city right-of-way, street or any municipal or public structure directly or indirectly involved in the construction of the system that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon by or on behalf of the franchisee pursuant to a franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.34 Franchisee shall temporarily move its wires to permit moving of buildings.
     Franchisee shall, at the request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, franchisee shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and franchisee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. Franchisee shall be given not less than fourteen (14) days’ notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.35 Replacement, repair, and restoration of damage to city facilities.
     In the event that a franchisee during construction, installation, inspection or repair of its facilities causes damage to pavement, sidewalks, driveways, landscaping or other property, the franchisee or the authorized agent shall at its own expense and in a manner approved by the city consistent with applicable ordinances, codes and regulations replace or repair and restore such places to their prior condition, or better, as is reasonably possible consistent with such ordinances, codes and regulations. The franchisee shall further warranty all such repair or restoration for a period of one year following such repair or restoration, unless the partial or complete failure of such repair or restoration is caused by circumstances not within normal operating conditions. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.36 Failure to complete required work.
     Upon failure of the franchisee to complete any work required by the provisions of the ordinance codified in this title or the franchisee’s franchise agreement, including, without limitation, applicable ordinances, codes and regulations of the city, to be done in any street or other city location to the satisfaction of the city within ten (10) days following receipt of written notice from the city specifying such failure, or within such longer period of time as is reasonably determined by the city, the city may, at its option, cause such work to be done and a franchisee shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the cable administrator to the franchisee within ten (10) days after receipt of such itemized report. At city’s option, city may demand of franchisee the estimated cost of such work, and such shall be paid by franchisee to city within ten (10) days of such demand; upon award of any contract or contracts for such work, franchisee shall pay to city within ten (10) days of demand any additional amount necessary to provide for the cost of such work. Upon completion of such work, franchisee shall pay to city or city shall refund to franchisee such sums so that the total received and retained by city shall equal the cost of such work. “Cost” as used herein shall include a reasonable charge for city’s overhead. Where the franchisee fails to pay in accordance with the demand of the city, then the city may proceed against the franchisee’s “letter of credit” or other surety. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.37 Emergency work.
     City may remove franchisee’s facilities including cable service wiring as may be required during emergencies. The city reserves the right to remove any portion of a franchisee’s equipment and facilities as may be required in any emergency as determined by the city without liability for interruption of cable service, and the city shall not be obligated to restore cable service or to pay the costs or expenses of restoring service provided that the city does not act arbitrarily in connection with the removal of such portion of the franchisee’s equipment and facilities in view of the circumstances of the emergency. The definition of an emergency or the determination that an emergency exits is within the sole discretion of the city and is not subject to review or appeal. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.38 Tree trimming.
     Cost of tree trimming is to be at expense of franchisee, and the city has the option to decide whether city or franchisee does the trimming. Before the installation of franchisee’s wires and cables and at any time thereafter, a franchisee shall notify the city regarding the need to trim trees and roots upon, and trees and tree branches overhanging, streets of the city so as to prevent the trees, branches and roots of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the franchisee. At the option of the city, such trimming may be done by the city at the expense of the franchisee, or by the franchisee under the city’s supervision and direction at the expense of the franchisee. When trees, tree branches or roots are located near the wires and cable of both franchisee and other utilities, then the costs of trimming such trees, tree branches or roots are to be allocated pro rata among the franchisee and such other utilities. When authorized, such trimming shall be limited to the area required for clear wiring passage and shall not include major structural branches which materially alter the appearance and natural growth habits of the tree. If such trimming is not performed by the city, the franchisee shall be responsible for any and all damages to any tree as a result of trimming or to the land surrounding any tree whether such tree is trimmed or removed, or for damage to property or person caused by such trimming and removal of any tree to the extent caused by the acts or omissions of the franchisee, its employees or contractors. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.39 Removal and abandonment of property of franchisee.
     4.20.114.39.1. Franchisee shall “wreck-out” or remove a cable system from any city street following termination or expiration of franchise. In the event that the use off:

     4.20.114.39.1.1. A substantial part of the cable system; or

     4.20.114.39.1.2. A part of the cable system is interfering with the city rights-of-way; or

     4.20.114.39.1.3. A part of the system which is visible or accessible to the public or is capable of causing a safety hazard, is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of ninety (90) days, or the city has terminated, canceled, revoked or affirmatively denied renewal of the franchise, a franchisee shall promptly at its own expense and upon written notice remove from the city all such property and poles of such cable system other than any which the city permits to be abandoned in place.

     4.20.114.39.2. In the event of such removal, a franchisee shall at its own expense promptly replace or repair and restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to its prior condition, or better, as is reasonably possible consistent with applicable ordinances, codes and regulations of the city as determined by the city. The franchisee may be permitted to abandon in place the underground portion of its cable system, provided that no portion of such cable system is accessible to the public or is capable of causing a safety hazard subject to the right of the city to require that the franchisee remove such underground portion of the cable system which interferes with roadwork or other road construction. In the event that any part of such cable system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement, then the city may require the franchisee either to remedy such noncompliance, or if the franchisee should fail to remedy such non-compliance within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice by the city, to remove such part of the cable system as provided in this subsection. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.40 Abandonment of property.
     4.20.114.40.1. Any property or a franchisee remaining in place ninety (90) days following the direction for removal specified in this section shall be, at the option of the city, considered permanently abandoned. The city may extend such time not to exceed an additional thirty (30) days. Any property, of the franchisee which is permanently abandoned shall automatically be deemed the property of the city.

     4.20.114.40.2. Any property of a franchisee which the franchisee seeks permission to abandon in place may only be abandoned in such a manner as the city shall prescribe. Upon abandonment in place of the property of a franchisee, the franchisee shall submit to the city an instrument in writing, to be approved by the city transferring to the city the ownership of such property. If such an instrument is not received within thirty (30) days of the city granting permission to abandon in place the property, the property shall automatically become that of the city.

     4.20.114.40.3.         Any abandonment, either with or without the city’s consent, shall not relieve the franchisee from its obligations to remove and/or remediate all toxic or hazardous materials (as defined by applicable provisions of either state or federal law), nor shall such abandonment relieve the franchisee from his defense and indemnification obligations regarding the same. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.41 Removal of replaced plant or equipment.
     4.20.114.41.1.         Notwithstanding any other provisions of the ordinance codified in this title, the franchisee shall remove or “wreck out” all of its aerial cable plant, together with above-grade pedestals containing passive devices utilized in connection with underground plant, which have been replaced by franchisee in the course of its normal operations or any construction or rebuild and which are no longer required for proper operation of the cable system.

     4.20.114.41.2.         Such portions of the plant which are subject to removal or wreck out in accordance with the provisions of this section must be removed before any construction, reconstruction, or rebuild is deemed complete by the city. Franchisee shall not be in default of any completion deadline unless franchisee has been given notice and opportunity to cure such default as provided in Section 4.20.109.2.1. However, franchisee will not be required to remove or wreck out, and may be permitted to abandon in place, any underground plant which has been rebuilt or replaced, provided that no portion of the abandoned plant is accessible to the public or is capable of causing a safety hazard.

     4.20.114.41.3.         Section 4.20.114.41.2 notwithstanding, the city may require franchisee promptly to remove underground plant or other equipment which interferes with roadwork or other road construction or which interferes with any other franchised cable service providers operation. Franchisee must comply with the requirements of applicable state and local statutes, ordinances, codes and regulations governing the location of subsurface installations with respect to notification to or from a regional notification center (such as Underground Service Alert) concerning proposed excavation work, and must keep adequate records or maps so that the location of its abandoned underground plant can be determined on request. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.42 Line extension policy.
     If the city increases the city service area by adding to or incorporating additional land areas, the franchisee will extend cable service to the new locations within one hundred eighty (180) days of a written request from the cable administrator or a subscriber in the added territories, at no cost to the city or the subscriber. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.114.43 Clean up.
     The franchisee shall at all times keep its work area, including storage areas used, free from accumulation of waste material or rubbish and all tools, scaffolding, equipment, and materials not the property of the city. Upon completion of any construction, the franchisee shall leave the work and premises in a clean, neat and workmanlike condition satisfactory to the cable administrator. Nothing in the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement shall hinder the right of the city or any governmental authority to perform or carry on, directly or indirectly, any public works or public improvements of any description. Should the cable system in any instance interfere with the construction, maintenance, or repair of such public works or public improvements, the franchisee shall, upon reasonable notice and at its own cost and expense, protect or relocate its cable system, or part thereof, as reasonably directed by the city. Unless an emergency situation exists, for the purpose of this section and in order to allow the franchisee to budget for any required relocation, in the event that public works or public improvement projects are pre-planned in the city’s prior year budget process, “reasonable notice” will be construed as written notification of no later than October 31 of the prior year, or within forty-five (45) days of the conclusion of the city’s budget process, whichever allows the city more time. The franchisee shall in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property. If public funds are available to any company using such street, easement, or right-of-way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds shall also be made available to the franchisee. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XVI Special Provisions Applicable to Holders of State Video Franchises.
4.20.115 Franchise fee.
     A state video franchise holder operating in the city shall pay to the city a franchise fee that is equal to five percent of the gross revenues of that state video franchise holder. The term “gross revenues” shall be defined as set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5860. (Ord. 265 § 2, 2007)

 

4.20.115.1 Audit authority.
     Not more than once annually, the city may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with all applicable statutes and regulations related to the computation and payment of franchise fees. (Ord. 265 § 2, 2007)

 

4.20.115.2 Customer service penalties under state video franchises.
     A.    The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

     B.     The city shall monitor a state video franchise holder’s compliance with state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city will provide to the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service and protection standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty (30) day time period will be subject to the following monetary penalties to be imposed by the city in accordance with state law:

     1.     For the first occurrence of a violation, a monetary penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each violation.

     2.     For a second violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a monetary penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each violation.

     3.     For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a monetary penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for each violation.

     C.     A state video franchise holder may appeal a monetary penalty assessed by the city within sixty (60) days. After relevant evidence and testimony is received, and staff reports are submitted, the city council will vote to either uphold or vacate the monetary penalty. The city council’s decision on the imposition of a monetary penalty shall be final. (Ord. 265 § 2, 2007)

 

4.20.115.3 City response to state video franchise applications.
     A.    Applications for state video franchises within the boundaries of the city must concurrently provide to the city complete copies of any application or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities Commission. One complete copy must be provided to the city clerk.

     B.     The city will provide any appropriate comments to the California Public Utilities Commission regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise. (Ord. 265 § 2, 2007)

 

4.20.115.4 PEG access channel capacity.
     A.    A state video franchise holder that uses the public rights-of-way shall designate sufficient capacity on its network to enable the carriage of at least three public, educational, or governmental (PEG) access channels.

     B.     Additional requirements relating to PEG access channels are as follows:

     1.     A state video franchise holder is subject to payment of the PEG support fee specified in Section 4.20.113.3 of Chapter 4.20.

     2.     PEG access channels shall be for the exclusive use of the city or its designees to provide public, educational, or governmental programming.

     3.     Advertising, underwriting, or sponsorship recognition may be carried on the PEG access channels for the purpose of funding PEG-related activities.

     4.     The PEG access channels shall be carried on the basic service tier.

     5.     To the extent feasible, the PEG access channels shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier, and the channel numbers for the PEG access channels shall be the same channel numbers used by the incumbent cable operator unless prohibited by federal law.

     6.     After the initial designation of PEG access channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without the prior written consent of the city, unless the change is required by federal law.

     7.     Each PEG access channel shall be capable of carrying a National Television System Committee (NTSC) television signal. (Ord. 265 § 2, 2007)

 

4.20.115.5 Interconnection.
     Where technically feasible, a state video franchise holder and incumbent cable operator shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG access channel programming. Interconnection may be accomplished by direct cable, microwave link, satellite, or other reasonable method of connection. State video franchise holders and incumbent cable operators shall provide interconnection of the PEG Access channels on reasonable terms and conditions and may not withhold the interconnection. If a state video franchise holder and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement, the city may require the incumbent cable operator to allow the state video franchise holder to interconnect its network with the incumbent’s network at a technically feasible point on the holder’s network as identified by the holder. If no technically feasible point for interconnection is available, the state video franchise holder shall make an interconnection available to the channel originator and shall provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the state video franchise holder requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the parties. (Ord. 265 § 2, 2007)

 

4.20.115.6 Emergency alert system and emergency overrides.
     A state video franchise holder must comply with the emergency alert system requirements of the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the holder’s network. Provisions in city-issued franchises authorizing the city to provide local emergency notifications shall remain in effect, and shall apply to all state video franchise holders in the city for the duration of the city-issued franchise, or until the term of the franchise would have expired had it not been terminated pursuant to subdivision (m) of Section 5840 of the California Public Utilities Code, or until January 1, 2009, whichever is later. (Ord. 265 § 2, 2007)

 

4.20.115.7 Encroachment permit application.
     A.    As used in this subsection, the term “encroachment permit” means any permit issued by the city relating to construction or operation of facilities by the holder of a state video franchise.

     B.     The city shall either approve or deny an application from a holder of a state video franchise for an encroachment permit within sixty (60) days of receiving a completed application.

     C.     If the city denies an application for an encroachment permit, the city shall, at the time of notifying the applicant of the denial, furnish to the applicant a detailed explanation of the reason for the denial. An applicant may appeal the city’s denial of an encroachment permit application in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 1.04.130 of Chapter 1.04 of Title 1 of the Yucaipa Municipal Code, which section is titled “Appeal of administrative actions.” (Ord. 265 § 2, 2007)

 

Article XVII Cable Service Provider Franchise Requirements.
4.20.116.1 Franchise required.
     A non-exclusive franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable system within all or any portion of the city is required of anyone desiring to provide cable service in the city. A franchise may be granted by the city to any person, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who offers to furnish and provide a cable system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of the ordinance codified in this title and an approved franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.116.2 Applicable documents.
     4.20.116.2.1            Documents specified in Section 4.20.116.1.

     4.20.116.2.2.           IEEE Committee 802.3 standards (ethernet).

     4.20.116.2.3.           ANSI Committee X3T9.5 standards (fiber distributed data interface (FDDI)).

     4.20.116.2.4.           Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) RFC 1156 and 1157 Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP).

     4.20.116.2.5.           Federal: Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Rules and Regulations (“R&R”) Parts 73, 76 and 78.

     4.20.116.2.6.           Industry, Electronic Industry Association (EIA) RS-170.

     4.20.116.2.7.           National Cable Television Association (NCTA) Standards. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

 

Article XVIII Reporting Requirements.
4.20.117 Reporting requirements.
     In addition to any other reports or documents required by the ordinance codified in this title, a franchisee shall maintain and provide all the following reports to the cable administrator within sixty (60) calendar days of the close of each calendar year unless otherwise stated. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.117.1 Monthly progress reports.
     During the construction, installation, upgrade or rebuild phases, the franchisee shall submit a monthly progress report (due on the tenth day of each calendar month until this phase is completed) which describes the contractor’s progress during the previous month. At a minimum the report shall indicate:

     4.20.117.1.1.           Dates of actions and milestones achieved;

     4.20.117.1.2.           Schedule extensions requested/received; and

     4.20.117.1.3.           Problems encountered and their resolution. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.117.2 Quarterly reports.
     4.20.117.2.1.           A franchisee shall submit to the city on a quarterly basis within thirty (30) days after March 31st, June 30th, September 30th, and December 31st of each year, or on a monthly basis if so requested within forty-five (45) days after the end of each month throughout the term of the franchise agreement, a reasonable, statistical summary of the operations of the system with respect to the number of dwelling units passed, the number of subscribers for basic and enhanced services, and the number of cable plant miles in construction or completed.

     4.20.117.2.2.           A franchisee shall submit to the city, on a quarterly basis within forty-five (45) days after March 31st, June 30th, September 30th, and December 31st of each year, or on a monthly basis if so requested within forty-five (45) days after the end of each month throughout the term of the franchise agreement, a completed franchise fee, subscriber, revenue and expenses reporting and tracking form. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.117.3 Annual reports.
     The franchisee shall complete and submit on an annual basis a copy of the annual reporting form, and its required documentation. A franchisee shall additionally file the following reports annually with the city, no later than one hundred twenty (120) days after the end of a franchisee’s fiscal year: an audited financial statement, or a financial statement certified to be true, correct and complete by an authorized officer or representative of the franchisee, applicable to the cable system serving the city, including a detailed statement of all income and revenues, and expenses attributable to the operations of franchisee in the city during the preceding twelve (12) month period, a balance sheet, and the information currently specified in the FCC’s “chart of accounts” (see 47 C.F.R. § 76.924), and such additional information as the FCC may subsequently require in its “chart of accounts” or in other comparable provisions, and in no less detail than currently required by the FCC. Expenses, balance sheet accounts and statements of properties shall be prorated to the city based on the number of subscribers served by the franchisee in the city as of the end of the calendar year for which such report is prepared in relation to all subscribers served by such franchisee as of the end of such year for any integrated cable system or cable systems serving the city and other communities using common facilities, equipment, management and personnel. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.117.4 Shareholder and financial reports.
     In the event the franchisee or its parent company, partnership or corporation publishes reports to shareholders, the city’s cable administrator shall receive copies when distributed. Any audited financial statements prepared for the franchisee, its parent company, partnership or corporation by a CPA shall also be provided promptly to the cable administrator. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.117.5 Reports regarding operations, affairs, transactions of franchisee.
     4.20.117.5.1.           A franchisee shall prepare and furnish to the city upon request franchise specific reports with respect to its operations, affairs or transactions of property provided that:

     4.20.117.5.1.1. The information request is reasonably related to the performance of the franchisee’s obligations under the franchise agreement or the ordinance codified in this title;

     4.20.117.5.1.2. The information requested is not otherwise required in any similar report or filing under the ordinance codified in this title or the franchisee’s franchise agreement;

     4.20.117.5.1.3. The preparation of any such report does not require excessive time, cost or commitment of personnel on the part of the franchisee;

     4.20.117.5.1.4. The form and content of such report is in the reasonable discretion of the franchisee; and

     4.20.117.5.1.5. The franchisee is given a period of no less that thirty (30) days following receipt of written request from the city in which to submit such report. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.117.6 Equipment location maps.
     4.20.117.6.1.           Within sixty (60) days of entering into the franchise agreement, the franchisee shall ensure that the city has full and complete maps (on Mylar sheets 24” by 36”, or larger in size) and records showing the location of franchisee’s cable system installed or in use in street, city rights-of-way and other city and private places in the city. Such maps may exclude the locations of drops but shall show the locations of active or passive electronic equipment, including pedestals and vaults, as well as the routing of the cable itself. Thereafter, if changes have occurred to such a cable system, the franchisee shall file with the cable administrator every six months, on or before the last day in March and September of each year, current maps or sets of maps drawn to scale, or updates to existing maps, showing the cable system installed and in place in streets, city rights-of-way and other private places in the city.

     4.20.117.6.2.           If no such changes have occurred during the six month period, the franchisee shall file a written notice stating that no changes have occurred; provided, however, that every five years franchisee shall file a complete, up-to-date set of such maps with the cable administrator. For purposes of this section, “changes” which have occurred to the cable system shall be deemed to mean rerouting of trunk or distribution cable, change in location of active or passive electronic equipment (but not replacement of such equipment in the same location), line extensions and the addition of active and passive electronic equipment in new locations. For aerial plant, the routing of the plant shall be indicated; for underground plant, the location of pedestals contain active or passive electronic equipment shall be identified in addition to the routing of the cable itself.

     4.20.117.6.3.           The franchisee may submit its maps in electronic form (i.e., diskettes or electronic maps) with accompanying software if acceptable to the cable administrator. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.117.7 Materials and information applicable to business, ownership and operations of system.
     4.20.117.7.1.           Throughout the term of the franchise agreement, a franchisee shall maintain at its office location in the franchise service area or at another office location as agreed to by the city and shall make available for inspection, review or audit at either office within ten (10) business days after receipt of a written request by the city, complete and accurate books of account, records, maps, plans and other like materials of the franchisee applicable to the business, ownership and operations of the system and compliance by the franchisee with its franchise obligations within the city. The city shall maintain the confidentiality of all such materials and shall not disclose such materials to any other person other than to those employees and designated representatives as may be reasonably necessary for evaluation, provided that such confidentiality is consistent with applicable state and federal statutes, ordinances and regulations.

     4.20.117.7.2.           The city shall have the right to inspect, examine or audit such materials during normal business hours and upon reasonable notice to the franchisee for reasons related to the enforcement and administration of a franchise agreement, and to obtain information which has not otherwise been provided to the city or which city has reasonable basis to believe has not been reported fairly and accurately, provided that such additional information is required by, or relates to franchisee’s compliance with its obligations under the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement with respect to the operations of the franchisee within the city, and where necessary, the larger cable system of which the system within the city is a part so as to verify income and expense allocations to the franchisee’s operations in the city.

     4.20.117.7.3.           Franchisee shall make available books, records and other documents maintained at any location outside the franchise area for review at the franchisee’s office, as set forth in the franchise agreement, within seven days after receipt of written request, or the city may review such materials at such other location provided that the franchisee reimburses the city for reasonable travel expenses to and from such other location. City may inspect, review and audit any materials of franchisee which are reasonably necessary to enable the city to determine the accuracy of franchisee’s pro rata allocation of expense and revenues to the franchise area.

     4.20.117.7.4.           All documents which pertain to financial matters which may be the subject of an audit by the city shall be retained by the franchisee for a minimum of three years following any termination of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.117.8 Public reports.
     A copy of each of franchisee’s annual and other periodic public reports and those of its parent, subsidiary and affiliated corporations or partnerships and other entities, shall automatica1ly be submitted to city within thirty (30) days of their issuance. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.117.9 Cost of reports.
     All reports, filings, documents, responses and records required to be made available for inspection or to be submitted to the city by the franchisee under the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement shall be provided by the franchisee to the city at the franchisee’s cost within the period required therefor. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.117.10 Reserved.
 

4.20.117.11 Performance evaluation/franchise compliance.
     The cable administrator may maintain a record of the franchisee’s performance for the purposes of franchise administration and renewal as outlined in the cable act. Performance and compliance will be determined in part based on the information provided by the franchisee pursuant to the ordinance codified in this title and the franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XIX System Requirements.
4.20.118.1 Emergency override.
     The franchisee shall provide an “emergency override” system for use by the city. This emergency alert system will allow live voice communications interrupt on all system channels in the city. The equipment shall be accessible to the city twenty-four (24) hours/day, seven days/week through an exclusive code, which can be used from a touch-tone telephone. The franchisee shall provide and maintain the equipment, services and personnel for the emergency alert system as consideration for the granting of a cable service provider franchise agreement at no cost to the city. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.118.2 Interconnection working group.
     In order to develop plans or arrangements for interconnection of access channels between systems, the city may require the formation of an interconnection working group (“IWG”) which shall be comprised of two representatives of the city to be designated by the city and one representative from each of the franchisees in the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.118.3 The IWG shall be chaired by a representative of the city.
     4.20.118.3.1.           The IWG shall study and make recommendations to the city on a plan for interconnection of PEG access channels on the cable systems. Such plan may include as required by the city:

     4.20.118.3.1.1. The technical method of interconnection of PEG access channels;

     4.20.118.3.1.2. The financial plan for interconnection, including but not limited to the total costs of the plan put forth by the IWG, and the share for each franchisee;

     4.20.118.3.1.3. The transmission and distribution equipment required by each franchisee for the operation of the interconnect;

     4.20.118.3.1.4. Operational procedures and maintenance for the interconnect;

     4.20.118.3.1.5. Licensing of communications paths;

     4.20.118.3.1.6. Specific responsibilities of each franchisee for implementing the interconnection plan developed by the IWG; and

     4.20.118.3.1.7. Timetable and implementation plan.

     4.20.118.3.2.           The IWG plan shall address:

     4.20.118.3.2.1. The origination of programming from the city complex onto the interconnected network for distribution and reception in all franchised areas of the city;

     4.20.118.3.2.2. The origination of PEG access from at least one additional point within the city;

     4.20.118.3.2.3. Simultaneous program origination on all channels of the PEG interconnected network which shall be possible on a live and taped basis;

     4.20.118.3.2.4. Uniform channel assignments for interconnected PEG access channels;

     4.20.118.3.2.5. Mechanisms for the provision of additional interconnected access channels and the use of the fallow time on interconnected access channels; and

     4.20.118.3.2.6. Recognition of the access corporation or other designated entity.

     4.20.118.3.3.           Franchisees shall implement any reasonable plan for interconnection adopted by a unanimous vote of the IWG provided, however, that if the interconnection working group is unable to formulate an acceptable interconnection plan within six months of its formation as required by the city, then the city shall have the power to create a fair and reasonable interconnection plan that has been adopted by the city council which franchisees shall then accept, provided that the plan is economically feasible (as determined by the city), the costs of the plan may be passed on to subscribers if and as permitted by FCC rules, and the plan and attendant cost is approved by the council. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.118.4 No proliferation of city data network transmissions beyond cable system.
     4.20.118.4.1.           Any cable service provider which transport signals to/from the city data network shall ensure that city data network signals do not “leak” into the surrounding communities. In the event that a service provider connects the cable system in the franchise area to other than city residences or businesses outside the franchise area, then the service provider shall:

     4.20.118.4.1.1. Provide, install, and maintain, at its expense, RF filters or other technology to ensure that city data network signals are not useable outside the city franchise area; and

     4.20.118.4.1.2. The city, at its cost, shall determine the adequacy of the methods used to prevent “leakage” of city data signals through both pre-installation engineering analysis and post installation testing.

     4.20.118.4.2.           If city determines that the service provider’s steps to prevent leakage of city data signals out of the franchise area are inadequate, then the service provider shall at its own cost propose, provide, install, and maintain additional modifications to the cable system as may be needed to prevent such signal “leakage.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XX System Design Requirements--Scope.
4.20.119 System design requirements--Scope.
     System design specifications shall be specified and agreed upon in the franchise agreement. All matters offered by the franchisee to the city in response to a request for proposals or other inquiry from the city, which are accepted by the city shall be incorporated by reference in the franchisee’s franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XXI System and Franchisee Performance Evaluation Requirements.
4.20.120.1 Subscriber surveys as to programming interests and quality of franchisee’s services and operations.
     Once every three years the franchisee, at its own expense, shall survey its subscribers to evaluate the franchisee’s performance and its subscriber programming preferences. Each survey shall be performed by a professionally qualified survey specialist independent of and not affiliated with the franchisee. The franchisee shall provide the cable administrator with a copy of the proposed survey and the identity of the survey specialist sufficiently in advance of the commencement of the survey to allow the cable administrator to review and comment upon the qualifications of the survey specialist and the adequacy of the survey instrument. The selection of the survey specialist, as well as the form and content of the survey shall be agreed upon by the cable administrator and the franchisee provided, however, that the survey shall contain at least one open-ended question (e.g., “Do you have any other complaints, problems or concerns about franchisee’s operations or service?”). The methodology and procedure of the survey shall be determined by the franchisee and may utilize either written or telephone surveys of all or a statistically reliable portion of the franchisee’s subscribers in the city. Copies of complete survey results shall be given to the cable administrator within thirty (30) days of completion of each survey. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.120.2 Sessions to be held every three years--Notice and timing.
     At the city’s election, the cable administrator and each franchisee may hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions every three years from the effective date of a franchise and as may be required by federal and state law. The cable administrator will provide franchisee with written notice of its desire to commence a performance evaluation session. A franchisee shall then provide the cable administrator with any written materials, reports or other written information the franchisee desires for consideration during the performance evaluation session to the cable administrator, within sixty (60) days following the date on which the cable administrator mails or transmits the notice of the performance evaluation session to franchisee. After the cable administrator is in receipt of the franchisee’s information, if any, he or she will schedule an evaluation session with franchisee, at a mutually convenient date and time, but no earlier than ninety (90) days from the receipt by the cable administrator of all information from franchisee. The franchisee will be notified of the date and time of each evaluation session within thirty (30) days after cable administrator is in receipt of all information, to provide franchisee with at least sixty (60) days in which to notify subscribers of the meeting. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.120.3 Access channel sessions shall be open to the public.
     4.20.120.3.1.           All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public.

     4.20.120.3.2.           A franchisee shall notify its subscribers of all evaluation sessions by:

     4.20.120.3.2.1. A notice printed prominently and separately from other materials of franchisee and sent directly to all of franchisee’s subscribers in the city at least twenty (20) days preceding each session, provided that such notice may be included in subscriber statements so long as it is a prominently printed, separate item and not incorporated into any other document in such statement; and

     4.20.120.3.2.2. Character-generated announcement on at least one channel (within channels 2-12 if there exists a channel within this range in which the franchisee provides character-generated programming controlled by it, or some other channel at franchisee’s discretion if not) of its system between the hours of seven a.m. and nine p.m., for five consecutive days preceding each session. The city may also provide such notice on its governmental access channel(s). (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.120.4 Discussion topics listed.
     Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation session may include, but not be limited to, compliance by the franchisee with respect to its obligations under the ordinance codified in this title or its franchise agreement concerning service rate structures; franchise fees; liquidated damages; free or discounted services; application of new technologies; system performance; services provided; access; programming offered; subscriber complaints; privacy; judicial and FCC rulings; line extension policies; and franchisee or city rules. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.120.5 Report required of franchisee, details outlined.
     During the evaluation session, the franchisee shall be prepared to answer questions and/or provided copies of existing reports which shall in reasonable detail address the franchisee’s compliance with the material terms and conditions of the franchise agreement during the period from the submission of the last such report or, in the case of the first such report, from the effective date of the franchise agreement to the date of the first such report, and may include in the cable administrator’s reasonable discretion those events related to the following topics:

     4.20.120.5.1.           Compliance with, and any modification necessary with respect to, the financial commitments required under the franchise agreement;

     4.20.120.5.2.           Compliance with requirements regarding system characteristics and technical performance and testing requirements;

     4.20.120.5.3.           Compliance with construction terms, standards, and schedule;

     4.20.120.5.4.           A description of the changes made or contemplated to the mix and quality of programming in the broad categories of video programming or other services on the system; nothing in this paragraph, however, shall imply any city regulatory authority or power of censorship over the content of programming on the franchisee’s channels, excepting, however, the pubic, educational, and governmental access channels or the leased access channels;

     4.20.120.5.5.           Compliance with, and any modification necessary with respect to, the plan for interconnection set forth in the franchise agreement;

     4.20.120.5.6.           Compliance with the subscriber privacy protection policies in accordance with the ordinance codified in this title;

     4.20.120.5.7.           A summary of all service interruptions with respect to any portion of the cable system thereof;

     4.20.120.5.8.           A summary of all subscriber and user complaints and the action taken by the franchisee in response thereto in accordance with the ordinance codified in this title; and

     4.20.120.5.9.           Other events which the franchisee or cable administrator may find significant. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.120.6 City may request additional information and clarification to determine franchise compliance.
     Within sixty (60) days after the conclusion of any evaluation session, unless otherwise extended, the city may request additional information on specified topics related to franchisee’s compliance with the franchise agreement which the franchisee shall supply such within sixty (60) days of such request. The city may review the franchisee’s performance to determine whether the franchisee has complied with the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement and shall, following completion of any such review, keep the franchisee supplied information on file. Nothing in this section shall affect the city’s remedies provided elsewhere in the ordinance codified in this title. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.120.7 City may issue report on compliance with cable service provider ordinance and franchise agreement and require improvements where necessary.
     Within sixty (60) days after the conclusion of any evaluation session, unless otherwise extended, the city may issue a report with respect to franchisee’s compliance with the ordinance codified in this title and the franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XXII System Testing And Franchise Performance Reports Requirements.
4.20.121.1 Ten or more complaints received by cable administrator.
     When the cable administrator has received ten (10) or more complaints which complaints in the judgment of the cable administrator cast reasonable doubt on the compliance of the franchisee’s system with the technical standards set forth in the ordinance codified in this title and the franchise agreement or FCC technical standards, the cable administrator shall have the right and authority to compel a franchisee to test, analyze, and report on the performance of the cable system at the franchisee’s expense, provided that such tests are directly related to the obligations of franchisee to meet the technical standards set forth in the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement. Such report shall be delivered to the cable administrator no later than thirty (30) days after the franchisee receives written notice from the cable administrator identifying those technical standards set forth in the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement on which the franchisee is to conduct such tests or make such analyses are to be made or conducted, which report shall include the following information: the nature of the complaints which precipitated the special test(s); which cable system component(s) was/were tested, the equipment used, and procedure(s) employed in said testing; the results of such test(s); and the method(s) in which said complaints were resolved. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.121.2 Required test may be done by independent engineer at cost of franchisee.
     4.20.121.2.1.           If franchisee’s tests as required by this section indicate that franchisee’s system is in compliance with the FCC’s technical standards, but the cable administrator subsequently receives five or more complaints which in the cable administrator’s judgment are substantially similar to those complaints reported prior to the franchisee’s testing concerning compliance of the franchisee’s cable system with such technical standards, then the cable administrator may require that the tests and analyses specified in this section be repeated under the supervision of a qualified engineer selected by the cable administrator who is not an employee or affiliate of the franchisee.

     4.20.121.2.2.           If such tests demonstrate the existence of technical compliance problems which are substantially and materially related to such complaints, then such tests shall be paid for by the franchisee within twenty (20) days after the cable administrator submits the engineer’s invoice, including without limitation the costs of the engineer’s travel, lodging, professional fees and the like provided, however, that such costs shall not exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) per instance.

     4.20.121.2.3.           If such tests do not demonstrate the existence of technical compliance problems, then such tests and expenses shall be paid for by the city. The aforesaid engineer shall sign all records of the special tests and forward to the cable administrator such records with a report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending actions to be taken by the franchisee and the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XXIII Technical and Performance Requirements.
4.20.122.1 Scope.
     4.20.122.1.1.           This section sets forth the minimum technical engineering and performance requirements which shall be met by a cable service provider in fulfilling its obligations under the ordinance codified in this title and the franchise agreement.

     4.20.122.1.2.           The franchisee may request a waiver of any requirement of this section where local conditions render a waiver essential. Such requests shall be directed to the cable administrator who shall determine whether such requests should be considered. Waivers shall be granted only where technically acceptable to and in the best interests of the city and cable subscribers. Any such waivers shall be signed by both parties and incorporated into the franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.2 Failure to meet technical and performance requirements.
     Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled. “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.3 Engineering.
     The system shall distribute NTSC-TV signals with standard six MHZ channel bandwidths, or their equivalent. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.4 General.
     All cabling shall be of a size and construction that will assure that the system functions as specified herein. All cable and components installed shall be wholly suitable for the conditions to which they may be exposed. (Note: Where not required for initial operation, unused cable ends shall be sealed and protected from moisture and other possible damage. In addition, all unused cable outputs shall be properly electrically terminated.) (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.5 Antennas.
     Antennas shall comply with all federal, state, local and/or FAA safety requirements concerning lighting, marking and analogous features. Each antenna shall be of sufficient gain and directivity to provide adequate reserve signal to noise ratio and suppression of adjacent channel interference. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.6 Electricity.
     The franchisee shall meet all National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electric Code California Public Utilities Commission, General Orders 95 and 128 standards with regard to and in all facets of the cable system including, but not limited to, lightning, power surges and proper grounding. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.7 Subscriber installation material.
     Cable fittings, ground blocks, etc., shall be of a quality that will provide secure and safe construction. Where grounding wire, rod, clamps, etc., are used, they shall be selected to conform to pertinent National Electric Code and local electrical safety specifications. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.8 Best engineering effort.
     The franchisee shall employ a best engineering effort in all phases of design and construction, limited only by restrictions imposed by the state of the art and zoning limitations to avoid or to minimize co-channel interference, electrical noise interference, multipath signal or excessive fading. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.9 Failure to comply with FCC technical standards.
     Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.10 Reserved.
 

4.20.122.11 Reserved.
 

4.20.122.12 Reserved.
 

4.20.122.13 FCC and franchise rules.
     In addition, franchisee shall comply with all relevant FCC and franchisee-proposed technical performance rules. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.14 Radiation leakage.
     Incidental radiation from any part of the system or service outlets shall conform with Part 15 of FCC Rules and Cumulative Leakage Index requirements, or such modifications thereof as may be adopted subsequently. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.15 Overhead.
     The installation shall conform to the requirements applicable to urban districts in the National Electrical Safety Code and shall apply to all streets, alleys, roads, and drives. All aerial coaxial cables shall be laced with lashing wire to messenger cables by means of a suitable lashing machine. Lashing wire shall be 0.045-inch stainless steel, or its equivalent, of the type used to lash aerial telephone cables. The pitch of lashing wire may be from ten to fifteen (15) inches but shall be consistent throughout the system. At a minimum the system shall he grounded at every first, last and tenth pole in a span. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.16 Ground clearance.
     The installation of all cable system cabling shall not conflict with or cause any other cabling (i.e., communications, power, etc.) to violate established ground clearance criteria (existing and/or future). (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.17 Underground.
     Cables shall be unreeled in place at the bottom of the trench. Cables normally shall not be unreeled and pulled into the trench from one end. Cables shall be in one piece without splices between connections except where the distance exceeds the length in which the cable is manufactured. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.18 Conduit.
     Under paved areas and roadways, the cables shall be installed in adequately sized conduit not less than three inches in size. Conduit shall be extended not less than two feet beyond pavements and roadways, when such roadway is utilized for vehicular or pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.19 Trenches.
     Trenches in which direct burial cables are placed shall have a minimum depth of eighteen (18) inches below grade shall be not less than six inches wide and shall generally be in straight lines between cable connections except as otherwise necessary. Bends in trenches shall have a radius of not less than thirty-six (36) inches. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.20 Rock.
     Rock, where encountered, shall be removed to a depth of not less than three inches below the cable depth and the space filled with sand or clean earth free from particles that would be retained on quarter inch sieve. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.122.21 Cathodic protection.
     The installation will be so designed and constructed as not to interfere with existing city-owned cathodic protection systems. The design will include but is not limited to the installation of guy strain insulators on all down guys. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XXIV Reservation of City’s Rights.
4.20.123.1 City’s reservation of rights.
     Insofar as it is not preempted by federal or state regulations, the city reserves all rights it may now have or subsequently acquire under state, federal or other law with respect to the regulation of cable services or other communications services by a franchisee. A franchisee shall provide written notice to the city thirty (30) days in advance of commencing the offering or distribution of any other communications service and the city may, unless its power or authority to do so is limited or preempted by federal or state law or regulations, authorize such activity subject to such reasonable terms and conditions as the city may establish. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.123.2 City reserves right to adopt additional terms, conditions and regulations.
     The city reserves the right, and in accepting a franchise a franchisee shall acknowledge and accept the city’s right to adopt, to incorporate into the franchise agreement or to incorporate into the franchise agreement by reference, any additional rules, regulations, terms, conditions or ordinances authorized or permitted by federal law as it finds necessary in the lawful exercise of its authority, constitutional powers, powers to protect good order and discipline, and protect the health, safety or welfare, provided, however, that the exercise of such rights and powers or the adoption of such additional rules, regulations, terms, conditions or ordinances does not otherwise constitute an impairment of contract or abrogation of contractual rights or obligations of the franchisee contained in the franchise agreement and protected under federal, state or local law. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.123.3 City discretionary powers.
     Should there be any significant change to the Communications Act of 1934 as amended or to the federal regulations promulgated thereunder, or to any other federal or state law, so as to expand the city’s discretionary, powers pertaining to cable service or other communication services, which expanded discretionary powers fall outside the purview of the city’s lawful exercise of constitutional powers, powers to protect good order and discipline, and protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, franchisee will be obligated to observe and follow any modifications to the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement which the city may require or be authorized to require or otherwise secure with respect to such change. Significant changes include, by way of example and not by way of limitation, changes which allow or address the following subjects: municipal regulation of cable system programming; increased technical proficiency; local requirements for access channels and financial support of local access and/or origination; municipal acquisition of cable systems; permitted franchise fees and revenue; city services for seniors or the disabled; franchise renewal or transfer procedures; “life line,” or special reduced rate service; and definition of “effective competition” with the franchisee’s cable system. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.123.4 Procedures for adoption of additional ordinances or regulations.
     4.20.123.4.1.           Each change to the ordinance codified in this title, other than the initial adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, shall be provided to the franchisee at least sixty (60) days preceding adoption by the city. The cable administrator shall provide each franchisee with the opportunity to meet and confer concerning changes to or modifications of such proposed ordinance or regulation during regularly scheduled public hearings.

     4.20.123.4.2.           Additional ordinances or regulations adopted by the city shall be complied with by the franchisee within sixty (60) days of the date of adoption of such ordinances or regulations, unless franchisee shall promptly and in writing request of the city an extension of time in which to comply. The city shall promptly respond and shall grant such requests for additional time if reasonably necessary to affect compliance, so long as franchisee is actively and expeditiously attempting to obtain compliance with such regulations. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.123.5 City has right to acquire cable system.
     Nothing in the ordinance codified in this title or any franchise agreement shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect in any way or to any extent the right of the city to acquire the property of a franchisee through mutual agreement or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the city’s right of eminent domain. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.123.6 If city acquires system, city may dispose of the system in any manner.
     In the event of any such acquisition of a cable system by the city, and subject to the requirements of applicable law, the city may lease, sell, operate or otherwise dispose of all or any part of the system in any manner. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.123.7 Privileges claimed by franchisee in city streets and easements subordinate to city’s rights.
     Any privilege claimed by a franchisee in any city street or other city property shall be subordinate to:

     4.20.123.7.1.           Any prior lawful occupancy or use thereof by the city or any other governmental entity;

     4.20.123.7.2.           Any subsequent lawful occupancy or use thereof by the city or any other governmental entity pursuant to the lawful exercise of its authority, constitutional powers, powers to protect good order and discipline, and protect the health, safety or welfare according to the ordinance codified in this title; and

     4.20.123.7.3.           Any prior lawful easements or occupancy or use thereof by any other person. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.123.8 Right of inspection of construction.
     The city shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work in the city or private property performed subject to the provisions of the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement, upon one business day’s notice or, in case of emergency, upon such notice or the absence of such notice as is reasonable under the circumstances, and to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the ordinance codified in this title, the franchise agreement and other pertinent provisions of law. Such inspections may address any issues of construction, reconstruction, design, safety or other issues pertinent to the cable system. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.123.9 Right to inspect facilities.
     Franchisee shall allow the city to inspect, through its appropriately designated representatives, any of franchisee’s facilities and equipment in the city or private property at any time. Such inspections are reasonably related to the operation or safety of the system and reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the ordinance codified in this title, the franchise agreement or pertinent provisions of applicable law. Facility inspections shall be permitted, (i) upon reasonable prior notice but in any event within five days of such notice; or (ii) in the case of emergency, upon such notice or the absence of such notice as is reasonable under the circumstances. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.123.10 Right to viewing of performance tests and selection of test points.
     The franchisee must provide reasonable notice of not less than ten (10) days to the city of the intent to perform any tests for system performance and/or standby power supply operation. Upon such notice the city may designate one or more observers to view any tests for system performance and/or standby power supply operation. The city may designate additional test points to those elected by the franchisee and the franchisee shall test those additional points in the same manner as the franchisee selected points. Copies of all testing data shall be attested to in writing by the technician performing such tests and provided to the city. If franchisee fails to timely notify the city of its intent to perform system performance testing, then the franchise shall perform a retest upon the city’s request. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XXV State-of-the-Art Technology Review.
4.20.124.1 Franchisee shall provide review of state-of-the-art technology every three years.
     Not more than once every three years following the effective date of the franchise agreement and with at least three months prior notice, franchisee will meet with the city to discuss the extent to which franchisee’s system and its technology and services are keeping up with the reasonable state of the art. In addition, and to the extent such information is available to franchisee, at the time that the city requests such a meeting, the city may also request, and franchisee shall provide no later than one month before such meeting, a summary of state-of-the-art cable services or technologies not offered to franchisee’s subscribers in the city which are commercially available to subscribers in other cable systems, including but not limited to other cable systems operated by franchisee. The summary shall indicate whether the franchisee intends to deploy such cable services or technologies over its cable system serving the city and, if so, when and under what circumstances. If the franchisee does not intend to make such services or technologies available in the city, the franchisee shall provide an explanation for this position. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.124.2 Experiments or tests to ascertain need for improvement in state-of-the-art.
     A franchisee may, on its own initiative, participate in or undertake experiments, tests, and other activities to enhance and advance or ascertain the need for an improvement in the state-of-the-art of its cable system technology. The city may request that a franchisee undertake such tests, and a franchisee will undertake such tests, to the extent the franchisee and the city mutually determine that it is economically viable and feasible to do so. The franchisee and city shall mutually determine which such experiments, tests, and other activities are technically sound and undertaken in response to a mutually perceived and defined market demand. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XXVI Security—Construction Bond.
4.20.125.1 Bond required for system construction or reconstruction.
     4.20.125.1.1.           Thirty (30) days prior to the point at which franchisee undertakes a major construction, upgrade or rebuild program, the franchisee shall obtain and maintain throughout the period of system construction, upgrade or rebuild, at its cost and expense, and file with the city, a corporate surety bond in a company authorized to do business in the state of California on a form provided by the city or on the surety company’s form which is found acceptable by the city, in the amount set forth in the franchise agreement to guarantee the timely construction or reconstruction and full activation of the cable system and the safeguarding of damage to private property and restoration of damages incurred with utilities. The city may review the construction bond submitted to the city for purposes of determining compliance with the requirements of the ordinance codified in this title and the franchise agreement.

     14.20.125.1.2.         If the city notifies the franchisee that all such conditions are not satisfied, the franchisee shall take such necessary or appropriate action as to achieve such compliance within ten (10) business days following receipt of notice thereof from the city.

     4.20.125.1.3.           Failure to obtain or maintain bonds required by this section until properly relieved of such requirement by the city constitutes a material breach of the ordinance codified in this title, the franchise agreement, and is grounds for termination of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.125.2 Construction bond to cover losses suffered by failure to complete system pursuant to terms of the franchise agreement and the ordinance codified in this title.
     The bond shall provide but not be limited to the following conditions: there shall be recoverable by the city, jointly and severally from the principal and surety, any and all damages, loss or costs suffered by the city resulting from the failure of the franchisee to satisfactorily complete and fully construct and/or reconstruct and activate the cable system throughout the franchise area with respect to such major construction, upgrade or rebuild pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.125.3 Construction bond shall be terminated after city finds franchisee has satisfactorily completed construction or reconstruction.
     The construction bond shall be terminated only after the city finds that the franchisee has satisfactorily completed construction or reconstruction and activation of the cable system pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. Termination of a franchisee’s construction bond required by the city is effective only if such termination is in writing. The principal sum of the bond may be reduced upon an application by franchisee and approval by the city prior to completion of construction or reconstruction. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.125.4 City’s rights with respect to construction bond are in addition to other rights.
     The rights reserved to the city with respect to the construction bond are in addition to all other rights of the city and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such construction bond shall affect any other rights the city may have. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.125.5 Endorsement required assuring no bond cancellation until 60 days after notice to city.
     The construction bond shall contain the following endorsement in substantially the following form: “It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the surety, nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety, until sixty (60) days after receipt by the city from the surety, by registered mail, of written notice of the surety’s intent to cancel or not to renew. A copy of the construction bond with this endorsement shall be filed with the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XXVII Security--Letter of Credit.
4.20.126.1 Irrevocable letter of credit required of franchisee.
     4.20.126.1.1.           Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the franchise agreement, franchisee shall deposit with the city an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount set forth in the franchise agreement and issued by a federally insured commercial lending institution with a net worth in excess or one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000.00) and an office in the state of California (although the letter of credit may be issued elsewhere).

     4.20.126.1.2.           The form and substance of said letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the city; such approval shall be given where the letter of credit complies with the requirements of the ordinance codified in this title and the franchise agreement. If all such conditions are not satisfied, the franchisee shall take all such necessary or appropriate actions as to achieve such compliance within ten days following receipt of notice from the city.

     4.20.126.1.3.           Failure to obtain or maintain a letter of credit required by this section until properly relieved of such requirement by the city constitutes a material breach of the ordinance codified in this title, the franchise agreement, and is grounds for termination of the franchise agreement.

     4.20.126.1.4.           The letter of credit shall be used to assure: the faithful performance by the franchisee of all its obligations under the franchise agreement and the ordinance codified in this title; compliance with all orders, permits and directions of the city having jurisdiction over the franchisee’s acts or defaults under its franchise agreement or ordinance; and the payment by the franchisee of any penalties, liquidated damages, claims, liens, franchise fees, taxes or other fees due to the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system, including cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the franchisee.

     4.20.126.1.5.           The letter of credit shall be irrevocable within its term and shall be maintained from the date of its initial deposit with the city to and including the end of a period of two years following the termination, cancellation, revocation or denial of the renewal of the franchise agreement and the exhaustion of any subsequent legal appeals therefrom. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.126.2 Letter of credit may be drawn upon after following specified procedure.
     When approved by the city council, the letter of credit may be drawn upon by the cable administrator by presentation of a draft on sight at the lending institution accompanied by a written certificate signed by the cable administrator certifying:

     4.20.126.2.1.           That the franchisee has failed to comply with its obligations under the franchise agreement and/or the ordinance codified in this title and identifying the nature of the noncompliance;

     4.20.126.2.2.           That the franchisee was given written notice of and an opportunity to cure such noncompliance in accordance with the ordinance codified in this title and the franchise agreement and that the franchisee failed to cure such noncompliance within the period allowed therefor, together with a copy of such notice;

     4.20.126.2.3.           That the cable administrator issued a notice of intention to assess liquidated damages pursuant to the ordinance codified in this title, required only where liquidated damages are to be assessed, together with a copy of such notice;

     4.20.126.2.4.           That franchisee was given a minimum of ten (10) days written notice that the letter of credit would be assessed by the cable administrator for such finding of noncompliance if franchisee failed to satisfy such monetary damages, together with a copy of such notice; and

     4.20.126.2.5.           That franchisee failed to pay such monetary damages within the period allowed under such notice, specifying the amount by which the letter of credit is to be charged. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.126.3 Examples of the nature of the noncompliance for drawing upon the letter of credit.
     Examples of the nature of the noncompliance for drawing upon the letter of credit include, but are not limited to, the following:

     4.20.126.3.1            Failure of the franchisee to pay to the city any franchise fees, taxes, liens or other fees due and owing pursuant to a franchise agreement or the ordinance codified in this title;

     4.20.126.3.2.           Failure of the franchisee to pay to the city any amounts due and owing the city by reason of the indemnity provisions of the ordinance codified in this title;

     4.20.126.3.3.           Failure of the franchisee to pay to the city any liquidated damages due and owing to the city pursuant to a franchise agreement or the ordinance codified in this title;

     4.20.126.3.4.           Failure to make any payment required by franchise agreement or the ordinance codified in this title within the time fixed therein; and

     4.20.126.3.5.           Failure to pay to the city any damages, claims costs or expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by the reason of any default by the franchisee in the performance of its obligations under the ordinance codified in this title or a franchise agreement.

     4.20.126.3.6.           In the event of such noncompliance, the city may order the withdrawal of the amount thereof from the letter or other instrument for payment to the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.126.4 Letter of credit shall be replenished to original amount following any draw down.
     Franchisee agrees to structure the letter of credit in such a manner so that if the cable administrator at any time draws upon the letter of credit, the amount of available credit shall automatically increase to the extent necessary to replenish that portion of the available credit exhausted by the honoring of the city’s draft. The intent of this subsection is to make available to the city at all times a letter of credit in the amount specified in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.126.5 City’s rights with respect to letter of credit are in addition to other rights.
     The rights reserved to the city with respect to the letter of credit are in addition to all other rights of the city whether reserved by the franchise agreement, the ordinance codified in this title or authorized by law, and no action or proceeding against a letter of credit shall affect any other rights the city may have provided that if the city elects to assess liquidated damages against the franchisee, such liquidated damages shall constitute the exclusive monetary remedy available to the city; and the city shall be entitled to no other monetary damages with the exception of claims sounding in fraud or tort. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XXVIII Continuity of Service Standards.
4.20.127 Continuity of service standards.
     Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.127.1 Franchisee shall act so as to assure that all subscribers receive continuous service.
     It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving cable service insofar as their financial and other obligations to a franchisee are honored, and the city may require continuous service to the subscribers in accordance with the terms of the franchise agreement throughout the entire period thereof. In the event that a franchisee elects to rebuild, modify or sell the cable system, or the city gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew a franchise, a franchisee shall provide continuous service to all subscribers. In the event of a change of franchisee’s, or in the event a new franchisee acquires the cable system, the former franchisee shall cooperate with the city, new franchisee or operator in maintaining continuity of cable service to all subscribers. During such period, a franchisee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the cable system, less any amount owed to the city under, or as may be required by, the franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.127.2 Uninterrupted cable system signals.
     The franchisee shall ensure that service interruptions to services do not exceed the specifications permitted by the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement. Failure to correct a service interruption within forty-eight (48) hours of the initial interruption shall be grounds for termination of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.127.3 Failure to operate the cable system.
     In the event a franchisee fails to operate a cable system or provide cable services or other communications services for forty-eight (48) consecutive hours due to an event or occurrence within franchisee’s control and without prior approval of the city, the city may at its option operate the cable system or designate an operator until such time as the franchisee restores cable service in accordance with the requirements of the ordinance codified in this title and the franchise agreement or a new permanent operator is selected. If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for a franchisee, the franchisee shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs or damages that are the result of the franchisee’s failure to perform. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.127.4 Changes in programming or services—Notice.
     The franchisee shall provide subscribers and the cable administrator thirty (30) days written notice prior to any change in programming or services. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.127.5 The need for periodic system service interruptions acknowledged.
     The need for periodic system service interruption by franchisee to perform preventive maintenance, system expansion, and system design upgrading is hereby acknowledged. Franchisee shall schedule such interruptions to minimize the disruption of programming to viewers (for example, by scheduling such interruptions during station breaks or minimum viewing hours). The franchisee shall be sensitive to newsworthy events of general public interest and, whenever possible, use all efforts to modify such outage plans to allow maximum customer reception of the news of these events. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XXIX Customer Service Standards.
4.20.128 Customer service standards.
     Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” The franchisee shall establish written customer service standards which shall be approved by the council. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.1 Franchisee shall not deny cable service or discriminate against subscribers.
     A franchisee shall not deny cable service or other communications services to its city facilities, including its public and educational access facilities, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, employees or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, age, disability, income level or area in which they live within the franchise area. A franchisee shall not discriminate in service or rates between similar classes of subscribers similarly situated throughout the geographic area in which cable service is provided, except that franchisee may offer reasonable discounts to senior citizens or economically disadvantaged group’s or as otherwise may be authorized by law. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.2 Franchisee to protect subscriber privacy.
     A franchisee agrees to comply fully with all applicable state and federal laws relating to the protection of subscriber privacy, including, without limitation, Section 631 of the Communications Act of 1934 and any future amendments or related provisions. To the extent not preempted by federal law, in the event that part or all of such provisions are repealed or lessened the requirements in effect on the effective date of the repeal shall nevertheless continue to apply to a franchisee throughout the term of the remaining franchise. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.3 Rights of individuals.
     4.20.128.3.1.           Each franchisee shall strictly observe and protect existing federal, state and local rights of privacy and of property of subscribers and users at all times. Information on individual subscribers, individual subscriber preference of any kind including, but not limited to, viewing habits, political, social, or economic philosophies, beliefs, creeds, religions, shopping choices, interests, opinions, energy uses, medical information, banking data or information, or names, addresses, or telephone numbers, or any other personal or private information, shall not be collected or revealed to any person, mailing service, investigating agency or department, company, other agency, or entity unless upon the authority of a court of law or upon prior written permission of the subscriber, which written permissions must be kept permanently on file by franchisee and available for review by the city upon five working days advance notice. The request for such permission must be contained in a separate document with a prominent statement that the subscriber is authorizing the permission in full knowledge of its provision. Such authorization shall not in any event be required as a condition of receiving service. However, nothing in this subsection shall prevent a franchisee from providing (i) the “names and address” only of subscribers to premium service providers for purposes of distribution of guides concerning programming offered by such providers, or (ii) the names, addresses and billing information of subscribers to billing services for purposes of preparing and mailing subscriber statements or to debt collection agencies for the purposes of debt collection.

     4.20.128.3.2.           Franchisee may release the number of its subscribers but only as a total number and as a percentage of the potential subscribers throughout the city. When indicating the number of subscribers viewing a particular channel at a particular time, franchisee shall indicate only the total number of subscribers viewing during the relevant time and the percentage of all subscribers which they represent, but never the identity of a particular subscriber. Franchisee shall provide such total and percentage information to city upon request. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.4 Required services for disabled and hearing impaired.
     4.20.128.4.1.           A franchisee shall provide the services and facilities of the system to disabled persists to the extent set forth in the franchise agreement. At a minimum, a franchisee shall provide a remote control device (and converter if required) to those subscribers who are paraplegic or quadriplegic, and franchisee shall not charge such subscribers a fee for such devices and converters which exceeds franchisee’s own costs in purchasing such devices and converters. If specified in the franchise agreement, and within a time specified therein, a franchisee shall submit to the city a plan and/or report for the disabled demonstrating how the franchisee intends to ensure the availability of its services and facilities to disabled persons. Said plan shall list, at a minimum, specified programming provided for the disabled, if any, and shall include the franchisee’s facility accessibility proposal. Said plan shall be updated from time to time as necessary or as required by the city.

     4.20.128.4.2.           The franchisee shall provide information on how to obtain equipment which facilitates the reception of closed-captioned programming transmitted over the cable system to any person who requests it within five business days of the receipt of such a request. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.5 Program guide and channel card.
     At the time of installation, the franchisee will provide each subscriber, free of charge, a card indicating the channel lineup for cable service. The franchisee will send a free replacement card to each subscriber whenever there is a change in the channel assignments; such card shall be sent within thirty (30) days of the change in channel assignment. The franchisee shall provide a printed program guide for basic service channels. If feasible, an electronic program guide is desired. It is the city’s understanding that premium program guides are included in the price of premium service. An electronic version of this card shall be provided to city in HTML format for inclusion in city WWW pages. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.6 Local and toll-free telephone numbers to be available for calls 24 hours/day, 7 days/week.
     A franchisee shall provide a local and a toll-free telephone number, a local office and adequately trained customer service representatives to receive and act upon requests for repairs and consumer complaints. Said telephone numbers shall be so operated that calls can be received and responded to on a twenty-four (24) hour basis, seven days a week, including weekends and holidays. When a regular customer service representative is not on duty, an adequately trained answering service or automated response unit shall take the name, address and telephone number of each caller to report back to the franchisee. The answering service or automated response unit shall be able to contact and dispatch a repair technician to meet the requirements of this section for a system service interruption. For non-emergency problems (e.g., requests for adding premium services), a franchisee’s customer service representative is to return the phone call to the customer the next business day after the customer’s call to the answering service or automated response unit. In addition, franchisee shall develop or cause to be developed a log which, at a minimum, contains and segregates the number and nature of calls made to its answering service or automated response unit from subscribers within the city on an ongoing basis, and the franchisee shall report this information, when requested by the cable administrator. For purposes of this section “adequately trained” includes the capability to provide for the dispatch of technical personnel and information as to business hours and appropriate telephone numbers for business hour contacts. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.7 Telephone access to customer service supervisors.
     If a subscriber states that he or she is unsatisfied with the response of a customer service representative, or asks to speak with a customer service supervisor or any qualified supervisor, the matter shall be immediately referred to a qualified supervisor for resolution. If no customer service supervisor or other qualified supervisor is available, the customer service representative must record the pertinent information and a qualified supervisor shall return the telephone call as promptly as possible, but in no event later than one business day. If that call does not achieve contact with the subscriber, the supervisor must utilize reasonable efforts to do so including, without limitation, calling periodically, leaving a telephone message or writing the subscriber to give a direct dial or extension number to reach the supervisor directly. If a subscriber remains dissatisfied with the resolution of his or her complaint following review by a qualified supervisor, the subscriber shall be referred to the manager or director of customer service for final resolution. The manager or director of customer service shall provide the customer with a follow up written response detailing the corrective measures taken by the franchisee within seven days of the customer’s initial call or complaint, a copy of which shall be sent to the cable administrator. For any such call or complaint which the manager or director of customer service fails to provide a written response within the time limit allowed, the franchisee shall automatically credit the complaining customer’s account in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) on the next billing cycle. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.8 Customer service representative identification.
     A customer service representative, manager or director must give his or her true name, or franchisee sanctioned pseudonym or identification number when so requested by a subscriber. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.9 Telephone system requirements.
     4.20.128.9.1.           A franchisee shall obtain and maintain sufficient telephone lines and staffing so as not to delay unreasonably the answering of all telephone calls. Trained customer service representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours, defined as not less than nine hours per business day Monday through Friday and four hours on Saturday.

     4.20.128.9.2.           Franchisee shall connect a telephone caller within thirty (30) seconds after the caller dials and “ringing” begins. This standard shall be deemed satisfied when a connection is made either to an automated attendant capable of responding to the subscriber’s inquiry, such as an automatic response unit, or to a customer service representative capable of responding to the subscriber’s inquiry. Under normal operating conditions, the caller will receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time.

     4.20.128.9.3.           If the call needs to be transferred, if the caller needs to be placed on hold, or if the caller wishes to be transferred, such transfer or hold time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds.

     4.20.128.9.4.           Each of the standards set forth in this section shall be met no less than ninety five percent (95%) of the time, measured on a quarterly basis, under normal operating conditions. The franchisee maintains the burden of providing a statistical printout so that compliance can be determined. However, the franchisee will not be required to acquire equipment to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless a historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply.

     4.20.128.9.5.           During the hours when a customer service representative of franchisee is not on duty to receive calls, a qualified employee or contractor shall either be available to an adequately trained answering service or to an automated paging system to act upon subscriber calls to correct service interruptions in cable service as provided in this section. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.10 Failure to satisfy telephone system requirement.
     4.20.128.10.1.         If the cable administrator reviews the telephone usage complaints against a franchisee and finds them to reflect a failure to comply with the standards of the ordinance codified in this title, the cable administrator shall direct the franchisee to provide to the city, at the franchisee’s cost, a statistically accurate call traffic study which shall identify the franchisee’s compliance with the requirements of the ordinance codified in this title and propose remedies to correct any deficiencies in compliance. This study shall be delivered to the city within ninety (90) days following receipt of written notice from the city specifying the need for such study. The study shall be conducted over a period of ninety (90) days so as to determine whether the standards set forth in this section have been satisfied no less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the time, measured on a quarterly basis, under normal operating condition.

     4.20.128.10.2.         Remedy. In the event that the city determines that the franchisee has failed to meet the standards set out in this section based upon such study, the franchisee shall have thirty (30) days from written notification of such noncompliance by the city to cure the same. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.”

     4.20.128.10.3.         Reservation. The city shall have the right to modify the telephone response requirements in the ordinance codified in this title and the franchise agreement as it reasonably deems appropriate to protect the public interest, after notice to all franchisees. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.11 Response to service calls to be made in accordance with stated performance standards.
     Customers requesting installation and/or service shall be informed of all service delivery performance requirements at the time of requesting service, including the need to be at home (if applicable) or provide cash payment (if applicable for installations, connection or reconnections). (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.12 A franchisee shall respond to requests for service and complaints promptly.
     Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.”

     4.20.128.12.1.         A franchisee may respond to a service request or complaint by telephone where the service request or complaint does not reasonably require dispatching an employee or contractor to address or resolve such request or complaint. When a telephonic response is insufficient and a service call is necessary, the franchisee shall be deemed to have responded to request for service when a qualified employee or contractor arrives at the subscriber’s location or other location where necessary to address the complaint and begin work, provided that the employee or contractor continues said work without cessation to completion where practicable.

     4.20.128.12.2.         If a work interruption is reasonably necessary (for example, to obtain unforeseeable but necessary permits, tools, materials, equipment or additional personnel), the employee or contractor shall complete said work at the earliest reasonable date that is convenient to the customer, provided; however, that a lack of an adequate supply of cable converters or other electronic hardware shall not be deemed a necessary work interruption.

     4.20.128.12.3.         If a subscriber is not at home when the employee or contractor arrives, the employee or contractor shall attempt to repair any problems which can be reasonably repaired from outside the customer’s premises (for example, a repair to a cable drop between the front of customer’s residence and the street).

     4.20.128.12.4.         If such a repair is not possible, the employee or contractor shall leave a door hanger at the customer’s location which shall notify the customer that a repair was attempted and ask the customer to call the franchisee to reschedule another mutually convenient service call.

     4.20.128.12.5.         A franchisee shall maintain a repair force of service and maintenance personnel capable of responding to subscriber requests for service and complaints under normal operating conditions within the following time frames (unless; a subscriber requests a different date that is more convenient to the subscriber and that is beyond the following performance standards):

     4.20.128.12.6.         Service interruption within four hours, including weekends and holidays of receiving subscriber calls which by number identify a service interruption. Repairs due to service interruption will be made on evenings and weekends as necessary at no cost to the subscribers or city. Agents of the franchisee responsible for evening and weekend repairs must be available at local telephone number or page;

     4.20.128.12.7.         Up to two subscribers service interruption. Within one day, including weekends and holidays, of receiving requests for service identifying an individual service interruption;

     4.20.128.12.8.         Up to two subscribers service interruption. Within two days, including weekends and holidays, of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality, or requesting exchange of defective converter; and

     4.20.128.12.9.         Where the subscriber requests service and the franchisee does not complete the service within the requirements of this section, the franchisee shall automatically credit the subscriber’s account a prorated amount equal to one thirtieth of the subscribers monthly bill per day, rounded up to the nearest day, in excess of the standards set forth above. The credit shall automatically appear in the customer’s next billing cycle. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” Additionally, failure to properly credit any customer account shall be grounds for termination of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.13 Record of requests for installations and service.
     The franchisee shall maintain for one year a written record (or an equivalent stored on magnetic, electronic or optical media capable of reproduction in printed form by the franchisee) of all requests for installations and/or cable service which require a service call to a subscriber’s residence, place of business or other location, and their disposition, whether such requests are made by telephone, in writing, in person, or otherwise, including the name of the person requesting installation or service, the date and time of the request, the nature of the request, the date and time of the franchisee’s response, and a brief description of the response or the service problem reported and resolved. Said written, electronic or optical record shall be made available to the city within five working days upon receipt of notice. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.14 Franchisee to furnish service to each person in franchise area making request for service.
     Consistent with Section 4.20.114.42, franchisee shall furnish and maintain services to each person within the franchise area who makes a bona fide request to receive any service. Nothing in the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement shall limit the right of the franchisee to deny service to any household or individual because of a negative credit or service history with the franchisee which may include nonpayment of bills or theft or damage to the franchisee’s equipment, or who has threatened or assaulted employees of the franchisee in the course of their employment provided that in the event service is denied, the franchisee will give written notice to the subscriber of his right to appeal to the cable administrator the franchisee’s decision to deny service. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.15 Basic service charges must be applied on nondiscriminatory basis.
     All charges for basic service must be applied on a nondiscriminatory basis for similar classes of subscribers similarly situated provided, however, that the franchisee may, among other things, conduct promotional campaigns in which rates are discounted or waived. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.16 Franchisee may require refundable deposits.
     A franchisee may require refundable deposits in circumstances consistent with reasonable business practices, including where such deposits are necessary to protect equipment or to ensure payment where there is reasonable evidence of a risk of nonpayment. Upon termination of service for any reason, subscribers will be entitled to receive a refund of the deposits, subject to (i) an offset or credit for all outstanding obligations of the subscriber to the franchisee, including outstanding service charges, and (ii) return of all equipment provided by the franchisee in connection with the services received by the subscriber. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.17 Connections and disconnects.
     Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.”

     4.20.128.17.1.         The franchisee shall execute an installation or disconnection within seven calendar days of the subscriber’s order. Failure to meet the installation deadline shall result in a crediting of the customer’s account the amount equal to one month’s basic service or twenty dollars ($20.00) which ever is less. A subscriber ordering disconnection shall be entitled to a prorated credit from the date of disconnection to the next regular bill date.

     4.20.128.17.2.         The franchisee shall provide each subscriber at the time of initial subscription to the system and upon request notice as to the procedures to be used for reporting and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service, defective equipment and similar matters; a complete listing of cable-related rates and fees; and a copy of billing policies.

     4.20.128.17.3.         A subscriber shall receive the monthly bill no less than two weeks in advance of its due date. A coupon book system may be employed.

     4.20.128.17.4.         Any disconnection or relocation caused by a city-ordered relocation of franchisees equipment due to repairs, refurbishing, demolition, safety or security reasons shall be effected at no additional charge to the city or the subscriber.

     4.20.128.17.5.         Involuntary Disconnection. Franchisee shall only disconnect or terminate a subscriber’s service for good and just cause. The franchisee shall not disconnect service for nonpayment until the franchisee has provided the subscriber with written notice, separate and apart from the customer’s regular monthly bill, provided on or after the due date of the subscriber’s billing and separately from that billing, at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of the disconnection. The notice shall specify:

     4.20.128.17.5.1. Proposed date subject to disconnection;

     4.20.128.17.5.2. Total payment required to avoid disconnection, with an itemization of component charges if such itemization has not recently been supplied to the subscriber;

     4.20.128.17.5.3. Total amount in arrears if that amount differs from above; and

     4.20.128.17.5.4. Telephone numbers and office hours to contact a customer service representative.

     4.20.128.17.5.5. In no event shall involuntary disconnection or termination for nonpayment occur less than fourteen (14) calendar days after the end of any billing period for which charges are delinquent. Franchisee will make reasonable efforts personally to contact the subscriber by knocking on the door of the subscriber’s residence or other facility and giving the subscriber an opportunity to continue service by paying all accrued charges. Where a franchisee has improperly discontinued service, or discontinued service not in accordance with the procedures set forth above, it shall provide free reconnection within twenty four (24) hours of being made aware of improper disconnection and credit the customer’s account in the amount of one month’s basic service or twenty dollars ($20.00) which ever is less. The credit shall appear in the customer’s next billing cycle. Failure to properly credit any customer account shall be grounds for termination of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.18 Reserved.
 

4.20.128.19 No charges to be made to subscriber for repair of equipment or service disconnection.
     A franchisee shall not, except to the extent expressly permitted by law, impose any fee or charge on any subscriber for: (i) any service call to said subscriber’s premises to perform any repair or maintenance work related to franchisee installed equipment necessary to receive service, except any such work which was necessitated by a negligent or wrongful act of said subscriber; or (ii) the disconnection or downgrading of any services to a subscriber, unless otherwise provided in this section, provided that the franchisee may impose appropriate charges if, at the time of disconnection, some or all of the franchisee’s equipment is not returned to the franchisee or the subscriber has not paid all outstanding fees and charges due to the franchisee. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.20 Customers to have three day right of rescission when ordering cable service.
     A franchisee shall afford subscribers with a right to cancel or rescind any contract or agreement for cable services by midnight of the third business day, excluding Sundays, after the day on which the subscriber enters such an agreement, except that such right of rescission shall end upon initiation of installation of service whether physically or electronically on the subscriber’s premises. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.21 Service changes.
     The franchisee agrees to make subscriber service changes as quickly as possible but not later than three business days after notification, or as agreed with the subscriber. Appointments shall be available in four-hour periods. Changes not made on time shall be provided free of charge. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.22 Passes and badges.
     4.20.128.22.1. All franchisee employees will carry an identification card, with photograph and physical statistics, which positively identifies them as working for the franchisee. All employees will carry this card in plain view whenever on a subscriber premises. The franchisee will provide these cards. Upon release of any employee, the franchisee will ensure that any required franchisee identification cards are returned to the issuing office.

     4.20.128.22.2. All personnel, agents and representatives of a franchisee, including subcontractors, that have occasion to deal, in their official capacity, directly with subscribers or members of the public at their residences or places of business shall wear photo identification badges, when acting on behalf of the franchisee, except in cases of emergency provided it is impracticable to do so. Proper identification shall be provided to all employees of the franchisee. Employees are responsible for cleanup and proper installation procedures on the subscriber’s premises. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.23 Untimely repairs or delays in making repairs—Basis for termination.
     In the city’s discretion, unreasonable, frequent or widespread delays in making repairs or failure to make timely repairs shall be grounds for liquidated damages or termination of a franchise agreement. Agents of the franchisee responsible for making repairs shall be available at a local published telephone number eight a.m. to five p.m., Monday through Saturday. At all other times the franchisee shall have at a minimum an answering service. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.24 Failure of franchisee to keep scheduled appointments.
     For each failure of the franchisee to meet any scheduled appointment, the franchisee must offer the subscriber in the sole discretion of the subscriber:

     4.20.128.24.1.         A credit of twenty dollars ($20.00) to the subscriber’s then current billing balance; or

     4.20.128.24.2.         With respect to service connection or repair appointments, an opportunity to elect to seek remedies under state law, if applicable;

     4.20.128.24.3.         The remedies in this section shall, however, be provided in addition to, not in lieu of, other remedies provided in the ordinance codified in this title and the franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.25 Franchisee fully responsible for action of contractors and subcontractors.
     Franchisee shall accept full responsibility and liability for the actions of its contractors and subcontractors and shall not advise any subscriber with a contractor or subcontractor-related problem that it is up to the subscriber to deal with the contractor or subcontractor directly. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.26 Advance notice to be given by franchisee prior to entering upon the curtilage of each household.
     Advance notice (which may be oral or written as reasonably appropriate under the circumstances) shall be provided to each household with respect to repair, maintenance or reconstruction of the cable system located upon such curtilage of their household. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.27 Authorizations must be obtained by franchisee from owners of private property.
     Franchisee must obtain approvals or authorizations for the use or occupancy of private property or private rights-of-way from their owners prior to such use or occupancy, unless otherwise provided under existing easements, licenses, rights of occupancy or other authorizations or as otherwise may be provided by applicable law. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.28 Subscriber to be advised in writing of specific services and procedures.
     Before or concurrently with providing initial cable service to each subscriber, at least annually thereafter, and at any time upon request, a franchisee shall provide each subscriber with a copy of its written customer service standards and shall advise each subscriber in writing either in its written customer service standards or a current rate card, or otherwise, of:

     4.20.128.28.1.         The availability of the signal control device or parental control option (lock box) required by 47 U.S.C. 544(d)(2)(A) of the Communications Act of 1934 as amended;

     4.20.128.28.2.         All cable service offerings and options, the fees, charges, deposits, and associated terms and conditions which apply to all cable services then being distributed over the system which the subscriber may elect to receive, including, if available, an option for a subscriber to pay for cable services one year in advance and receive a substantial discount;

     4.20.128.28.3.         Procedures for ordering, changes in or termination of services, as well as franchisees obligation to provide subscribers with thirty (30) days prior written notice of any changes in such services, fees, charges, deposits, procedures, policies or associated arms and conditions, excluding temporary marketing and sales discounts on offers and adjustments in rates for pay-per view and similar per-event programming;

     4.20.128.28.4.         All refund and credit policies, including but not limited to subscriber’s right to a credit or pro-rata refund of monthly subscription fees for any loss or interruption of cable service as described in this section, and to a refund of all fees, deposits or pro-rata payments to which the subscriber is entitled;

     4.20.128.28.5.         The franchisee’s practices and procedures for protecting subscriber privacy as required by federal, state and local law or regulation, including, but not limited to, 47 U.C.C. 551, the ordinance codified in this title and the franchise agreement in the form of a separate, written statement to each subscriber which clearly and conspicuously informs the subscriber of his or her rights to privacy;

     4.20.128.28.6.         The franchisee’s procedures for the receipt and resolution of subscriber complaints;

     4.20.128.28.7.         The address, telephone number and business hours of the franchisee’s office in the franchise area to which complaints may be reported;

     4.20.128.28.8.         The responsibility of the cable administrator for assistance in resolving cable complaints, together with the cable administrator’s address and normal business hours and the title and telephone number of the person designated to receive such complaints;

     4.20.128.28.9.         The regular meetings of the council or other meetings designated by the city that are open to the public; and

     4.20.128.28.10. A general description of broadcast channel syndicated exclusivity, network non-duplication and sports blackout requirements which may affect subscribers’ viewing of the franchisee’s cable services.

     4.20.128.28.11.        The written materials required to be provided annually to subscribers under this section shall, at least forty-five (45) days before their mailing, be submitted for review and comment to the cable administrator for purposes of assuring compliance with the provisions of this section, the ordinance codified in this title, the franchise agreement and applicable provisions of federal or state law. The cable administrator shall provide comments concerning the form and content of such written materials within thirty (30) days following receipt of such materials from the franchisee; if the cable administrator fails to provide comments within such thirty (30) day period, the form and content of such materials shall be deemed satisfactory. The final form and content of such notice is within the franchisee’s control, provided that the notice is otherwise consistent with the provisions of the ordinance codified in this title, the franchise agreement and applicable provisions of federal or state law.

     4.20.128.28.12. The notice described in this section, and every other notice required under the ordinance codified in this title to be sent to all subscribers, shall either be included in the subscriber’s monthly billing statement or provided separately, without inclusion with any other materials, by U.S. Mail or such other timely method of delivery as shall be appropriate. One copy of each such notice shall also be sent to the cable administrator. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.29 Promotional material.
     The franchisee shall supply the city with one copy of all current written materials, including promotional materials and a copy of all new and periodically updated materials which it distributes to subscribers concurrently upon their distribution to subscribers or, at the franchisee’s option, up to one year in advance. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.30 Franchisee shall accommodate subscriber as to choice of morning or afternoon service calls.
     4.20.128.30.1.         A franchisee shall notify subscribers of the expected time of visits for installations, service or other activities, and shall offer to schedule such visits either at a specific time or, at maximum, within a two-hour time block during normal business hours. Franchisee shall also schedule such visits outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer. Franchisee shall offer subscribers a choice of either morning visits, afternoon visits or, if franchisee makes service calls later into the evening, visits up to the close of business. In each case, the subscriber shall be advised of the time block during which the service representative is scheduled to arrive.

     4.20.128.30.2.         If a subscriber requesting service on a given day cannot be scheduled within a specific time period and is advised that the franchisee’s service personnel may arrive at any point during the business day, the subscriber may request the franchisee to make an appointment for service on the next business day in which such time periods are available.

     4.20.128.30.3.         If, under circumstances which depart from normal operating conditions, a franchisee is unable to keep a scheduled appointment, franchisee shall attempt to make prompt contact with subscriber to inform the subscriber of the delay and to reschedule the service visit at a time meeting the subscriber’s convenience. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.31 Subscriber to be notified immediately of unplanned system outages.
     Upon being notified of a service interruption, franchisee shall devise some reasonable method, such as an automated recording immediately to be placed on its incoming telephone lines, to advise subscribers of the nature and expected duration of the service interruption. If a recording is used, it shall also provide subscribers calling on other matters with the option of either obtaining information on such other matters through an automated response unit or choosing to speak with a live representative of franchisee including, if outside normal business hours, franchisee’s answering service. Franchisee shall, where practicable, also notify the cable administrator by telephone or facsimile as soon as such an outage is identified and promptly after it is repaired. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.32 Notice to subscribers regarding blackout requirement.
     With respect to syndicated exclusivity and network non-duplication blackouts, franchisee shall either substitute another signal to avoid transmitting a “blank” screen on the black-out channel frequency or, by use of some reasonable device, such as a continuous, character-generated notice, otherwise avoid transmitting a “blank” screen on the blacked-out channel frequency or otherwise conveying the impression that the channel is not working properly. With respect to blackouts of selected sports events, franchisee shall prepare a character-generated notice to be superimposed on the affected channel, advising subscribers of the TV blackout of the particular sports event. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.33 Franchisee to respond to subscriber inquiries and complaints.
     Franchisee shall respond in writing to written subscriber inquiries and complaints received by the franchisee at any of its addresses. The franchisee shall include its complaints/inquiry address on its billing statements. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.34 Automatic termination of limited term premium channel offerings.
     Franchisee shall automatically terminate the subscriber’s reception of any promotional no-cost or discounted premium channel offering at the end of the established or extended promotional period, and shall not continue to assess or collect a charge for such service offering, unless the subscriber affirmatively and specifically elects, either orally, in writing or by telephone, to continue that service for the applicable charge(s). This election may be made by the subscriber at any time prior to the imposition of the applicable charge, including at any time prior to first receiving the service for no charge. This provision does not apply to the addition of any service to an existing package, tier or service offering or to any restructuring or retiering of any package, tier or service offering, provided that the subscriber is receiving the package, tier or service offering at the time of the addition, restructuring or retiering. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.35 City reserves right to establish and to modify subscriber service standards from time to time.
     4.20.128.35.1.         The city reserves the right to establish and to modify subscriber service standards from time to time, provided such standards do not conflict with applicable federal or state law. The city shall provide each franchisee with written notice of any proposed addition to or modification of such service standards. Each such addition or modification shall be provided to each franchisee at least ninety (90) days preceding implementation of the new standard(s).

     4.20.128.35.2.         The city shall provide each franchisee with the opportunity to meet and confer concerning such proposed addition or modification. However, the city is under no obligation to adopt recommendations by a multi-channel service provider. Each such addition or modification shall be uniformly applied to all cable service providers within the city concurrently with the effective date of such addition or modification as it applies to any one cable service provider.

     4.20.128.35.3. The franchisee shall comply with any such addition or modification within ninety (90) days following the date of adoption of such addition or modification by the city, unless franchisee shall promptly and in writing request of the city an extension of time in which to comply. The city shall promptly respond and shall grant such requests for additional time if reasonably necessary to affect compliance, so long as franchisee is actively and expeditiously attempting to obtain compliance with such additions or modifications. The determination of whether the franchisee is actively and expeditiously attempting to obtain compliance is within the sole discretion of the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.36 Refunds--Subscriber may receive prorated credit for loss of cable service commencing from time of notification of franchisee.
     4.20.128.36.1.         Subscribers not satisfied that their cable services have been provided as required in the franchise agreement or the ordinance codified in this title shall be encouraged to notify the franchisee, and the franchisee shall notify subscribers of the opportunity to do so in franchisee’s annual notice required to be distributed to subscribers. A franchisee shall work with the subscriber to resolve the problem. Upon request and verification, franchisee shall provide a credit to service charges for each service interruption as set forth in this section.

     4.20.128.36.2.         Any signal interruption or service interruption of a combined duration of fifteen (15) minutes or more in any continuous twenty-four (24) hours (when normal operating conditions exist), whatever its cause, shall entitle each subscriber or subscribers affected to a automatic credit of the monthly subscriber fee prorated on a per day basis. Such credit must be applied to the first bill issued following the interruption. The only exceptions are for interruptions due to power outages which exceed the operating limits of the system’s backup power supplies, acts of God or nature, or scheduled outages.

     4.20.128.36.3.         Any signal interruption or service interruption shall be computed from the time the franchisee receives notice from the first subscriber. In no event shall a franchisee be required to credit a subscriber’s account in an amount in excess of one day’s credit for each day a customer endures a service interruption. For example, a customer suffers a service interruption for five hours; this would entitle the customer to one day of credit. If there was a loss of signal during two four hour periods within the same day, the customer would still be entitled to only one day’s credit. If, however, a service interruption runs into a second or more days, then one day’s credit is due for each day, or part thereof, the service interruption or occurs. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.”

     4.20.128.3 6.4. No credit shall be required for any service interruption which is caused by the acts or omissions of the subscriber, video, audio or other equipment of the subscriber.

     4.20.128.36.5.         The franchisee’s customer service manager shall be given authority to credit a subscriber’s account for a service interruption or signal interruption of in an amount up to one month’s service charges, based upon the facts and circumstances of the complaint. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.37 Franchisee’s opportunity to correct, including reasonable access.
     A subscriber must afford the franchisee the opportunity to correct the service interruption including reasonable access to the subscriber premises if necessary. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.38 Franchisee to issue refund within 30 days after disconnection.
     A franchisee shall refund to a subscriber all fees, deposits or pro-rata payments to which the subscriber is entitled within thirty (30) days following disconnection of cable service, subject to (i) an offset or credit for all outstanding obligations of the subscriber to the franchisee, including outstanding service charges, and (ii) return of all equipment provided by the franchisee in connection with the services received by the subscriber. Franchisee shall automatically provide a subscriber with a twenty dollar ($20.00) payment to the last address of record for failure to provide such a refund within said thirty (30) day period. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.39 Subscriber’s liability for loss or damage to converter or other electronic equipment is limited if it can be shown franchisee contributed to such loss.
     Notwithstanding any other sections of the ordinance codified in this title, where the actions of a franchisee, its agent(s) or subcontractor(s) can be shown, upon a reasonable demonstration of evidence by a subscriber or the cable administrator, to have been the substantial cause for the theft, loss or damage of a converter or other electronic equipment provided for the use of a subscriber (for example, by leaving a converter or other electronic equipment unattended on a subscriber’s doorstep when delivering such converter to the subscriber), the subscriber shall have no liability with respect to such theft, loss or damage. Where the franchisee falls to retrieve a converter or other electronic equipment within seven days after a disconnection and the local office located in the city is not staffed or operated in accordance with the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement, neither the city nor the subscriber shall have liability with respect to such converter or other electronic equipment nor shall a franchisee subject a subscriber to any charges in connection with the failure by the franchisee to regain such converter or other electronic equipment. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.40 Billing procedures.
     4.20.128.40.1.         The franchisee shall bill all subscribers to its cable services in a uniform, nondiscriminatory manner, regardless of the subscriber’s level of service. In no case shall any subscriber be required (i) to pay for services more than thirty (30) days in advance of the start of the period of service for which the subscriber is being billed or (ii) to pay for more than thirty (30) days of such services at any one time, provided, however, that the subscriber may be required to pay for more than thirty (30) days of service if the account is or has been past due. The franchisee shall clearly disclose on the billing statement both the date on which the payment is due and the date on which a penalty may begin to accrue if payment has not been received. There shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) days from the date of the postmark on billing statements to the payment due date, and there shall be a minimum of forty-five (45) days from the date of the postmark on the first billing statement to the imposition of a late fee.

     4.20.128.40.2.         The franchisee shall provide all subscribers with an itemized monthly bill that contains, at a minimum, the following information:

     4.20.128.40.2.1. A list of each service or package received for that billing period showing individual charges for the lowest basic tier, satellite tier, each pay-per-view usage, each premium service subscribed to on an a la carte or package basis, and each remote control or other devices;

     4.20.128.40.2.2. The period of time over which said services are billed;

     4.20.128.40.2.3. The total charges due for the monthly period separate from any previous balance due;

     4.20.128.40.2.4. A specific date by which payment is required; and

     4.20.128.40.2.5. Specific information on complaint procedures that are available to subscribers, or a local or local and toll-free telephone number that can be called to obtain copies of franchisee’s billing and complaint procedures. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.41 Information provided to subscribers by telephone.
     Customer service representatives shall be kept fully informed of subscriber options for service, and shall be required to advise subscribers of those options where reasonably appropriate, when subscribers telephone or otherwise contact franchisee’s customer service representatives, including, but not limited to, the following:

     4.20.128.41.1. Advising subscribers, whenever applicable, that they may either schedule converter boxes for at-home pickup or exchange by franchisee’s personnel or may themselves bring converter boxes to the franchisee’s business office located in the city;

     4.20.128.41.2. Advising subscribers, whenever applicable, that programming promotions are currently being, or may be within a week, offered at discounted rates or prices; and

     4.20.128.41.3. Advising subscribers, whenever applicable, that known or planned service outages may affect subscribers’ cable reception, provided, however, that in lieu of this franchisee may use a character generator to disclose such information on an appropriate and convenient channel. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.42 Reports required of compliance and enforcement of standards.
     4.20.128.42.1. Upon request, a franchisee shall report to the city on a quarterly basis regarding its compliance with the customer service standards. A report form shall be developed in consultation between the cable administrator and a franchisee that will provide the detail necessary to monitor franchisee’s compliance with these standards, and such report shall include, but not be limited to, a summary of subscriber complaints by type of complaint in accordance with this section. A franchisee shall comply with all procedures established by the city and the franchisee regarding the handling of all complaints received directly by the cable administrator from city residents regarding cable system service. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.128.43 Compatibility with consumer electronics equipment.
     Franchisees are required to be in compliance with 47 C.F.R. §76.630, “Compatibility with Consumer Electronics Equipment.” (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XXX Sundry Provisions.
4.20.129.1 Headings are for reference only.
     The headings identified as bold text contained in the ordinance codified in this title and the franchise agreement are to facilitate reference only, do not form a part of the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement, and shall not in any way affect the construction or interpretation hereof. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.129.2 Time is of the essence.
     Whenever the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement shall set forth any time for an act to be performed by or on behalf of the franchisee, such time shall be deemed to be of the essence; and any failure of the franchisee to perform within the time allotted shall always be sufficient grounds for the city to invoke liquidated damages or initiate procedures leading toward the revocation or termination of a franchise. Time is of the essence with respect to material and substantial franchise obligations, including but not limited to, those obligations where appropriately listed in the ordinance codified in this title. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.129.3 Notice, approval, consent, waiver or other communication required or permitted must be in writing.
     Except as otherwise provided in the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement, any notice, approval, consent, waiver or other communication required or permitted to be given or to be served upon any person shall be in writing. Such notice shall be personally served, or sent by facsimile, telegram, tested telex or cable, or sent by first class, registered or certified U.S. mail (first-class, postage prepaid, with return receipt requested from the addressee only) and shall be deemed given (i) if personally served, when delivered to the person to whom such notice is addressed, (ii) if given by facsimile, telegram, telex or cable, when sent, or (iii) if given by mail, upon receipt by the addressee. Receipt of any notice given by facsimile, telegram, tested telex or cable must be confirmed in writing sent by registered or certified mail in the manner prescribed by this section within forty-eight (48) hours after sent to be effective. Such notices shall be addressed to the party to whom such notices to be given as follows: if to the franchisee, at the local offices of the franchisee; if to the city, to the cable administrator, city of Yucaipa. Either party may change the address to which notice is to be given by providing written notice to the other party in the manner provided in this section. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.129.4 Applicability to successors and assignees.
     All provisions of the ordinance codified in this title shall apply to a franchisee, its successors, and assignees as may be approved by the city in accordance with the ordinance codified in this title. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.129.5 Specific mention of materiality.
     Specific mention of the materiality of any of the provisions herein is not intended to be exclusive of any others for the purpose of determining whether any failure of compliance hereunder is material and substantial. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.129.6 Severability.
     If any particular section, subsection or provision of the ordinance codified in this title or the particular application thereof, shall be held invalid, the remaining provisions and their application shall not be affected, thereby. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.129.7 Agreement to be bound.
     A franchisee, upon its acceptance of the franchise agreement, shall be bound by the provisions of the ordinance codified in this title, all matters agreed upon in the franchise agreement and all matters offered by the franchisee to the city or other inquiry from the city, which response of franchisee is accepted by the city and incorporated by reference in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.129.8 Relationship to cable act or other statues, laws, or regulations.
     In the event that any provision of the cable act or other statute, law or regulation which is relied on herein or in the franchise agreement for any definition or requirement, is repealed, then the language of such provision at the time of such repeal shall nevertheless continue to apply for purposes of the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement, regardless of such repeal, except as otherwise provided herein or in the franchise agreement or as prohibited by such subsequent repeal or amendment. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.129.9 Rights and remedies--Cumulative.
     The rights and remedies of the parties pursuant to the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement are cumulative, except as otherwise provided in the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement, and shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other rights or remedies which the parties may have with respect to the subject matter of the franchise agreement or the ordinance codified in this title. A waiver of any right or remedy by a party at one time shall not affect the exercise of said right or remedy or any other right of other remedy by such party at any other time. The failure of the city to take any action in the event of a material breach by the franchisee shall not be construed or otherwise be deemed to constitute a waiver of the right of the city to take such action at any other time in the event that said material breach has not been cured, or with respect to any other material breach by the franchisee. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.129.10 Renegotiation or amending franchise agreements upon order of higher authority.
     In the event that, after the effective date of the franchise agreement, any court, agency, commission, legislative body, or other authority of competent jurisdiction: (i) declares a franchise agreement invalid, in whole or in part, or (ii) requires the franchisee either to: (a) perform any act which is inconsistent with any provision of the franchise agreement or (b) cease performing any act required by any provision of the franchise agreement, the city shall reasonably determine whether said declaration or requirement has a material and adverse effect on the franchise agreement. If the city determines that said declaration or requirement does have a material and adverse effect on the franchise agreement, the franchisee shall, upon the city’s request, enter into good faith negotiations with the city to consider amendments to the franchise agreement to eliminate any inconsistency or conflict between said declaration or requirement and the provisions of the franchise agreement and to meet the original intent of the parties as the circumstances warrant and unless prohibited by law. Neither party is required to agree to such re-negotiations or amendments, and either party may terminate the franchise agreement without penalty. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XXXI Termination.
4.20.130.1 The city reserves the right to terminate a franchise.
     In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the city, the city reserves the right to terminate a franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchisee in the event of a failure to comply with, or breach of, a term or condition of the franchise agreement, of the ordinance codified in this title, or of any federal, state, or local law or regulation pertaining to the provision of cable services, which failure has not been remedied following procedures set forth in the ordinance codified in this title and/or the franchise agreement. Material provisions shall include all labeled as such and all others, which, under all the facts and circumstances indicated, are material to the franchise agreement or the ordinance codified in this title. For purposes of this section, “frequent” means more than twelve (12) occurrences in any six (6) consecutive month period. “Unjustified” means without legal excuse. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.130.2 Bases for termination; examples given.
     Such material breaches which may serve as a basis for termination shall include but not be limited to the following, provided that the franchisee has been given notice and opportunity to cure such breach as provided in the ordinance codified in this title:

     4.20.130.2.1.           Violation or breach of any provision of the ordinance codified in this title or the cable act, or any rule, order, regulation or determination pursuant to the ordinance codified in this title or the cable act;

     4.20.130.2.2.           Failure to meet the construction, reconstruction, extension or operation deadlines established unless such failure is due to factors beyond the control of the franchisee. The franchisee shall establish such factors by clear and convincing evidence to the satisfaction of the city;

     4.20.130.2.3.           Loss of or failure to obtain or renew any FCC certificate, registration or other city authorization that may be required;

     4.20.130.2.4.           Failure to obtain and maintain any utility easements, road crossings, utility pole agreements or the like required to provide service;

     4.20.130.2.5.           [Reserved.]

     4.20.130.2.6.           Failure to provide the types of services promised, assuming the franchisee has unsuccessfully pursued whatever recourse is available under Section 625 of the Cable Act;

     4.20.130.2.7.           Refusal or otherwise unreasonable failure to meet any of its obligations under the ordinance codified in this title or a franchise agreement or failure to correct the deficiency as provided in the ordinance codified in this title;

     4.20.130.2.8.           Insolvency, bankruptcy, inability or unwillingness to pay its debts, including subscriber refunds where owed;

     4.20.1302.9. Use of a city channel without permission;

     4.20.130.2.10. Discrimination in the provision of cable services, in access to facilities, including city and educational access facilities, and in subscriber rates;

     4.20.130.2.11. Attempt to evade any provision of the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement or the practice of any fraud or deceit upon the city or subscribers;

     4.20.130.2.12. Failure to begin or complete construction, reconstruction, or extension of cable system, together with service and maintenance thereof, as provided under the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement;

     4.20.130.2.13. Failure significantly to provide the categories of programming and cable services set forth under the franchise agreement;

     4.20.130.2.14. Failure to maintain in effect the insurance, bonds and letters of credit required under the ordinance codified in this title and the franchise agreement;

     4.20.130.2.15. Failure to operate the franchisee’s cable system for forty-eight (48) consecutive hours due to an event or occurrence within the franchisee’s control and without prior approval of the city;

     4.20.130.2.16. Any misrepresentation of fact, made by or on behalf of a franchisee in its proposal to obtain a franchise, or in connection with the negotiation or re-negotiation, or any amendment or other modification to, the franchise agreement;

     4.20.130.2.17. Failure to provide the financial information required by the ordinance codified in this title and/or the franchise agreement;

     4.20.130.2.18. Frequent or unjustified failure to satisfy the requirements regarding the technical performance standards specified in an agreement;

     4.20.130.2.19. Abandonment of the system, in whole or in material part, without the prior written consent of the city;

     4.20.130.2.20. Frequent or unjustified failure to comply with the leased access requirements of 47 U.S.C. 532;

     4.20.130.2.21. Unjustified failure to supply the access channels and other access support and any related services, equipment and facilities as required in the franchise agreement;

     4.20.130.2.22. Imposition of any fee, charge, deposit, or associated term or condition for any service which fails to comply with the requirements of the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement;

     4.20.130.2.23. Failure to comply with the interconnection requirements, as provided in the ordinance codified in this title and the franchise agreement;

     4.20.130.2.24. Frequent or unjustified failure to comply with the consumer service standards and requirements set forth in the ordinance codified in this title and franchise agreement;

     4.20.130.2.25. The taking of any material action which requires the approval or consent of the city without having first obtained said approval or consent, as provided in the agreement;

     4.20.130.2.26. The conviction of a franchisee, any affiliated person, any director or executive officer of a franchisee or of an affiliated person, any person holding control of or a controlling interest in the franchisee, or any employee or agent of a franchisee or of any affiliated person acting under the express direction or with the actual consent of the franchisee, its directors or officers, of any criminal offense constituting a felony, including, without limitation, bribery or fraud, arising out of or in connection with the franchise agreement. Provided, however, that the right to terminate the franchise agreement in the event of said convictions shall arise only with respect to any of the foregoing convictions of the franchisee itself and, in the event of the conviction of any other persons specified in this subsection if the franchisee fails to disassociate itself from, or terminate the employment of, such other persons with respect to activities in the franchise area or any other activities affecting the system pursuant to the franchise agreement, within thirty (30) days after the time in which appeals from such conviction may be taken, if not taken, or within thirty (30) days following the final determination of all appeals which are in fact taken;

     4.20.130.2.27. The franchisee’s becoming insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or upon listing of an order for relief in favor of franchisee in a bankruptcy proceeding; and

     4.20.130.2.28. Dissolution or termination of the franchisee’s partnership, company, corporation, or business. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.130.3 Reserved.
 

4.20.130.4 Force majeure.
     In the event the franchisee’s performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required of it under the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement is prevented by any cause or event not reasonably foreseeable and avoidable under standard industry practice or not within the franchisee’s control, such inability to perform shall be excused and no penalties or sanctions of any nature shall be imposed upon the franchisee as a result thereof during said event and for a reasonable time thereafter. Causes or events not within the control of the franchisee include, without limitation, strikes, labor strife, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, actions of any governmental agency or court, explosions, actions of public enemies, unusually severe weather conditions, natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides and fires, extended power or communication failures, embargoes, quotas, rationing, material shortages, inability to secure materials or services or equipment from normal sources of supply following diligent efforts to do so and inability to secure approvals, consents or authorizations from any person upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable, in the discretion of the city, after diligent efforts to do so. The period of the franchisee’s performance shall be extended by the period of any such delay. The franchisee shall provide the city with written notice promptly following the franchisee’s knowledge of any such cause or event. Economic hardship, business agreements or misfeasance or malfeasance of the franchisee’s shareholders, partners, directors, officers, or employees shall not be deemed to be causes or events not within the control of the franchisee. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.130.5 Pending litigation or financial difficulties shall not excuse franchisee from performance of its obligations.
     Litigation pending against a franchisee shall not excuse the franchisee from the performance of its obligations under the franchise agreement except when such performance is enjoined or prohibited by a court of law or excused or suspended by the city. Failure of a franchisee to perform those obligations which are the subject of litigation, solely because of pending litigation, may result in the imposition of liquidated damages and/or revocation of its franchise. A franchisee may petition the city or a court to be excused from the performance of an obligation under an agreement because of pending litigation. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XXXII Termination Procedures.
4.20.131.1 Requirement of notice and opportunity to cure--Reason for suspension of requirement.
     4.20.131.1.1.           The cable administrator shall provide notice and opportunity to cure for each occurrence, event, incident, violation, failure, refusal, neglect or breach of the ordinance codified in this title, the franchise agreement, local, state, or federal law or regulation which the cable administrator deems sufficient to warrant termination of the franchise agreement.

     4.20.131.1.2.           Notice and the opportunity to cure shall be in writing, sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the franchisee’s local place of business or any other place reasonably calculated to provide such notice to the franchisee. The amount of time given the franchisee to cure such occurrence, event, incident, violation, failure, refusal, neglect or breach shall be as provided by specific provision within the ordinance codified in this title.

     4.20.131.1.3.           The cable administrator shall make a written notice to cure and demand that a franchisee comply with any provision, rule, order, or determination under or pursuant to the cable service provider ordinance or the franchise agreement. If the occurrence, event, incident, violation, failure, refusal, neglect or breach by a franchisee continues for a period beyond the stated opportunity to cure period following such written demand without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the cable administrator may place the issue of termination of a franchise before the council. The cable administrator shall cause to be served upon franchisee, at least thirty (30) days prior to the day of such council meeting, a written notice of intent to request termination and the time and place of the meeting. Such notice shall specify the failure alleged to have occurred. Public notice shall be given at least once of the meeting and the issue which the council is to consider and such notice shall be published in the newspaper in which the city publishes its other legal notices. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.131.2 Council shall hear and consider issues and determine if a violation has occurred.
     4.20.131.2.1.           The council shall hear and consider the issue and shall hear any person interested therein and any relevant evidence, and shall: determine, whether or not any violation, breach, failure, refusal or neglect by a franchisee has occurred, after affording franchisee rights of due process to be heard, to present all relevant evidence and witnesses and to question opposing witnesses. The franchisee may, at its own expense, make a transcript of any such hearing or share equally with the city the costs of obtaining a transcript of such hearing.

     4.20.131.2.2.           At the completion of the hearing or a reasonable time thereafter, the council shall issue a written determination as to whether such an occurrence, event, incident, violation, failure, refusal, neglect or breach has occurred based upon the record of such proceeding, stating with particularity the reasons for such determination. A copy of the council’s determination shall be provided to the franchisee.

     4.20.131.2.3.           In the event that the council finds that (i) no failure occurred, (ii) the franchisee remedied the failure or (iii) the franchisee promptly commenced to remedy such failure following receipt of written notice from the cable administrator and actively and expeditiously proceeded, or is actively and expeditiously proceeding, to complete such remedy, the proceedings shall terminate and no penalty or other sanctions shall be imposed. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.131.3 Review of the council’s decision.
     The council shall base its decision on a preponderance of evidence from the record established during the council hearing. If the council determines that the occurrence, event, incident, violation, failure, refusal, neglect or breach by a franchisee of a term or condition of the ordinance codified in this title, the franchise agreement, or other law or regulation was the fault of the franchisee and within its control, following the notice and opportunity to cure and due process requirements of the ordinance codified in this title, the council may declare the franchise terminated. The council’s decision to terminate is final and no other administrative remedies or procedures are provided to a terminated franchisee. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.131.4 Review of city’s termination decision.
     Any decision by the city to terminate the franchise agreement is subject to review through the provisions of the cable act unless otherwise agreed to between the city and the franchisee. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.131.5 Termination--Continuation of service.
     In the event of termination, the franchisee shall continue to provide service until the effective date of the termination. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XXXIII Transfers and Assignment.
4.20.132.1 Nontransferability of franchise rights.
     The rights accruing to the franchisee under the agreement are nontransferable without the written consent of the city. Assignments or other transfer of the franchisee agreement without the written consent of the city shall be grounds for default and termination. This clause shall not apply to assignments of accounts receivable or to mortgages, deeds of trust, or similar financing instruments, unless operational or organizational control of the franchisee is altered by such instruments. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.132.2 Prior written consent of city required before any sale, assignment, or transfer of a franchise.
     A franchise and any rights or obligations of the franchisee under the franchise agreement shall not be sold, assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased, sublet, or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or tangible or intangible property therein (tangible property being defined as more than twenty-five (25) percent of the tangible property of the franchisee located in the city either cumulatively or at any one time), pass to or vest in any person without prior written consent of the city. Such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other hypothecation in whole or in part to secure an indebtedness, provided, however, that such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, and that such consent shall not be required for purchase money security interests incurred in the ordinary course of business. The franchise shall deposit with the city an amount determined by the cable administrator as necessary to reimburse the city for all city and third party costs incurred by the city with respect to the city’s review of such transfer. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.132.3 Prior written consent of city required before any transfer of ownership or control of franchisee.
     Ownership or control of franchisee shall not be transferred without the prior written consent of the city. The franchisee shall deposit with the city an amount determined by the cable administrator as necessary to reimburse the city for all city and third party costs incurred by the city with respect to the city’s review of such transfer. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.132.4 Franchisee to submit documentation related to proposed transfer.
     4.20.132.4.1.           The city shall have one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of submission of a completed FCC Form 394, together with all exhibits, and any additional information required by the terms of the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement or applicable state or local law to act upon an application to sell, assign, or otherwise transfer controlling ownership of a cable system.

     4.20.132.4.2.           At any time during the review process, the city reserves the right to require additional supporting documentation from a franchisee or any other person involved in the action or proposed action to support the showing required of franchisee under this section. A franchisee shall provide all requested assistance to the city in connection with any such inquiry and, as appropriate, shall secure the cooperation and assistance of all other persons involved in such action.

     4.20.132.4.3.           If the city questions the accuracy of the information provided under the previous paragraph it must notify the cable operator within thirty (30) days of the filing of such information, or such information shall be deemed accepted, unless the cable service provider has failed to provide any additional information reasonably requested by the franchise authority within ten (10) days of such request.

     4.20.132.4.4.           If the city fails to act upon such transfer request within one hundred twenty (120) days, such request shall be deemed granted unless the franchise authority and the requesting party otherwise agree to an extension of time.

     4.20.132.4.5.           A franchisee shall promptly notify the city of any action or proposed action requiring consent of the city pursuant to this section. A franchisee shall submit to the city an original petition, which includes the completed FCC Form 394, and four copies, unless otherwise directed, which petition shall fully describe the terms and conditions of the action or proposed action subject to this section and clearly state the basis on which the petition should be approved. The petition shall also contain all documentation to support the showings required of franchisee under this section.

     4.20.132.4.6.           The city may deny such a petition, among other grounds, for a franchisee’s failure to submit the information needed to support the required showings. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.132.5 Showings required of proposed transferee or assignee—Transferee or assignee must agree to conditions prescribed by city.
     4.20.132.5.1.           As a condition of the city’s consent, the proposed transferee must agree to comply with all provisions of the ordinance codified in this title and the franchise agreement, and must show the financial, legal, technical and character qualifications to do so. The proposed transferee or franchisee, as determined between themselves, will bear the cost of independent evaluation of these qualifications.

     4.20.132.5.2.           Failure to produce the documents required under this section shall constitute fraud on the franchising authority and may result in a denial of the transfer.

     4.20.132.5.3.           A proposed assignee or transferee must demonstrate that it possesses the legal, financial and technical qualifications necessary to perform all the terms, conditions and obligations under the franchise agreement for the remaining term thereof, and such reasonable additional obligations required of the assignee or transferee by the city for the specific and limited purpose of assuring the performance by assignee or transferee of all the terms, conditions and obligations of the franchise agreement, and in this connection, a proposed assignee or transferee must provide information regarding legal, technical, financial, character, and customer service.

     4.20.132.5.4.           Legal Qualifications. The application shall identify the proposed assignee or transferee and, if the proposed assignee or transferee is not a natural person, each of its officers, directors or shareholders owning or beneficially holding five percent or more of its outstanding voting shares, general partners and limited partners holding an equity interest in the proposed assignee or transferee of five percent or more, and the respective percentage share of each such identified officer, director, shareholder or general or limited partner. The proposed assignee or transferee shall disclose any pending administrative, legal, equitable or dispute resolution proceeding and any adverse finding made or adverse final action taken during the past three years by, any court, administrative body or arbitrator with respect to the proposed assignee, transferee or officers, directors, or other persons having a legal or equitable interest in five percent or more of the voting stock of such transferee or assignee in a civil, criminal, administrative or equitable proceeding brought under the provisions of any law or regulation related to the following: any felony, revocation, suspension or involuntary transfer of any authorization (including cable or cable service provider franchises) to provide video programming or other communications services; antitrust or unfair competition; fraudulent statements to a governmental unit; material breach of the franchise agreement pursuant to a finding of default under the franchise agreement including, but not limited to, a material failure to provide PEG access channels, facilities or equipment; or final rate regulation proceeding in which the proposed rate was not sustained.

     4.20.132.5.5.           Financial Qualifications. The proposed assignee or transferee must demonstrate that it has sufficient net liquid assets on hand or available from committed resources to consummate the transaction and any proposed upgrade or rebuild, construction or reconstruction of the cable system and operate the franchisee’s cable system for six months. The application for transfer shall include recent financial statements, including audited financial statements if available, of the proposed assignee or transferee prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, including balance sheets, income and expense statements, capital expenditure statements and accompanying notes for the past three years. Such statements, if not otherwise publicly available, may be designated as confidential and shall be maintained as such by the city to the extent permissible by law.

     4.20.132.5.6.           Technical Qualifications. The application shall set forth a narrative account of the proposed assignee’s or transferee’s technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding cable systems. The narrative account shall include, but not be limited to:

     4.20.132.5.6.1. List of the cable systems currently and formerly owned or operated by assignee or transferee within the past three years;

     4.20.132.5.6.2. Summary information concerning appropriate management personnel that will be involved in the management and operation of the assignee’s or transferee’s cable system;

     4.20.132.5.6.3. A list of any material violations of the technical rules of the FCC or of federal, state or local governments, including but not limited to violations of rules or regulations regarding signal quality, safety and construction cited during the past three years by any franchising authority or by local, state or federal governments involving currently or formerly owned or operated cable systems; and

     4.20.132.5.6.4. Any and all technical or safety reports, summaries, or inspections involving currently or formerly owned or operated cable or cable systems issued or written by any person within the past three years. The narrative report shall also include as an exhibit copies of any and all inspection or other reports, whether published, public, or in draft form for any above listed system; without regard to the source or authorship of said reports.

     4.20.132.5.7.           Customer Service. The application must submit to the city:

     4.20.132.5.7.1. A reasonably detailed narrative describing, or a representative manual (if such a manual exists) containing, assignee or transferee’s customer service procedures;

     4.20.132.5.7.2. Copies of at least two representative annual customer notices provided by other systems owned or operated by assignee or transferee;

     4.20.132.5.7.3. A summary of assignee or transferee’s proposed billing procedures;

     4.20.132.5.7.4. A sample customer service bill which assignee or transferee proposes to use in franchisee’s system; and

     4.20.132.5.7.5. A copy of a sample customer service complaint log or form, printed out from an electronic or computerized complaint recording system, which assignee or transferee proposes to use in franchisee’s system. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.132.6 Compliance with franchise agreement and cable service provider ordinance.
     The proposed assignee or transferee must agree to comply with all provisions of the franchisee’s franchise agreement and the ordinance codified in this title, as well as such reasonable additional terms and conditions as the city may require for the specific and limited purpose of assuring the proposed assignee’s or transferee’s compliance with such provisions, including without limitation such additional terms and conditions as the city may require to remedy or avoid the recurrence of any past violations of the terms of a franchise or of applicable federal, state or local law or regulations in the operation of franchisee’s, assignee’s or transferee’s cable systems or service. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.132.7 Franchisee and assignee or transferee to assist city in its inquiry of prospective controlling party.
     4.20.132.7.1.           Franchisee’s Responsibility. A franchisee shall assist the city in its inquiry into an assignee’s or transferee’s capabilities under this section. The franchisee shall promptly notify city of any actual or prospective change in control of franchise.

     4.20.132.7.2.           Assignee’s or Transferee’s Responsibility. In seeking the city’s consent to any change in ownership or control, assignee or transferee shall have the responsibility to establish, to the satisfaction of city, that assignee or transferee has all the legal, financial and technical qualifications necessary to perform all of the terms, conditions and obligations of the franchisee under the franchise agreement for the remaining term thereof. The city may request, and assignee or transferee shall provide, all reasonable financial data relative to the transfer, including but not limited to the materials specified in this section. In addition, assignee or transferee shall provide to the city the terms and conditions of the sale, credit agreements, partnership agreements and any other information reasonably related to the assignee’s or transferee’s acquisition of the franchise agreement which is needed to clarify the change of ownership. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.132.8 Transfer of control occurs with change of 10% of voting interest or of person exercising management authority over franchisee.
     The franchisee shall notify the city promptly of any proposed change in, transfer of, or acquisition by any other person of control of the franchisee or any parent company. For purposes of the ordinance codified in this title, a change of control of the parent company will be deemed to have taken place upon the transfer of ten (10) percent or more of the common stock, shares, or units of such parent company to an unaffiliated entity. Every such change shall make the franchise agreement void and terminated unless and until the city has granted consent. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.132.9 “Control” defined.
     4.20.132.9.1.           The word “control” as used in this section is not limited to major stockholders but includes de facto control or significant influence with respect to the operation of the franchisee’s cable system. For purposes of this section, “significant influence” occurs where a person other than the franchisee or a person controlling, controlled by or under common control with the franchisee exercises working or effective control of decisions affecting the operation of the cable system.

     4.20.132.9.2.           A rebuttable presumption that transfer of control has occurred, including transfer of control in fact (i.e., transfer of de facto control), shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person, or group of persons, of ten (10) percent of the voting interest of a publicly held franchisee or of the person exercising management authority over such a publicly held franchisee, or of twenty-five percent (25%) of the voting interest of a privately held franchisee or of the person exercising management authority over such a privately held franchisee. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.132.10 Transfer without prior consent deemed to be material breach and shall subject franchisee and assignee/transferee to, liquidated damages.
     Any assignment of franchise or transfer of ownership or control of franchisee without the prior consent of the city shall null and void the franchise unless later ratified by the city and shall: (i) be deemed a material breach of an agreement and (ii) among and/or in addition to other remedies available to the city, be subject to a liquidated damages assessment, on a daily basis, until the taking of a transfer or assignment is approved, or if not approved, until the prior ownership, control or other status quo ante is restored to a condition satisfactory to the city. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in foreseeable damages in an amount specified in the section titled, “liquidated damages.” Both the franchisee and the assignee/transferee shall be jointly and severally liable for liquidated damages accrued pursuant to this section. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.132.11 City may revoke franchise if unauthorized transfer occurs.
     If the city fails to approve or denies its consent to any such assignment of franchise or transfer of ownership or control of the franchisee and such action has nevertheless been effected, the franchise is terminated unless control of the franchisee or the system is restored within ten (10) calendar days to its status prior to such unauthorized action or to a status acceptable to the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.132.12 Consent of city to transfer shall not constitute waiver of city rights.
     The consent or approval of the city to any assignment of a franchise or transfer of control of a franchise or of ownership shall not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the city unless the city specifically releases or waives such rights in writing. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.132.13 Franchisee must notify city of agreement to transfer or assign cable system and of terms of sale.
     A franchisee must notify the city whenever it reaches a definitive written agreement to sell, transfer or assign its cable system, or any portion thereof. A franchisee must also notify the city of the terms and conditions of any proposed sale as required by this section. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.132.14 Successor-in-interest must become signatory to an agreement.
     In no event shall an assignment of franchise or a transfer of ownership or control be approved without the successor-in-interest becoming a signatory to existing franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.132.15 Franchisee not to enter into any management contract if it results in a change of control.
     A franchisee shall not enter into any management contract or other arrangement for the management of the system, to the extent that such contract or other arrangement would result in a significant change of influence over the operational control of a franchisee or the system, without the prior consent of the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

Article XXXIV Waiver.
4.20.133.1 Failure to enforce provisions of the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement is not waiver nor acquiescence.
     A cable service provider shall not be excused from complying with any of the requirements of the ordinance codified in this title, or any subsequently adopted amendments to the ordinance codified in this title, by any failure or the city on any one or more occasions to seek, or insist upon, compliance with the ordinance codified in this title or the franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.133.2 The franchisee may request a waiver of any requirement of the ordinance codified in this title.
     The franchisee may request a waiver of any requirement of the ordinance codified in this title where local conditions render a waiver essential. Such requests shall be directed to the cable administrator who shall determine whether such requests should be granted. Waivers shall be granted only where technically acceptable to and in the best interests of the city and upon adequate consideration. Any such waivers must be signed by both parties and incorporated into the franchise agreement. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.133.3 Provisions subject to waiver.
     Any provision of the ordinance codified in this title may be waived, at the sole discretion of the city. Any waiver of any provision must be in writing signed by the city. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.133.4 Submission of a written request for a waiver necessary.
     A franchisee may submit a written request for a waiver to the cable administrator at any time during the franchise term. The city shall determine whether to grant or deny any such written request for waiver within one hundred twenty (120) days following a franchisee’s request. Such request for a waiver may, at the sole discretion of the city, be set for a public hearing and, if the city should determine to hold such a public hearing, it shall make a decision within one hundred twenty (120) days following the submission. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.133.5 Reimbursement of expenses.
     If the city believes it will require economic, technical, or legal evaluation of such waiver request, it will so notify franchisee; if franchisee decides to pursue its waiver request, the franchisee shall be required to pay for in advance or reimburse the city (in the city’s discretion) for any expenditure incurred by the city in connection with such evaluation. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

 

4.20.133.6 This section for convenience and benefit of the city.
     This Section 4.20.133 is enacted solely for the convenience and benefit of the city and shall not be construed in such a manner as to create any right or entitlement for the franchisee. (Ord. 205 § 3, 2001)

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
Chapter 5.08 BINGO
Chapter 5.12 PEDDLERS, HAWKERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
Chapter 5.16 TEMPORARY SPECIAL EVENTS
Chapter 5.20 YARD SALES
Chapter 5.22 STATE CERTIFIED MASSAGE THERAPY AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 5.24 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS, MASSAGE THERAPISTS AND MASSAGE THERAPY PERMITS
Chapter 5.26 INSPECTION GRADING OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 5.30 MARIJUANA ACTIVITIES
Chapter 5.34 MULTIPLE-FAMILY AND OTHER RENTAL UNITS

Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
5.04.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided, the words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

     “Business” means any employment avocation, occupation, profession, trade, calling, lawful game, show, exhibition, event, venture, fund-raising activity, commercial enterprise, company, corporation, joint enterprise, place of business, partnership or other activity or enterprise engaged in for gain, profit, benefit, advantage or livelihood, whether or not a gain, profit, benefit, advantage or livelihood is earned thereby.

     “City” means the city of Yucaipa.

     “Collector” means the city official charged with the administration of this chapter.

     “Contractor” means any person who undertakes to or purports to have the capacity to undertake to or submits a bid to, or does himself or by or through others, construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, parking facility, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or works in connection therewith. The term contractor includes subcontractor and specialty contractor.

     “Employee” means any person who receives his compensation from an employer that carries worker’s compensation insurance, makes all necessary payroll deductions from such compensation, directly supervises and assumes all other responsibilities as an employer. Any person who is not an employee shall be deemed self-employed and in business for himself subject to the provisions of this chapter.

     “Fixed place of business” means the place within the city at which the principal tools, equipment or machinery used in a business are customarily stored or located, or at which are maintained the principal stock of materials or supplies and the books and records used in a business.

     “License” means the valid receipt issued by the collection which indicated that any fee imposed by this chapter has been paid to the city. The business license is a receipt only and shall have no other legal effect.

     “Licensee” means any person holding a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

     “Person” includes any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, Massachusetts business trust, receiver, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular number.

     “Premises” means all lands, structures, places, and also the personal property, equipment and appurtenances connected or used in any business.

     “Sworn statement,” as used in this chapter means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths, or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 101 § 1, 1992)

 

5.04.020 Purpose of provisions.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted for the purpose of keeping record of business locations and zoning and for statistical purposes. (Ord. 101 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.030 License and fee required— Exception.
     A.    License and Fee Required. No person shall conduct any business in the city without first having obtained a business license, paid the appropriate license fee, and complied with any and all applicable provisions of this code. In any business where a county, state, federal license is required, such license shall be exhibited to the collector before a city business license is issued. Failure of the applicant for a business license to exhibit or be in actual possession of a county, state, or federal license or failure of the collector to verify the legitimacy or applicant’s possession of such license shall not constitute negligence on the part of the city.

     B.     Exception. This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a business license where such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California. (Ord. 101 § 3, 1992)

 

5.04.040 Fees set by resolution.
     Every person engaging in business in the city shall pay a business license fee as prescribed by resolution. The amount or rate of the applicable business fee shall bear a reasonable relationship to the service to be performed by the city and the costs incurred by the city in reviewing and acting upon the application. The city council shall, from time to time, review the resolution fixing business license fees and shall retain, revoke, modify, adjust, add or determine any amount or rate of such business license fees. Such resolution shall have the force of law and shall be binding on all persons engaging in business in the city and shall be done in an advertised public hearing.

     Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city who engages in business within the city, shall pay a license fee at the same rate prescribed in this chapter for persons engaged in the same type of business and having a fixed place of business within the city. (Ord. 101 § 4, 1992)

 

5.04.050 Fees and penalties constitute debt.
     The amount of license fee and fee and penalty imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent license fee and penalties. (Ord. 101 § 5, 1992)

 

5.04.060 Compliance with other regulations.
     A.    The payment of a fee required by this chapter and the issuance of a license to any person, shall not entitle the licensee to engage in any business unless the licensee has complied with all other applicable federal, state or local laws; nor shall the licensee be excused from the payment of any license, certificate, registration, insurance, bond, cash deposit, or permit fee or tax required under any other provision of this code or any ordinance of the city; nor shall the licensee be authorized to conduct any business or activity in violation of any federal, state or local law.

     B.     A city business license shall not be issued until an applicant has obtained all necessary land use entitlements, building permits, or certificates of occupancy to operate the business in and at its location. (Ord. 101 § 6, 1992)

 

5.04.070 Evidence of doing business.
     When any person by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone book, or newspapers, advertises, holds out, or represents that such person is conducting business in the city, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that such person is in business in the city and such person fails to deny by a sworn statement given to the collector that he is not conducting a business in the city, after being requested to do so by the collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that such person is conducting a business in the city. (Ord. 101 § 7, 1992)

 

5.04.080 Separate license required for each place or type of business.
     Where a license fee is imposed upon any business pursuant to this chapter and such business is conducted with branch establishments or at separate fixed places, the fee shall be computed as if each such branch or place were a separate and independent business.

     A separate license shall be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business and for each separate type of business at the same location. Each license, shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location specified in the license, and in the manner designated in such license.

     Warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. (Ord. 101 § 8, 1992)

 

5.04.090 Information confidential.
     The collector shall maintain in confidence the business affairs, operations or other information contained in any statement or business license application and any information obtained from an investigation of records of a business; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the examination of records by federal or state officials, a grand jury or court of law upon subpoena, or other agents of the city for the purpose of auditing the accounts of the collector or administering or enforcing this chapter; nor shall this section prohibit the disclosure of the names and business addresses of licenses, the general type of their business and general statistics regarding business license fees collected in the city. (Ord. 101 § 9, 1992)

 

5.04.100 Exemptions.
     Although the following may be exempt from a city business license fee, they shall apply for and obtain a city business license:

     A.    Constitutional and Statutory Exemptions. This chapter shall not be construed to require the payment of a license fee by any person engaging in business when the person or business is exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California, or by any ordinance of the city.

     B.     Interstate Commerce. No license fee provided for by this chapter shall be so applied as to impose an undue burden upon or unlawful interference with interstate commerce. Where a licensee or applicant for a license believes a license fee places an undue burden upon or unlawfully interferes with interstate commerce, such person may apply to the collector for an exemption of the fee. Application for exemption of the fee shall be made during application for a license. The licensee or applicant for a license shall, by sworn statement and supporting testimony, demonstrate to the collector the interstate commerce character of the business entitling the licensee or applicant to such exemption. The statement shall contain the name and address of the company or firm for which the orders are to be solicited or secured; the name and address of the nearest local or state manager, if any; the kind of materials or merchandise bought or sold in commerce; the place from which the same are to be shipped or forwarded; the method of solicitation or taking orders; the address of any warehouse, factory or plant within the state; the method of delivery; the name and address of the applicant for the exemption; and any other information required by the collector to establish such claim of exemption. The collector shall then conduct an investigation to determine the facts and, if warranted, issue a fee-exempt license.

     C.     Disabled American Veterans. No honorably discharged veteran who is physically disabled shall be required to pay a business license fee when such payment would impose an undue burden on the disabled veteran. An honorably discharged veteran who can produce evidence attesting to such disability and discharge status, and who provides a sworn statement attesting to the nature of the undue burden a business license fee would impose, may distribute circulars and peddle and vend any goods, wares or merchandise owned, except alcoholic beverages, without payment of a business license fee.

     D.    Nonprofit and Charitable Organizations. Except as otherwise provided, this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license fee to engage in any business operated for nonprofit purposes where such business is conducted, managed or carried on by and/or only for the benefit of any nonprofit organization, including fraternal societies, orders or organizations, religious, charitable, philanthropic, scientific, literary or educational, organizations, amateur sports or humanitarian organizations, civic leagues, social welfare and employees’ organizations, nonprofit pleasure and recreation clubs, political organizations, home owners’ associations, and military, federal, state, county or municipal organizations. The collector shall require any information or evidence necessary to establish profit status.

     E.     Public Utilities. Any public utility making franchise payments to the city, except to the extent the public utility engages in retail sales or services within the city not covered or otherwise authorized by such franchise.

     F.     Employees of Licensees. Except as otherwise provided, no person acting solely as an employee or as the direct representative of a business which holds a business license shall be required to pay a business license fee.

     G.    Domestic Household Help. The license provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to include or apply to domestic household help in the employ of an individual homeowner.

     H.    Banks, including national banking associations, federal credit unions, and financial corporations, to the extent that a city may not levy a license fee upon them under the provisions of Article XIII, Section 27 of the State Constitution.

     I.      Insurance companies or associations engaged in the sale and servicing of insurance and their direct agents, including bailbond agents and life agents, but not including brokers or bailbond brokers or life and disability insurance analysts or insurance solicitors to the extent that a city may not levy a license fee upon them under the provisions of Article XIII, Section 28 of the State Constitution.

     J.      Any governmental agency or subdivision and the employees thereof, to the extent they are engaged in the business of such governmental agencies or subdivision.

     K.    Motor vehicle carriers, or household goods carriers operating under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California or any public transportation system in the city whose definite permanent points of origin and/or termination lie outside of the legal limits of the city to the extent that a city may not levy a license fee upon them pursuant to Section 4301 et seq., of the State Public Utilities Code.

     L.     Any state alcoholic beverage licensee engaged in the manufacture, sale, purchase, possession or transportation of alcoholic beverages within the state to the extent that a city may not levy a license fee upon them under provisions of Article XX, Section 22 of the State Constitution.

     M.    Any day care facility where not more than six people are cared for on a full or part-time basis, to the extent that a city may not levy a license fee upon them pursuant to Section 1523.1 of the Health and Safety Code.

     N.    Any residential care facility where not more than six people are cared for on a full or part-time basis, to the extent that a city may not levy a license fee upon them pursuant to Section 1566.2 of the State Health and Safety Code.

     O.    Minors. A business license shall not be required for any person under eighteen years of age, who is a citizen of the city, and who is enrolled in an institution of secondary education: provided, however, such person has no employee or employees working for him or her. (Ord. 157 § 10, 1996; Ord. 101 § 10, 1992)

 

5.04.110 Filing for exemptions.
     Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this chapter shall file a sworn statement with the collector stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed; in the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such person shall be liable for the payment of the appropriate business license fee as set forth by resolution. The collector shall, upon verification of the information contained in the sworn statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption. Upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption, the collector, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, may revoke any license and shall require the licensee to pay the amount of the license fee determined to be due the city. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt any person from complying with any and all other applicable federal, state or local laws. (Ord. 101 § 11, 1992)

 

5.04.120 General application procedure.
     Every person required to have a business license shall apply to the collector for a license. Upon receipt of a completed application and any fees required, the collector shall process the application and issue a business license. The amount of the fees due shall be determined in accordance with a schedule established by resolution. The collector may submit the application to other city departments or governmental agencies to determine if the business in premises to be occupied meet the requirements of federal, state and local laws. (Ord. 101 § 12, 1992)

 

5.04.130 Contents of application.
     Each business license application shall contain the following:

     A.    Business name;

     B.     Business address;

     C.     Mailing address;

     D.    Phone number;

     E.     Employer I.D. number (or Social Security number);

     F.     State resale permit;

     G.    State contractors license number;

     H.    Type of business being conducted;

     I.      Start date;

     J.      Type of ownership;

     K.    Owners or principal officers;

     L.     Standard industrial classification code;

     M.    Business license number;

     N.    Health permit number;

     O.    Such other information as may be required by the application form or requested by the collector for the enforcement and administration of this chapter. (Ord. 101 § 13A, 1992)

 

5.04.140 Contents of business license.
     Upon the payment of the prescribed license fee, the collector shall issue to the applicant a license which shall contain the following:

     A.    Type of business;

     B.     Location;

     C.     Business tax number;

     D.    Expiration date;

     E.     Amount paid;

     F.     Name of business;

     G.    Owner;

     H.    Such other information as deemed necessary by the collector. (Ord. 101 § 13B, 1992)

 

5.04.150 Renewal of license.
     Any person applying to renew a business license shall submit to the collector a completed application for renewal and pay the appropriate license fee as set forth by resolution. (Ord. 101 § 14, 1992)

 

5.04.160 License fee—Payment due dates.
     A.    Annual. For businesses established prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, license fees shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of adoption of each year. For businesses established after the adoption of said ordinance, license fees shall be due and payable annually in advance on the first day of the month following the anniversary date on which a license was originally payable.

     B.     Other than Annual. Except as otherwise provided, license fees other than annual shall be due and payable as follows:

     1.     Monthly. Monthly license fee, on the first day of each and every month,

     2.     Weekly. Weekly license fees, in advance on Monday of each week, and

     3.     Daily. Daily license fees, in advance each day,

     4.     Quarterly. Quarterly license fees, on the first day of each and every quarter. (Ord. 155, 1996: Ord. 101 § 15A, 1992)

 

5.04.170 Establishing alternative license periods.
     If deemed necessary for administrative purposes, the collector may establish alternative license periods for individual businesses or for certain classes of business on a fiscal year, calendar year or other basis. (Ord. 155, 1996: Ord. 101 §15B, 1992)

 

5.04.180 Refunds.
     No business license fees or penalties collected shall be refundable in any manner; provided, that where a licensee establishes to the satisfaction of the collector that an amount was paid in excess of the correct amount due for a first license, a refund of the excess amount paid in shall be made by the collector. Claims for refund shall be made by sworn statement with supporting testimony and must be filed with the collector within a period of thirty (30) days from the day on which the first license expired. Claims for refund may be made only by a person named on the business application, a designated guardian, executor administrator or heir. No refund for overpayment shall be made where the license was issued under a misrepresentation of fact by the applicant. (Ord. 101 § 16, 1992)

 

5.04.190 Mistakes not to prejudice fees or terms.
     In no case shall any mistake of the collector in stating the amount or terms of a license, or the time for which the license is valid, prevent or prejudice the collection, by the city, of what shall be actually due from any person engaging in business in the city. (Ord. 101 § 17, 1992)

 

5.04.200 Duplicate license— Modification to license— Transfer of license.
     A.    Duplicate License. Upon a licensee filing a statement indicating that a license has been lost or destroyed, and after paying a fee as established by resolution, a duplicate license shall be issued by the collector.

     B.     Modification to License. Where a license is issued authorizing a person to engage in a business under a particular business name or at a particular location, the licensee may, upon application, and paying a minimal fee to cover administrative cost as established by resolution, have the license amended to reflect a new business name or some other location to which the business has or is to be moved.

     C.     Transfer of License. Upon the change of ownership of a business a city business license is transferable subject to the filing of a new application and the paying of a transfer fee as set by resolution. (Ord. 101 § 18, 1992)

 

5.04.210 Payments received by mail.
     Whenever any payment, statement, report or other communication is received after a deadline prescribed by this chapter, but is received in a sealed envelope bearing a postmark dated on or before such deadline, the collector may regard such payment, statement, report or other communication as having been received in a timely manner. (Ord. 101 § 19, 1992)

 

5.04.220 Posting and keeping of licenses.
     Any person engaging in business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep a business license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where the business is carried on. Any person engaging in business, but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city, shall be in possession of a business license or an authorized facsimile at all times while on such business in the city. (Ord. 101 § 20, 1992)

 

5.04.230 Authority to enforce—Entry to inspect.
     A.    Authority to Enforce. The collector shall have the authority to enforce each of the provisions of this chapter. The police department and other departments of the city shall render assistance in the enforcement of this chapter as may, from time to time, be necessary. The collector shall have the authority to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all persons found to be violating any of the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     Entry to Inspect. The collector, in the exercise of the duties imposed by this chapter, and every police officer, fire inspector and other officers of the city empowered to enforce the provisions of this code, shall have the power and authority to enter into or upon, free of charge, and at any reasonable time, the premises of any place of business required to be licensed and demand that any person in charge of such place of business exhibit a license to engage in business. Any persons engaging in business in the city who is required to be in possession of a business license, and who fails to exhibit such license on demand by the collector or any police officer, fire inspector or other officer of the city empowered to enforce the provisions of the municipal code is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 101 § 21, 1992)

 

5.04.240 Penalties for delinquency— Action to collect.
     A.    Penalties for Delinquency. Any person engaging in business in the city who fails to pay the appropriate business license fee shall be subject to the following penalties:

     1.     For failure to pay a license fee when due, the collector shall add a penalty of ten percent of such license fee on the day following the last day of each consecutive thirty (30) day interval following the total amount of the penalty to be added shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of the amount of the license fee due. The city will make every effort to give notice to businesses prior to date of renewal.

     2.     For failure to secure a license to engage in business, the license fee due and payable shall be that amount due and payable from the first date the person engaged in business, together with applicable penalties provided in subsection (A) (1) of this section;

     3.     For failure to pay the amount which was actually due, it shall be deemed that to the extent of the deficiency, there was a failure to pay a license fee when due. Penalties provided in subsection (A) (1) of this section shall be assessed on the amount of the deficiency from the date when such amount was first required to be paid. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to apply to any person when the deficiency is the result of an error by the collector in calculating the amount of the license fee due and when such error is not the result of misrepresented facts supplied to the collector by any such person.

     B.     Action to Collect. Notwithstanding subsection (A) (1) of this section, should court action be required to collect any license fee and/or penalties, an additional penalty shall be charged equal to the cost incurred by the city for the court action, including attorney fees. All penalties shall be added to the license fee and shall become due and payable along with the delinquent license fee. (Ord. 101 § 22, 1992)

 

5.04.250 Withholding a license.
     The collector shall withhold from any person a license to engage in business where there are pending violations of this code against such person applying for a license, or when any person owes a debt to the city as a result of a violation of this code. (Ord. 101 § 23, 1992)

 

5.04.260 Violation a misdemeanor.
     It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresent to any officer or employee of this city any material fact in procuring a business license. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The city attorney may specify in the accusatory pleadings that the offense shall be an infraction. The conviction and punishment of any person in violation of this code shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any license fees or penalties due or unpaid at the time of such conviction. (Ord. 101 § 24, 1992)

 

5.04.270 Appeal.
     Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector with respect to the issuance or denial of a business license shall have the right to appeal to the city council through appropriate procedures. (Ord. 101 § 25, 1992)

 

5.04.280 Collector—Power and duties.
     The collector is charged with the duty of carrying out and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. In addition to all other powers conferred upon him, the collector shall have the authority for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days and in such case to waive any penalty which would otherwise have occurred. He shall have the further authority, with the consent of the council, for good and satisfactory cause shown, to order the issuance of a license for less than the fees provided. (Ord. 101 § 26, 1992)

 

5.04.290 Remedies cumulative.
     The city may initiate civil action to compel compliance with this chapter. All remedies prescribed in this chapter shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 101 § 27, 1992)

 

5.04.300 Issuance—Proof of state license required for contractors.
     No license shall be issued to do business as a contractor in a classification which requires licenses from the California Contractor’s State License Board until proof of a valid state contractor’s license is provided to the city license collector. (Ord. 101 § 28, 1992)

 

5.04.310 Business by vehicle.
     Business conducted by vehicle where an exchange of money takes place shall be deemed as conducting business in the city. (Ord. 101 § 29, 1992)

Chapter 5.08 BINGO
5.08.010 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols that are marked or covered by the player on a tangible card in the player’s possession and that conform to numbers and symbols, selected at random and announced by a live caller, and shall include remote caller bingo games, or shall have the meaning otherwise set forth in Section 326.5(o) of the California Penal Code.

     “Minors” are all persons defined as a person under eighteen (18) years of age.

     “Nonprofit organization” means an organization exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g), 23701(k), 23701(l), or 23701(w) of the California Revenue and Taxation Code.

     “Prizes” means cash, kind or both for each separate game which is held.

     “Remote caller bingo” means a game of bingo in which the numbers or symbols on randomly drawn plastic balls are announced by a natural person present at the site at which the live game is conducted, and the organization conducting the bingo game uses audio and video technology to link any of its in-state facilities for the purpose of transmitting the remote calling of a live bingo game from a single location to multiple locations owned, leased, or rented by that organization. (Ord. 304 §§ 1—3, 2010; Ord. 157 § 12, 1996; Ord. 117 § 1, 1993)

 

5.08.020 License required.
     No person or organization other than a nonprofit organization may conduct bingo games. A nonprofit organization may conduct bingo games only after having first obtained a license from the city clerk pursuant to this chapter, and provided that the receipts of such games may be used only for charitable purposes or as otherwise allowed pursuant to Section 326.5 of the Penal Code. Remote caller bingo may be lawfully played in the city of Yucaipa pursuant to the provisions of Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the California Penal Code, and this chapter, and not otherwise. Any remote caller bingo license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the conditions contained in Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code, and each licensee shall comply with the requirements of those provisions and any applicable regulations set forth in Title 4 of the California Code of Regulations. (Ord. 304 § 4, 2010; Ord. 117 § 2, 1993)

 

5.08.030 License—Fee.
     An annual license fee, set by resolution of the city council, shall be payable upon the filing of an application for license or for renewal of a license. If an application for a license is denied, one-half of the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 117 § 3, 1993)

 

5.08.040 License—Application.
     Applicants for bingo games shall file a written, signed, and acknowledged application with the city clerk showing:

     A.    The name and address of applicant;

     B.     The dates, hours and location where the bingo games will be operated;

     C.     The name or names of the person or persons having the management or supervision of such games;

     D.    Such other reasonable information as may be required as to the identity or character of the applicant, manager, members of the applicant operating such games;

     E.     The maximum number of participants expected on the premises;

     F.     Proof by copy of exempt status issued by the California State Franchise Tax Board. (Ord. 117 § 4, 1993)

 

5.08.050 License—Granting.
     After making and filing the application, the city clerk shall refer the application to the police department for investigation. The police department shall make a report to the city clerk of the findings, together with a recommendation as to whether or not the applicant shall be granted a license within ten working days of receipt of the application. The license shall be issued for a specified location and shall be valid for a period of one year from date of issuance. (Ord. 117 § 5, 1993)

 

5.08.060 License—Display.
     Every licensee shall display the license issued by the city in a conspicuous place on the premises where the bingo games are conducted. (Ord. 117 § 6, 1993)

 

5.08.070 License—Nontransferability.
     Each license issued hereunder shall be issued to a specific nonprofit organization and shall in no event be transferable from one organization to another. (Ord. 117 § 7, 1993)

 

5.08.080 License—Suspension or revocation.
     The city council may, upon its own motion or upon the verified complaint in writing of any person, investigate the actions of any licensee and may temporarily suspend, for a period not exceeding one year, or revoke the permit of any licensee which commits any one or more of the acts or omissions constituting grounds for disciplinary action under this chapter. (Ord. 117 § 8, 1993)

 

5.08.090 Disciplinary action— Grounds.
     It shall be a ground for denial, revocation or other disciplinary action of any applicant, licensee, the agent or employee, or any person connected or associated with the applicant or licensee as partner, director, officers, stockholder, general manager or person exercising managerial authority of or on behalf of the licensee if such organization or person has:

     A.    Knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in an application for a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city; or

     B.     Violated any provision of this chapter or of any statute relating to the permitted activity, including Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the California Penal Code; or

     C.     Been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude; or

     D.    Committed any unlawful, false, fraudulent, deceptive or dangerous act while conducting permitted bingo games; or

     E.     Violated any rule or regulation adopted by the city council relating to the licensed bingo games; or

     F.     Conducted the permitted bingo games in a manner contrary to the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the public; or

     G.    Failed to comply with zoning and building and safety regulations of the city, the health department, the police chief and applicable local and state fire regulations. (Ord. 304 § 5, 2010; Ord. 117 § 9, 1993)

 

5.08.100 Suspension or revocation of license without hearing.
     If any applicant, licensee, the agent or employee, or any person connected or associated with the applicant or licensee as partner, director, officer, stockholder, general manager or person who is exercising managerial authority on behalf of the licensee is convicted in any court of the violation of any law regulating any activity at the licensee’s business premises, the council may revoke such license forthwith without any further action thereon other than giving notice of revocation to the licensee. (Ord. 117 § 10, 1993)

 

5.08.110 Hearing—Procedure.
     An applicant or licensee may, within ten days after service of a written notice of denial of a license or suspension or revocation of his license, file a request for a hearing with the city council. The request for a hearing shall be in writing and signed by or on behalf of the applicant or licensee. It need not be verified or follow any particular form. Failure to file such a request for a hearing shall constitute a waiver of the licensee’s right to a hearing. (Ord. 117 § 11, 1993)

 

5.08.120 Effect of pending revocation or suspension.
     A.    Continuing Operation of Bingo Games. Pending the final determination of a proceeding for revocation or suspension of a license, a licensee may continue to operate bingo games for the period of his license or until the council makes such final determination.

     B.     Renewal—Effect of Pendency or Proceeding to Suspend or Revoke License. A licensee may file an application for renewal of a license pursuant to Section 5.08.040, accompanied by the required fee. Renewal application should be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the license period. In the event a renewal application is filed during the pendency of a proceeding to suspend or revoke the license, such filing shall continue such license in full force and effect until the entry of the final order by the city council terminating proceedings. Failure of the council to revoke, suspend, limit or condition the license shall have the effect of granting such license. The application for renewal shall become a part of the pending proceeding and be subject to all evidence which has been or is thereafter presented. No further notice to the applicant is required and the city council is authorized to consider and make findings upon such application in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 117 § 12, 1993)

 

5.08.130 Game operation.
     A bingo game, including a remote caller bingo game, shall be conducted only on nonresidential property owned, rented, or leased by the nonprofit organization, or property whose use is donated to the organization, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purpose for which the organization is organized. Except for the operation of a remote caller bingo game, the bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the nonprofit organization that organized the game. Such members of the nonprofit organization shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the nonprofit organization that is licensed to conduct the bingo game shall receive any proceeds from the operation of the game. No bingo game may be conducted between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. or may last more than five hours in any twenty-four (24) hour period. The number of bingo sessions may not exceed ten such sessions in any calendar month, except that a licensee may hold one additional game, at its election, in each calendar quarter. (Ord. 304 § 6, 2010; Ord. 117 § 13, 1993)

 

5.08.140 Alcoholic beverage consumption prohibited.
     The consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited in any room being utilized to conduct the bingo game. (Ord. 117 § 14, 1993)

 

5.08.150 Participation of intoxicated person prohibited.
     No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (Ord. 117 § 15, 1993)

 

5.08.160 Financial interest limitation.
     No individual, corporation, partnership, nor other person or legal entity except the organization licensed to conduct a bingo game shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of the bingo game. However, this shall not preclude the employment of security personnel who are not members of the licensed organization at such game by the organization conducting the game. (Ord. 117 § 16, 1993)

 

5.08.170 Profit accountability.
     All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Records required by this section shall be retained for a period of three years. The licensee shall maintain a record of all receipts derived from bingo games and cash disbursement thereof including those disbursements awarded as prizes of each game. The licensee’s books and records shall be available for inspection upon reasonable. No licensee may expend funds to publicize its bingo games except for small signs or handbills. (Ord. 117 § 17, 1993)

 

5.08.180 Participation limited to those present.
     No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. (Ord. 117 § 18, 1993)

 

5.08.190 Games to be open to public.
     All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the nonprofit charitable organization. (Ord. 117 § 19, 1993)

 

5.08.200 Value of prizes.
     The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any regular bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game that is held, except that for games of remote caller bingo, the total value of the prizes awarded for each game shall be determined by the entity that is calling the remote caller bingo game in compliance with Section 326.3 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 304 § 7, 2010; Ord. 117 § 20, 1993)

 

5.08.210 Participation of minors prohibited.
     No minor shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (Ord. 117 § 21, 1993)

 

5.08.220 Use of fictitious name or address prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person or persons to sign a fictitious name or fictitious address in connection with applications submitted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 117 § 22, 1993)

 

5.08.230 Violation—Penalty.
     Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or both such fine and imprisonment; provided, however, pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, any person receiving a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game authorized by Section 19 of Article IV of the State Constitution and this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). (Ord. 117 § 23, 1993)

Chapter 5.12 PEDDLERS, HAWKERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
5.12.010 General definitions.
     A.    The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

     “Hawking” means offering goods, wares or merchandise for sale on the streets by outcry or by attracting the attention of persons by exposing such goods in a public place, or by placards, labels, or signals.

     “Itinerant vendor” means any person who engages in a temporary or transient business in the city, selling or offering for sale services, goods, wares, merchandise or things or articles of value, with the intention of conducting such business in the city for a period of not more than ninety (90) days in a calendar year, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires, leases or occupies any room, doorway, vacant lot, parking lot, building or structure for the exhibition or sale of services, goods, wares or merchandise.

     “Peddler” means a hawker, itinerant street vendor, or other person who, without an appointment, goes from house to house, place to place, or in or along streets of the city selling and making immediate delivery, or offering for sale and immediate delivery, any services, goods, wares, merchandise or anything of value in the possession of the peddler to a person other than manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers or retailers in such commodities.

     “Point of vending” is the location or approved route/area at/within which the vending occurs. Each location, or approved route/area, requires a separate permit even if under the same ownership or management.

     “Stationary vending” means vending from the same location(s) on a regular basis. Vending from any one location for more than two consecutive hours is stationary vending.

     “Vending” means selling, offering for sale, or displaying or dispensing of any services, goods or merchandise for sale or purchase to the public from any carrying device, box, bag, stand, human-powered device (including, but not limited to, any pushcart, wagon, bicycle, tricycle, or other wheeled container), portable stand, or any other device used for carrying goods or merchandise. This includes hawking, peddling, operating noise-making devices, and any other activity or signage to attract attention to the vendor or the goods or merchandise. A vendor may be both stationary and itinerant depending on the vendor’s method of operation. Examples of vending activity include, but are not limited to, hot dog carts/vehicles, flower carts/stands/ sales, ice cream carts/vehicles, roadside sales, stationary food carts/vehicles, and similar activities.

     B.     Where terms are not specifically defined in this chapter, in the municipal code, in any applicable statute, rule, code or regulation, or in any of the uniform codes adopted and incorporated by reference by the municipal code, they shall have the meanings set forth in their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. The most current edition of Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, shall be construed as providing ordinary accepted meanings for any duly adopted city policy or regulation described in this chapter.

     C.     Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular.

     D.    Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine. (Ord. 224 § 2, 2003)

 

5.12.020 Application procedures.
     An itinerant vendor permit is required in order to vend pursuant to this chapter. Each permit applicant shall provide the following:

     A.    A completed application, including a written description of the proposed vending activity.

     B.     Mailing address(es) and legal name(s) of vending business owner(s) and/or operator(s).

     C.     Proof of valid city business license.

     D.    Proof of valid health permit(s), if required by applicable law or regulation.

     E.     Photocopy of valid form of identification for business owner and/or operator.

     F.     Color photographs showing different views of the vending vehicle or device, and of the proposed location for vending. An applicant shall provide a site plan for all proposed stationary location(s) and a map of the proposed route/area of vending.

     G.    Dimensioned sample or rendering of proposed signage.

     H.    Non-refundable initial deposit for application processing fee.

     I.      If an applicant proposes to vend from a single location for more than four consecutive hours at a time, the applicant must identify the location of an available restroom on or adjacent to the vending location to be used by the vendor.

     J.      Written property-owner approval. (Ord. 224 § 2, 2003)

 

5.12.030 Permit issuance and notification of decision.
     A.    An itinerant vendor permit is an administrative permit issued by the community development department (department) pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The city code enforcement officer and/or the police department shall have the authority to enforce the terms of the permit.

     B.     Upon acceptance of a properly filed application, the director of community development (director), or designee, shall make a determination within thirty (30) days of acceptance to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Applicants shall receive written notice of the decision. (Ord. 224 § 2, 2003)

 

5.12.040 Performance standards.
     A.    No person(s) may engage in peddling, hawking or vending in any location within the city of Yucaipa unless the conduct of that activity meets each of the following criteria listed below, and unless the person is operating under and by the authority of a valid itinerant vendor permit.

     B.     The permit shall address, and the vendor shall comply with, the following items:

     1.     General. The city may impose conditions on the permit, as it deems necessary for health and safety, and/or to mitigate the impact of vending on an area. This may include the imposition of additional conditions and/or stricter requirements than identified below.

     2.     Shall Not Obstruct or Create Hazards. Vendors shall not obstruct vehicular traffic, bicycle traffic, sidewalk pedestrian traffic, or accessibility to vehicles parked adjacent to the curb, and shall not create public health or safety hazards.

     3.     Hours of Operation. Vending shall be conducted within the hours of operation established in the permit. Notwithstanding approved hours of operation, all activities are subject to the restrictions of the city’s noise ordinance requirements.

     4.     Signage. No more than one sign is allowed associated with each permit. The sign shall not exceed ten square feet and shall be affixed to the vehicle or device from which the goods or merchandise are being vended.

     5.     Number of Permits. Each point of vending shall require a separate permit, even if multiple points of vending are under the same ownership or management.

     6.     Business License. The vendor shall have a valid city business license.

     7.     Health Permit. Vending of food, produce, or other edible items requires valid health or other permit(s) issued by the appropriate agency.

     8.     Indemnification. As a condition of issuance, the vendor agrees to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city and its representatives against liability and/or loss arising from activities connected with and/or undertaken pursuant to the permit. The city is not liable for any business loss, property loss, or other damage that may result from use of the permit, or suspension or revocation of the permit, and no vendor shall maintain any claim or action against the city, its officials, officers, employees, or agents on account of any suspension or revocation.

     9.     Property Owners Approval. Permit applications must include the written approval of any property owner whose property will be used for vending. Vending on private property must comply with any development conditions imposed on the private property, and all requirements of the appropriate land use district.

     10.   Other Applicable Regulations. The vendor shall conform at all times with all applicable city and governmental requirements, including without limitation, the Americans with Disabilities Act, health and safety regulations, local zoning, and any applicable redevelopment agency regulations.

     11.   Term of Permit—Renewal. The maximum term of a permit shall be for a one-year period. The permit may be renewed subject to compliance with all terms and conditions of the permit, the standards established in this section of the municipal code, and payment of applicable fees. At the city’s discretion, the term of the permit may be less than one year.

     12.   Transferability. A permit is not transferable to any entity or person and is valid only as to the original applicant.

 

     13.   Proximity to Other Items. No vending may occur within ten feet of a fire hydrant, fire escape, building entrance, bus stop, loading zone, handicapped parking space or access ramp, fire station driveway, or police station driveway. A greater distance or separation from other uses may be required, under the permit, in order to preserve line-of-sight, or for other safety reasons. The vending shall not damage landscaped areas.

     14.   Appearance and Storage. The vendor shall maintain the area within which vending activities occur in a clean, safe, sanitary, and dust-controlled condition. With the exception of approved stands, the vendor shall remove all evidence of vending and leave the site in a clean state at the close of each business day.

     15.   Lighting. Vending may not occur after dark unless appropriate lighting is provided, or an exemption from this requirement is specifically granted as a part of the permit due to the type of activity (e.g., one-time permit for itinerant vending at a special nighttime event).

     16.   Parking. Prior to issuance of any permit, the city shall confirm that an acceptable area for customer parking exists, or must specifically exempt the vendor from this requirement due to the nature and/or location of the use. Parking for the vendor shall be specified pursuant to the permit. The vendor shall not indicate exclusive roadway parking or reserve any public parking area for the vendor’s customer parking.

     17.   Location on Particular Roadways. Vending may be restricted or prohibited along specific roadways, or portions thereof, which, as a result of limited parking, limited line-of-sight, traffic control impacts, high traffic flow, or other reasons specified, are determined to be unsafe for vending. This may include restrictions against operating during peak traffic hours, as determined by the city.

     18.   Number of Vendors and/or Operators. The city may limit the number of vendors at any one location or within an area, or limit the number of operators, sales persons, or others engaged in the act of vending for any one owner or permittee at the requested or approved location. No vending activity may occur within the triangular visibility area described in Section 87.0815 of the municipal code, as shown below:

 



 

     19.   Design and Set-Up of Vehicle or Device for Vending. The width, length, and height of all vendor vehicles and devices shall be subject to review as a part of consideration of the permit. The city’s review shall include but not be limited to color, materials, and appearance of the vending vehicle or device; shade umbrellas; accessories (including ice chests and trash receptacles); and maneuvering necessary for set-up and takedown. Vending vehicles or devices shall be designed such that they do not detract from the aesthetic value of the vicinity. A site plan of areas at which stationary vending will occur must be provided, and is subject to the city’s discretionary review. The area of vending activity (excluding parking) shall be specified under the permit and shall not generally exceed two hundred (200) square feet.

     20.   Tables. Tables for use by customers shall generally be prohibited unless the vending is occurring in an area that is specifically designed for such purpose such as a plaza, park, or other public open space area with adequate restroom facilities, or if specifically required as a part of the health department conditions.

     21.   Permit Display. Vendor permits and business licenses must be prominently displayed on the vehicle or device for vending, or if stationary, at the location of vending. (Ord. 224 § 2, 2003)

 

5.12.050 Exemptions.
     An itinerant vendor permit is not required for the following activities or individuals:

     A.    City-Sponsored Events. Farmers markets, crafts fairs, street fairs, and other special events on city property, approved and designated by the city. A vendor/event must have prior written approval of the city.

     B.     Deliveries. Delivery activities of any establishment with a fixed place of business, which only delivers its products, services, or goods to a specified address in response to a customer request, order, or invoice previously placed through that fixed place of business.

     C.     Public Park Events. Nonprofit organizations selling goods or merchandise on park property as part of an authorized joint use activity pursuant to a written agreement with the city.

     D.    Garage Sales. Garage sales are separately regulated by the municipal code, and are not subject to this regulation.

     E.     Agricultural Products Grown On-Site. The sale of agricultural products on the site where the product is grown.

     F.     Mall Sales. The sale or offering for sale or distribution from interior private pedestrian circulation areas of shopping centers or malls of products to pedestrians which is traversing such areas or patrons of retail stores.

     G.    Veterans. Veterans who are physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor and that are entitled to the exemption of Section 5.04.100(C).

     H.    Bona fide nonprofit and charitable organizations engaging in lawful and authorized nonprofit and charitable activities and that are entitled to the exemption of Section 5.04.100(D).

     I.      The driver of any commercial vehicle engaged in vending upon a street who vends products on a street in a residential district only after bringing the vehicle to a complete stop and lawfully parked adjacent to the curb, consistent with state law and local ordinances adopted pursuant thereto.

     1.     Such vehicle shall not stand or park within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any public or private school property.

     2.     Such vehicle shall stand or park only at request of a bona fide customer or purchaser and for a period of time not exceeding ten minutes at any one place.

     3.     Such vehicle shall not broadcast any noise greater than seventy (70) decibels in intensity or exceeding a duration of five seconds while standing or parked in any one place. (Ord. 224 § 2, 2003)

 

5.12.060 Prohibitions.
     A.    Vending is unlawful without an itinerant vendor permit and a valid city business license, and a home occupation permit (if required).

     B.     Vending shall not be permitted in any roadway medians.

     C.     Vending shall not be permitted in any public rights-of-way.

     D.    With the exception of food products, vending shall not be permitted in a residential land use district. (Ord. 224 § 2, 2003)

 

5.12.070 Denial—Suspension—Revocation.
     A.    City staff may revoke or suspend a permit as an administrative action, for good cause or upon violation of any provision of this chapter or the conditions of the permit. Any person whose permit has been revoked or suspended shall receive in writing an explanation of such action by the code enforcement officer. Reasons for denial, suspension, and revocation include:

     1.     Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for the permit;

     2.     Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of vending;

     3.     Vending contrary to the conditions of the permit and/or the regulations;

     4.     Vending in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or to constitute a danger to the public.

     B.     The following factors shall be considered in determining whether a permit should be suspended or revoked upon noncompliance with these regulations:

     1.     Any prior citation for violation of these regulations previously received by the vendor;

     2.     A previous suspension and/or revocation imposed on the vendor;

     3.     Whether the vendor’s permit was subject to suspension or revocation and was not suspended or revoked;

     4.     The seriousness of the violation or misrepresentation and the danger to the health and/or safety of the public represented by the vendor’s misrepresentation, noncompliance and/or misconduct;

     5.     Whether the condition subjecting the vendor to suspension or revocation is of a nature that can be or has been corrected.

     C.     A vendor whose permit is suspended or revoked, or whose application for a permit is denied, may appeal the action to the city council within ten days of the action by filing written notice of appeal with the city clerk. The appeal must include statements against the suspension, revocation, or denial, and must identify a proposed alternative outcome. A public hearing before the city council shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days to consider the appeal. Except in cases involving an immediate threat to public health, safety and welfare (as defined by the city), the permit will remain in effect pending the outcome of the appeal. At the hearing, the permit holder or applicant will be afforded the opportunity to be heard and present facts and witnesses on his or her behalf. At that time or within ten days thereafter, the city council shall make a final written decision. (Ord. 224 § 2, 2003)

 

5.12.080 Fees.
     The applicant shall pay an application initial deposit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) at the time of filing an application pursuant to this chapter, to pay for the administrative costs associated with the community development department’s review of the application. If additional funds are necessary to cover the above costs, the applicant shall pay such additional costs to the city before further processing of the application may proceed. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 224 § 2, 2003)

 

5.12.090 Violations and penalties.
     A.    No person shall violate any provision, or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violation of a specific provision of this chapter, every act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter is punishable as a misdemeanor. Where the city attorney determines that such action would be in the interest of justice, he/she may specify in the accusatory pleading that the offense shall be an infraction. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly.

     B.     All remedies herein are stated to be cumulative and nonexclusive. (Ord. 224 § 2, 2003)

Chapter 5.16 TEMPORARY SPECIAL EVENTS
5.16.010 Purpose.
     It is the purpose of the city to establish a process for permitting special events that impact city right-of-way, public property, other facilities, safety, and or services. It is vital to the public health, safety, and welfare of the city to monitor, track, and assist with these events to mitigate traffic conflicts, monitor commerce, and promote tourism in the city. It is recognized that these special events enhance the Yucaipa lifestyle and provide benefits to the citizens through the creation of venues for programs, services and entertainment that are not normally provided as a part of governmental services. Notwithstanding any provision of the Yucaipa Municipal Code, this code authorizes special events which would otherwise be prohibited by city ordinance.

     By recognizing special event venues, it is further intended to supplement land use and street right-of-way regulations, to provide a coordinated process for the regulation of certain activities to be conducted in conjunction with special events and to ensure the health and safety of patrons, residents, and other visitors of special events. It is further intended to create a cost recovery without having an adverse effect on those events that contribute to the community. (Ord. 394 § 1, 2020)

 

5.16.020 Definitions.
     “Carnival” means the exhibiting or conducting of a traveling show or of entertainment open to the public, including any caravan, museum, menagerie, animal collection, circus, sideshow, burlesque show, rodeo, carnival, animal exhibition, feats of horsemanship, acrobatic performance, “wild west” show, or any other show or entertainment similar in character.

     “Community celebration” means those public affairs sponsored by chambers of commerce or community service groups for the promotion of community spirit by public parades, carnivals and other outdoor activities.

     “Outdoor festival” means any music festival, dance festival, rock festival, or similar musical activity or gathering where live or prerecorded entertainment is presented to the public at facilities without specific site approval for such activity.

     “Site approval” means a land use whose activities have been approved as to location, design and scope subject to conditions established under authority of the city code.

     “Special event” means any temporary, organized activity sponsored by an event organizer and will result in people congregating at the event location for a particular and limited purpose and time, and meets any one or more of the following criteria:

     1.     City Property, City Parks and City Rights-of-Way. The activity will be conducted in whole or in part on a city-owned or controlled property, city park or facility or city rights-of-way, and the director of community services, or designee, determines that the activity requires a special event permit because:

     a.     The activity is likely to obstruct, delay or interfere with the free and normal use of public rights-of-way or other public property of the city within the vicinity of the event; or

     b.     The activity is likely to result in the need for the city to provide extraordinary services in response to or arising out of the special event. Criteria to be considered include, by way of example and not limitation, available parking capacity, likely pedestrian and vehicular routes, availability of public transportation, the number of days and hours of operation, the number of people anticipated to attend, the capacity and safety of the permanent and temporary structures, the proximity and availability of health and sanitation services, the proximity and availability of emergency services, the activity(ies) to be engaged in, the historical impacts of the proposed or comparable special events, if known, upon use of public rights-of-way and public property and public services including police and fire, and other considerations deemed appropriate.

     2.     Private Property. The activity will be conducted in whole or in part on private property and the director of development services, or designee, determines that the activity requires a special event permit because:

     a.     The activity is likely to obstruct, delay or interfere with the free and normal use of public rights-of-way or other public property of the city within the vicinity of the event. It is presumed that any event on private property which involves an open invitation to the public to attend or events where the attendance is by private invitation of one hundred (100) or more people are each presumed to be an event that will have a direct significant impact on the public streets or rights-of-way; or

     b.     The activity is likely to result in the need for the city to provide extraordinary services in response to or arising out of the special event.

     3.     Sales Not Already Permitted. The activity will involve the sale of merchandise, food or beverages where not already permitted by city code, whether by for profit or nonprofit organizations.

     4.     Public Disturbance Noise. The activity will include use of sound amplification, public address, loud speaker, audio, video, or television systems or other devices likely to result in public disturbance noise in violation of YMC Section 811.0305 as now or hereafter amended.

     “Special event permit” means a permit issued under this chapter.

     “Special event venue” means that area for which a special event permit has been issued.

     “Tax-exempt nonprofit organization” means an organization that is exempted from payment of income taxes by federal or state law and has been in existence for a minimum of six months preceding the date of application for a special event permit.

     “Vendor” means any person who sells or offers to sell any goods, food, or beverages within a special event venue. (Ord. 394 § 1, 2020)

 

5.16.030 Special event permit—Requirements.
     A special event permit is required when the following criteria has been met:

     A.    Estimated attendance of three hundred (300) or greater and; or

     B.     Amplified sound and; or

     C.     Street closures and; or

     D.    Alcohol is provided or sold on public property or public right-of-way, or if served on private property but within a special event venue that encompasses public right-of-way (e.g., closed street, alley or sidewalk). Excludes Community Center, Scherer Community Center and the Yucaipa Performing Arts Center. (Ord. 394 § 1, 2020)

 

5.16.040 Exemptions to special event permit requirement.
     It is unlawful for any person to hold or conduct any special event in the city, or to use private property, any street, right-of-way, or other public place in the city for any purpose unless such person has obtained and has in full force and effect a permit to do so issued by the city.

     The following special events shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain a permit under this chapter; provided, that the special event shall be conducted in accordance with all laws and regulations governing public safety or health:

     A.    Funeral Processions. Funeral processions by a licensed mortuary or funeral home;

     B.     Wedding Processions. Wedding processions conducted on public rights-of-way wherein applicable traffic regulations, laws or controls are complied with;

     C.     School, Church and Governmental Events. Any special events held or conducted by or on behalf of a public or private school, college or school district, the state of California or other governmental entity or any church that is legally operated in the city, so long as the activity or event is conducted on property owned, used, or leased by the entity or its sponsor and is for the benefit of the entity that owns, uses, or leased the property on which the activity takes place;

     D.    Expressive Activities on Sidewalks. Rallies, marches, demonstrations and picketing which take place on public sidewalks crossing streets only at pedestrian crosswalks in accordance with traffic regulations and controls and laws applicable to use of public sidewalks;

     E.     Special Event Facilities. Events conducted at a facility designed for the special event purpose or upon facilities where such events are normally held, such as churches, events/convention centers, schools, athletic fields, auditoriums, stadiums, and theaters;

     F.     Regularly Scheduled Athletic Events. Regularly scheduled outdoor athletic events conducted on property where such events are normally held;

     G.    Outdoor Demonstrations on Public Property. Demonstrations on publicly owned property (other than public rights-of-way), unless:

     1.     The activity is likely to obstruct, delay or interfere with the free and normal use of such public property or the public rights-of-way, or

     2.     The activity is likely to result in the need for the city to provide extraordinary services in response to or arising out of the special event. (Ord. 394 § 1, 2020)

 

5.16.050 Issuance of a special event permit.
     Issuance of a special event permit pursuant to this chapter does not obligate or require the city of Yucaipa to provide city services, equipment, funding or personnel in support of a special event. (Ord. 394 § 1, 2020)

 

5.16.060 Application—Form.
     Any person desiring to apply for a special event permit shall do so by filing a written application with the community services department not fewer than ninety (90) days prior to the proposed event and no earlier than three hundred sixty-five (365) days prior to the event. The application shall be made on forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied by the following:

     A.    A nonrefundable application fee listed in the community services user fee schedule established by resolution of the city council. The application fee must be submitted when the applicant or sponsor files the application. Other costs for city services shall be invoiced to the applicant no later than ten (10) calendar days after the expiration date of the permit. The applicant shall pay said costs within thirty (30) calendar days of invoice or late fees shall apply.

     B.     The applicant may request a waiver of the application fee. Such request shall require a community activity grant application, found on Yucaipa.org or at the city clerk’s office. Requests for fee waiver through the community activity grant process will be reviewed by the city council at a regular scheduled city council meeting. The application must be submitted.

     C.     Certificate of liability insurance. Insurance certificate must be issued by insurance underwriters “admitted” by the California Insurance Commission and rated “A” or better by AM Best. Requirements are:

     1.     Minimum one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) general liability limit.

     2.     Minimum one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) general automobile liability.

     3.     Minimum one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) worker’s compensation.

     4.     On an additional insured endorsement, the city, its elected officials, officers, and agents are to be named as additionally insured.

     5.     Minimum limits of coverage may change depending on event.

     D.    Applicants who intend to have food vendors must provide a copy of the county of San Bernardino department of environmental health temporary food facility permit.

     E.     Applicants who intend to provide or sell alcohol on public property or public right-of-way, or if served on private property but within a special event location that encompasses public right-of-way (e.g., closed street, alley or sidewalk), the event organizer shall comply with the following conditions:

     1.     Obtain and comply with the applicable liquor license or permit issued by the

State of California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, and provide such license or permit to the city;

     2.     Service must end by 12:00 a.m.;

     3.     Liquor liability must be included on insurance coverage;

     4.     Trained volunteers or paid security personnel must be posted at every entrance/exit point to ensure that no person under the age of twenty-one (21) will be allowed into the alcohol service area; and

     5.     No outside alcohol may be brought into an alcohol service area and no alcohol may be removed. (Ord. 394 § 1, 2020)

 

5.16.070 Application—Review.
     Upon receipt of a completed special event permit application, the city shall refer the application to the chief of police, director of development services, director of community services, assistant city manager and the fire chief, for their review and determination of compliance of the proposed special event with the criteria for issuance set forth by their department. The departments shall forward the results of their review and determination, including any comments, to the community services department within ten (10) working days. The city council shall review and approve or deny all special event permits with an estimated attendance of more than one thousand (1,000) and/or with a request to close streets. (Ord. 394 § 1, 2020)

 

5.16.080 Issuance of special event permit.
     A.    The city manager, or designee, shall endeavor to take final action upon a completed application for a special event permit within thirty (30) working days of receipt of the completed application.

     B.     The city manager, or designee, is not required to take final action upon any special event permit application prior to three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days before the special event.

     C.     The city manager, or designee, is not required to take final action on an incomplete or untimely special event permit application.

     D.    Final action on a completed special event permit application shall consist of one of the following:

     1.     Issuance of a special event permit in accordance with the terms of the application; or

     2.     Issuance of a special event permit by the city manager, or designee, with such conditions as deemed necessary for the application to meet all of the criteria set forth above; or

     3.     Denial of the special event permit application by the city manager, or designee. (Ord. 394 § 1, 2020)

 

5.16.090 Cost recovery for special events.
     A.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, or when a fee waiver has been approved through the community activity grant process, for any special event, the city may impose a fee for expected departmental service charges. Factors that the city will consider in evaluating whether to impose a fee are:

     1.     The extent of use of public property or right-of-way;

     2.     The extent of use of city services, facilities or affected entities;

     3.     The extent of use of city personnel, including police and fire;

     4.     Whether the city is sponsoring or co-sponsoring the event.

     B.     The city shall require payment of the expected departmental service charges imposed pursuant to subsection A of this section, at the time the completed application is approved and prior to the issuance of the special event permit, unless the city determines there is good cause and extends time for payment.

     C.     If the event organizer fails to clean the special event venue or route of the special event both during and upon completion of the special event and to return the area or route to the same condition of material preservation and cleanliness as existed prior to the special event, the event organizer will be billed for actual city costs for cleanup and repair of the area or route occasioned by the special event. If the event organizer failed to comply with such requirements under a previously issued special event permit, the city may require the event organizer to deposit adequate surety in the form of cash.

     D.    The applicant will be billed for any city departmental charges in excess of the estimate in subsection B of this section, including any billing and collection costs incurred. (Ord. 394 § 1, 2020)

 

5.16.100 Authorized special event vendors.
     A.    The issuance of a special event permit confers upon the permit holder or event organizer the right to control the sale of goods, food, and beverages within the special event venue in accordance with the terms and conditions of the special event permit. The permit holder may grant no greater rights or privileges to vendors than the rights or privileges granted to the permit holder pursuant to the special event permit.

     B.     Vendors authorized to sell goods, food, or beverages in the special event venue shall obtain and display their city of Yucaipa business license. Only vendors displaying the required authorization shall be allowed to sell goods, food, or beverages in the special event venue.

     C.     Vendors authorized to sell food must obtain and display a San Bernardino County health permit. (Ord. 394 § 1, 2020)

 

5.16.110 Unlawful to conduct or promote attendance at special event without permit.
     It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage, or promote a special event without a special event permit as required pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 394 § 1, 2020)

 

5.16.120 Other permits and licenses.
     The issuance of a special event permit does not relieve any person from the obligation to obtain any other permit or license required pursuant to the city of Yucaipa Municipal Code or any other applicable law. (Ord. 394 § 1, 2020)

 

5.16.130 Cost recovery for unlawful special event.
     Whenever a special event is conducted without a special event permit, when one is required, or a special event is conducted in violation of the terms of an issued special event permit, the event organizer shall be responsible for, and the city shall charge the event organizer for, all city costs incurred, caused or necessitated by the adverse impacts of the special event or the violation of the special event permit upon public safety. (Ord. 394 § 1, 2020)

Chapter 5.20 YARD SALES
5.20.010 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, “yard sale,” “rummage sale” and “garage sale” are synonymous and, for the purpose of this chapter, mean any event which is advertised by any means whatsoever as a place or location to which members of the public may come and purchase identifiable or tangible personal property; provided, however, they shall not mean any such event which constitutes a sales activity; wholesale or retail, by any business which has a current business license issued by the city. (Ord. 102 § 1, 1992)

 

5.20.020 Permit requirements.
     The first yard sale conducted or carried on within the city by any person, firm or corporation within any calendar year shall be exempt from the requirement of a permit. However, a permit shall be required for the second and each subsequent yard sale conducted within any calendar year. (Ord. 102 § 2, 1992)

 

5.20.030 Permit fee.
     The fee for such permit shall be set by resolution. (Ord. 102 § 3, 1992)

 

5.20.040 Exemptions.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales of personal property made under court order or process. (Ord. 102 § 4, 1992)

 

5.20.050 Frequency and hours.
     An individual or household shall be limited to four such sales per calendar year and each sale shall be limited to three consecutive days. There shall be no consecutive sales. Such sales may be conducted only between the hours of eight a.m. and eight (8) p.m. (Ord. 102 § 5, 1992)

 

5.20.060 Sworn statement that personal property only is to be sold.
     Before a permit may be issued a sworn statement must be filed with the collector stating that all property to be sold is the applicant’s own personal property and has not been acquired or consigned to him for the purpose of resale. If the occupant of the premises is selling another’s property, said property owner must also sign a sworn statement stating that it is his own personal property. (Ord. 102 § 6, 1992)

 

5.20.070 Display of goods.
     Sale goods may not be displayed in the public right-of-way, and all sale goods shall be arranged so that fire safety service and other officials may have access for inspection at all times during the sale. Sale goods may only be displayed on the days of and between the hours of sales as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 102 § 7, 1992)

 

5.20.080 Signs.
     No other signs shall be permitted, except one double faced sign, not to exceed six square feet in area and the maximum height shall be five feet. Such sign shall have a maximum height of four feet when placed within the front yard or side yard setback area. The sign shall be permitted only on the property where such sale is located. Such sign may be posted twenty-four (24) hours prior to the sale and must be removed immediately following sale. (Ord. 102 § 8, 1992)

 

5.20.090 Enforcement.
     The collector is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. He/she may delegate his or her powers and duties to assistants and safety personnel as may be warranted. (Ord. 102 § 9, 1992)

 

5.20.100 Violation—Penalty.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon a first conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine. For second and third convictions, additional fines will be added. The amount of the fines will be as set forth by resolution. (Ord. 102 § 10, 1992)

Chapter 5.22 STATE CERTIFIED MASSAGE THERAPY AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
5.22.010 Purpose and intent.
     It is the purpose and intent of the city council that massage therapists and practitioners who meet standards and qualifications promulgated by the California Massage Therapy Council and pursuant to the California Massage Therapy Act to perform the massage treatments offered and, to further the public health, safety, and welfare, that massage establishments are operated in a lawful and professional manner. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.020 Definitions.
     Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter.

     “California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC)” means the nonprofit organization created to regulate the massage industry in California pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code (commencing with Section 4600).

     “CAMTC certificate” means a massage practitioner certificate issued by the CAMTC pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 4601(b), or a massage therapist certificate issued by the CAMTC pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 4601(c).

     “Certified massage practitioner” or “practitioner” means any person to whom the CAMTC has issued a certificate pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 4601(b), and who provides massage services for compensation.

     “Certified massage therapist” or “therapist” means any person to whom the CAMTC has issued a certificate pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 4601(c), and who provides massage services for compensation.

     “Chief of police” means the chief of police of the city of Yucaipa.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Yucaipa or designated representative.

     “Massage” includes methods that are undertaken to promote wellness, relaxation, stress reduction, pain relief and postural improvement, or provide general or specific therapeutic benefits, including, but not limited to, massaging, stroking, friction, kneading, rolling, vibrating, cupping, petrissage, rubbing, effleurage, tapotement and any other non-incidental touching, with the hands or other parts of the body, with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical device or appliance, and with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. Massage services include, but are not limited to, hydrotherapy, and therapeutic application of wraps, oils, alcohol rubs, skin brushing, salt glows and similar applications of products to the skin.

     “Massage establishment” means any business where any person engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in or conducted, for money or any other consideration, massage services or health treatments involving massage including, but not limited to, those businesses that provide massage services accessory to their principal permitted use, such as aromatherapy, beauty salon, health club, beach club, skin care salon, and day spa.

     “Massage Therapy Act” means those provisions in Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the California Business and Professions Code commencing with Section 4600.

     “Operator” means any person who supervises, manages, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the overall operation, conduct or activities of a massage business or establishment.

     “Owner” means any of the following:

     1.     The sole proprietor of a massage business or establishment. As used in this chapter, the term “sole proprietor” shall mean a massage business or establishment where the owner is the only person employed by that business or establishment to provide massage therapy;

     2.     Any general partner of a partnership that owns and operates a massage business or establishment; or

     3.     Any person who has an ownership interest in a corporation that owns and operates a massage business or establishment. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.030 CAMTC certificates.
     Any person possessing a valid CAMTC certificate obtained and maintained in compliance with the Massage Therapy Act may perform or engage in the practice of massage for compensation within the city. All persons certified by the CAMTC shall have the right to perform or engage in the practice of massage consistent with the Massage Therapy Act, the qualifications established by his or her certification, and the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.040 Health and safety requirements.
     All massage establishments, including its owners, operators, and employees, and all persons engaged in the practice of massage for compensation within the city, shall comply with all health and safety requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.050 City business license required.
     A.    It is unlawful for any massage establishment to operate, or any independently employed certified massage practitioner or therapist to perform or engage in the practice of massage for compensation within the city, without first obtaining a city business license.

     B.     In applying for a city business license, a massage establishment owner shall fill out an application and shall file along with the completed application a copy of the current and valid CAMTC certificate possessed by every person who will be performing or engaging in the practice of massage at the massage establishment. In addition, massage establishment owners who do not possess a CAMTC certificate, and who own five percent or more of the massage establishment, are subject to a background check pursuant to Section 5.22.080, prior to the issuance of a city business license. Massage establishment operators who do not possess a CAMTC certificate shall also be subject to a background check pursuant to Section 5.22.080.

     C.     In applying for a city business license, a certified massage practitioner or therapist who will be independently employed shall fill out an application and shall file along with the completed application a copy of his or her current and valid CAMTC certificate.

     D.    Prior to the issuance of a city business license to any massage establishment or any independently employed certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist, the police department shall make a reasonable investigation into the information provided in the application, and shall contact the CAMTC to verify the status of the CAMTC certificate(s) filed by the business license applicant.

     E.     No city business license shall be issued to a massage establishment that will employ or contract with one or more persons to perform or engage in the practice of massage without that person or persons possessing a current and valid CAMTC certificate, unless the massage establishment complies with the requirements of Chapter 5.24 of Title 5 of the Yucaipa Municipal Code.

     F.     No city business license shall be issued to a person who wishes to perform or engage in the practice of massage for compensation within the city and who does not possess a current and valid CAMTC certificate, unless the requirements of Chapter 5.24 of Title 5 of the Yucaipa Municipal Code have been fulfilled.

     G.    The city may deny a business license to any applicant who has provided materially false information in applying for a business license.

     H.    The chief of police may order that a business license required by this chapter be revoked pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 5.22.190. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.060 Exchange of information.
     The chief of police may request information from the CAMTC pertaining to any individual who possesses a CAMTC certificate and who is engaging in the practice of massage in the city. The requested information may include, but need not be limited to, the current status of the individual’s CAMTC certificate, any history of disciplinary action(s) taken against the individual, the home and work addresses of the CAMTC certificate holder, and any other information that may be necessary to verify facts relevant to administering the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.070 Regulation of massage establishment.
     A.    It is unlawful for any massage establishment or its owner(s) or operator(s) to hire or employ any person for the purpose of performing or engaging in the practice of massage without requiring that person to possess a valid CAMTC certificate, unless that person has complied with the requirements of Yucaipa Municipal Code Chapter 5.24.

     B.     It is unlawful for any massage establishment or its owner(s) or operator(s) to allow an independent contractor to perform or engage in the practice of massage at the massage establishment if that independent contractor does not possess a valid CAMTC certificate, or that independent contractor has not complied with the requirements of Yucaipa Municipal Code Chapter 5.24. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.080 Massage establishment owners and operators.
     A.    Massage establishment owners who do not possess a current and valid CAMTC certificate, and who own five percent or more of the massage establishment, are subject to a background check prior to the city’s issuance of a business license. If a massage establishment has multiple owners with a five percent or greater ownership interest in the business, each of those owners shall be subject to a background check and each owner shall be considered an “applicant” for purposes of applying for a business license.

     B.     Massage establishment operators who do not possess a current and valid CAMTC certificate are subject to a background check.

     C.     Massage establishment owners and operators who are subject to a background check shall complete an application that requests information regarding topics including, but not limited to, the applicant’s business, occupation, employment history for the five years preceding the date of the application, and the name and address of any massage business or like establishment owned or operated by the applicant.

     D.    All massage establishment owners and operators who are subject to this section shall personally appear at the police department to be fingerprinted. The police department shall conduct, or shall cause to be conducted on its behalf, a background investigation of the applicant.

     E.     At the time of fingerprinting, the applicant shall pay to the police department a fingerprinting fee, and the cost of obtaining criminal history information and conducting a background investigation. Fees are set forth in the city’s fee schedule in amounts established by resolution of the city council.

     F.     With respect to massage establishment owners who are subject to a background check, the chief of police shall determine, based on the background investigation and the information submitted with the application, whether a business license to operate a massage establishment in the city shall be issued. If the chief of police determines that the applicant is not qualified to operate a massage establishment, the chief of police shall inform the applicant in writing and specify the reasons for the denial. The city may deny a business license to a massage establishment owner for the following reasons:

     1.     The applicant has provided materially false information in applying for a business license.

     2.     Within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, the applicant has been convicted of, or pled guilty to, any of the following offenses: violation of Penal Code Sections 243.4, 261, 266a through 266j, inclusive, 267, 288, 314 to 316, inclusive, 318, 647(a), 647(b), 647(d), 647(i), or 647(j); any offense requiring registration under Penal Code Section 290 or Health and Safety Code Section 11590; any felony offense involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, or giving away of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Sections 11054 to 11058, inclusive, as amended; any offense in another state which, if committed in California, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses mentioned here; any offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of another; or any offense involving theft, embezzlement, or moral turpitude.

     3.     The applicant has had a massage technician, massage establishment, or similar permit or license suspended within one year or revoked within three years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, unless the applicant can show a material change in circumstances or that mitigating circumstances exist since the revocation or suspension.

     G.    Any person aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police may appeal that decision to the city manager or designee by filing a notice of appeal within ten days of being notified of the decision. The notice of appeal shall explain the reason(s) for the appeal. As soon as practicable after receiving the notice, the city manager’s office shall set a date for the city manager to hear the appeal. The city manager shall render his or her decision within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing, unless the parties agree otherwise. The city manager shall notify the appellant in writing of the decision within ten days of that decision being made. The city manager’s decision shall be final.

     H.    The massage establishment owner shall be responsible for notifying the city when it hires a new operator for the massage establishment. Such notification shall be in writing and provided to the city within five business days of the commencement of the new operator’s employment. If the new operator is subject to a background check pursuant to this section, he or she shall have thirty (30) days from date of hire to submit the application required by this section, to personally appear at the police department for fingerprinting, and to pay all applicable fees. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

 

5.22.090 Responsibilities of massage establishment.
     A.    For the purpose of enforcing the requirements of this chapter and of the Massage Therapy Act, the owner(s) and operator(s) of a massage establishment within the city shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees and independent contractors working at the massage establishment while those persons are on the premises of the massage establishment or providing massage services.

     B.     If the owner(s) or operator(s) of a massage establishment violates any provision of the city’s municipal code, including, but not limited to, the provisions of this chapter, or of any state or federal law, including, but not limited to, the Massage Therapy Act, the massage establishment’s license to conduct business within the city may be revoked pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 5.22.190. In addition, the city shall report all violations to the CAMTC.

     C.     If any employee or independent contractor working at a massage establishment violates any provision of the city’s municipal code, including, but not limited to, the provisions of this chapter, or of any state or federal law, including, but not limited to, the Massage Therapy Act, the massage establishment’s license to conduct business within the city may be revoked pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 5.22.190. In addition, the city shall report all violations to the CAMTC. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.100 Responsibilities of practitioners and therapists.
     A.    If an independently employed certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist violates any provision of the city’s municipal code, including, but not limited to, the provisions of this chapter, or of any state or federal law, including, but not limited to, the Massage Therapy Act, his or her license to conduct business within the city may be revoked pursuant to Section 5.22.190. In addition, the city shall report all violations to the CAMTC.

     B.     No certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist shall engage in the practice of massage for compensation within the city under any name other than the name reflected on his or her CAMTC certificate. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.110 Changes regarding massage establishment.
     The owner or operator of a massage establishment must notify the city’s finance department of any intention to rename, change management, or convey the massage establishment to another person. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.120 Inspection of massage establishment.
     A.    The city has the right to conduct reasonable inspections of any massage establishment during regular business hours to ensure compliance with the Massage Therapy Act, this chapter, and other applicable fire and health and safety requirements.

     B.     It is a violation of this chapter for a massage establishment owner, operator, employee, or representative to prohibit or interfere with any lawful inspection of the premises.

     C.     Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from pursuing any and all available legal remedies to secure entry into and inspection of the premises if such entry is refused. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.130 Proof of certification.
     A.    Every massage establishment established pursuant to this chapter shall maintain on its premises evidence for review by city authorities that demonstrates that all persons providing massage services at the business establishment, whether such persons are employees or independent contractors, are certified by the CAMTC.

     B.     Every certified massage practitioner and certified massage therapist shall display his or her CAMTC certificate at his or her place of business. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.140 Massage establishment facility requirements.
     All massage establishments within the city that are established pursuant to this chapter must comply with the following facility requirements:

     A.    Every massage establishment shall comply with all applicable city code and state law requirements and standards, including, but not limited to, those related to health, zoning, fire, and safety;

     B.     All massage establishments must comply with all state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to disabled clients. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.150 Massage establishment health and safety requirements.
     All massage establishment owners, operators, and employees, and all practitioners and therapists working within the city pursuant to this chapter, must comply with all of the following health and safety requirements:

     A.    All persons shall be fully clothed at all times in clean and professional attire;

     B.     Each practitioner and therapist shall display his or her original CAMTC certificate in an open and conspicuous place in his or her place of business;

     C.     Each practitioner and therapist shall have his or her CAMTC-issued identification card in his or her possession while providing massage services. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.160 Exceptions.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply, except as noted, to the following classes of individuals or businesses while engaged in the performance of their duties provided sufficient documentation verifying exempt status is furnished to the police department:

     A.    Employees of state-licensed hospitals, nursing homes, and other state-permitted health care facilities while working in those facilities;

     B.     Individuals holding a valid permit to practice the healing arts under the laws of the state of California, including, but not limited to, holders of medical degrees such as physicians, surgeons or chiropractors, osteopaths, naturopaths, podiatrists, acupuncturists, physical therapists, registered nurses and licensed vocational nurses;

     C.     Barbers and cosmetologists who are licensed under the laws of the state of California while providing massage therapy within the scope of such licenses, provided that the massage therapy is limited to the neck, face, scalp, feet, and lower limbs up to the knees, hands and arms of clients; and

     D.    Recognized schools of massage and their students in training provided the students administer massage therapy only under the direct personal supervision of an instructor. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.170 Applicability of other ordinances.
     Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt any person from complying with the provisions of any other applicable ordinance, rule, or regulation, or to exempt a massage establishment or independently employed certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist from the provisions of any zoning, licensing, taxing, or other building ordinance, rule, or regulation. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.180 Public nuisance.
     Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action, commence an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court(s) as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such businesses and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. Further, any violations of this chapter may be prosecuted pursuant to Yucaipa Municipal Code Section 5.04.260. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

 

5.22.190 Business license revocation.
     A.    The city manager may revoke approvals issued under this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:

     1.     The applicant practiced fraud or deceit in obtaining an approval under this chapter.

     2.     The massage establishment owner, operator, employee, or any person performing or engaging in the practice of massage, violated a provision or provisions of this chapter or of the Massage Therapy Act.

     3.     The facilities and operations of the massage establishment are not maintained in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and the owner or operator has failed to promptly remedy any deficiency for which they have received notice. For purposes of this provision, “notice” means notice given personally to an owner or operator of the massage establishment; notice delivered to the massage establishment premises; or notice mailed to an address provided in the business license application.

     4.     The massage establishment has employed, allowed, or permitted a person who was not certified by the CAMTC to perform massage services at the massage establishment, unless otherwise permitted pursuant to Chapter 5.24 of this Title 5.

     5.     An independently employed certified massage practitioner or therapist is no longer in possession of a current and valid CAMTC certificate.

     6.     The approval was issued in error.

     B.     The city manager shall cause a notice of revocation to be mailed by first class, postage prepaid, to the address provided in the business license application.

     C.     A person who received notice of business license revocation may request a public hearing on the issue by submitting a written request for such hearing to the city clerk within ten days of receipt of the notice. As soon as practicable after receiving the hearing request, the city manager’s office shall set a date for the hearing. At such hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The public hearing shall take place before the city manager or designated representative, who shall hear all facts and testimony he or she deems pertinent. The city manager shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence.

     D.    Following the revocation hearing, the city manager or designated representative may find that the facts do or do not support a revocation of a business license and may order that a business license be revoked if the facts justify such determination. The city manager shall render his or her decision within fifteen (15) days of the conclusion of the hearing, unless the parties agree otherwise. The city manager shall notify the licensee in writing of the decision. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2014)

Chapter 5.24 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS, MASSAGE THERAPISTS AND MASSAGE THERAPY PERMITS
5.24.010 Purpose and intent.
     A.    The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public’s health and safety and the personal safety of massage therapists through the establishment of certain licensing standards pertaining to massage therapy business activities within the city and to recognize massage therapy as a legitimate business occupation and health enhancement service. This chapter shall not apply to massage therapists and massage practitioners who are certified by the California Massage Therapy Council, and who are subject to the requirements of Chapter 5.22 of the Yucaipa Municipal Code.

     B.     This chapter is not intended to permit any of the following uses, conduct, and/or activities which are specifically prohibited under the following California Penal Code sections:

     1.     Section 266(d) which prohibits receipt of money for placement of any person for purposes of cohabitation;

     2.     Section 266(e) which prohibits the purchase of any person for purposes of prostitution or placement of any person for immoral purposes;

     3.     Section 266(f) which prohibits the sale of any person for immoral purposes;

     4.     Section 266(h) which prohibits pimping;

     5.     Section 266(i) which prohibits pandering;

     6.     Section 314 that prohibits lewd or obscene conduct;

     7.     Section 315 that prohibits houses of ill-fame;

     8.     Section 316 that prohibits disorderly houses which disturb the immediate neighborhood;

     9.     Section 317 that prohibits places of prostitution;

     10.   Section 11225 which prohibits places of prostitution, places of lewdness, or places used as a bathhouse permitting conduct capable of transmitting AIDS; and

     11.   Section 647(a) that prohibits lewd conduct.

     C.     This chapter is not intended to apply to cosmetologists, barbers, or to persons licensed to practice any healing under the provisions of Division 2 (commencing with Section 500) of the California Business and Professions Code where such persons are solely providing certain massage therapy services which are specifically exempted from local regulation pursuant to state law. This chapter, however, shall apply to those above-mentioned practitioners who intend to provide any massage therapy services that are beyond the scope of the massage therapy services specifically exempted from local regulation by state law. (Ord. 332 § 2, 2014; Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.020 General definitions.
     A.    The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

     “Certified copy” means a copy of a document that is certified by the issuer as being a true and accurate copy of the original document or a similar document bearing an original signature of the issuer.

     “Certified statement” means a written assertion, claim or declaration bearing the original signature of the issuer.

     “City” means the city of Yucaipa.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Yucaipa.

     “Client” means any person who receives a massage in exchange for any form of consideration including, but not limited to, the payment of money.

     “Communicable disease” means tuberculosis, or any disease which may be transmitted from a massage therapist to a client through normal physical contact during the performance of any massage service as permitted under this chapter.

     “Complete application” means an application which provides all of the requisite information required to be provided by an applicant pursuant to this chapter and is accompanied by the requisite application deposit fees.

     “Director” means the director of community development.

     “Employee” means a person who works for any permittee, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the permittee.

     “Establishment” means any of the following: (1) the opening or commencement of a massage therapy related business as a new business or as an accessory use to an existing business, (2) the conversion of an existing business, whether or not it is a massage therapy business, to any other type of massage therapy business as defined in this chapter, (3) the relocation of any massage therapy business to any other location, or (4) the substantial enlargement of an existing massage therapy business.

     “Filing date of application” means the date on which the city determines that a complete application has been submitted to the city by the applicant.

     “Full nudity or semi-nudity” means any of the following: (1) the appearance or display of an anus, male or female genital, pubic region, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and/or (2) a state of undress which less than completely and opaquely covers an anus, male or female genital, pubic region or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.

     “Massage” means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating the external parts of the human body, excluding any specified anatomical area other than the gluteal region, with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, with or without supplementary aids such as creams, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay money or give any other consideration or any gratuity therefor.

     “Massage therapy establishment” or “massage establishment” means any commercial establishment with one or more employees having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage and which has a fixed place of business and a valid city business license.

     “Massage therapist” means an individual who has obtained a permit as required by this chapter to engage in the practice of massage for compensation, whether in a massage establishment as an employee or independent contractor or on an outcall massage therapy basis.

     “On-site manager” means the person who supervises, directs or manages the employees including, but not limited to, all massage therapists performing massage therapy services at a massage therapy establishment.

     “Operator” means any of the following: (1) the owner, (2) the permit holder, (3) custodian, (4) manager, or (5) person in charge of any massage therapy establishment.

     “Outcall massage therapist” means any individual who engages in or performs massages for consideration at a remote and not at a fixed location.

     “Permit” means a massage therapy permit as required by this chapter that is a written license to engage in the practice of massage for compensation, whether as a massage therapy establishment, an outcall massage therapist or a personal massage therapist authorized to perform massage therapy as an employee or independent contractor at a massage therapy establishment.

     “Permittee” means the person in whose name a permit to operate or perform certain massage therapy business activities has been issued pursuant to this chapter whether for the operation of a massage therapy establishment or an outcall massage therapy service or as a personal massage therapist.

     “Person” means any of the following: (1) an individual, (2) a proprietorship, (3) a partnership, (4) a corporation, (5) an association, or (6) any other legal entity.

     “Personal massage therapist” means any person who is permitted under this chapter to perform massage activities as an employee of a massage therapy establishment or an independent contractor at a massage therapy establishment.

     “Police chief” means the chief of the police of the city of Yucaipa.

     “Reception area” means the area of a massage therapy establishment where clients or other persons enter the business and are greeted and/or received by the operator, personal massage therapist and/or other employee of said business, or otherwise check in for their massage therapy sessions.

     “Recognized school of massage” means any school or educational institution licensed or approved by the state in which it is located, whose purpose it is to upgrade the professionalism of massage therapists and which teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession or work of massage and which requires a resident course of study before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or a certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning following the successful completion of such course of study or learning. Schools offering a correspondence course not requiring actual attendance shall not be deemed a recognized school.

     “Specified anatomical area” means human genitals, pubic region, anus, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.

     “Specified sexual activities” means any of the following: (1) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts, (2) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including, but not limited to, intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy, or (3) excretory functions as part of or in connection with the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts, sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy.

     “Stand-alone massage therapy establishment” means a massage therapy establishment that is operated as the predominant business activity on the subject premises rather than as an accessory use to a barbershop, beauty salon, hotel or resort, or any other type of business.

     “Transfer of ownership or control of a massage therapy establishment” means any of the following, whether voluntary or involuntary: (1) the sale, lease or sublease of the business, (2) the transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means, or (3) the establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control.

     B.     Where terms are not specifically defined in this chapter, in the municipal code, in any applicable statute, rule, code or regulation, or in any of the uniform codes adopted and incorporated by reference by the municipal code, they shall have the meanings set forth in their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. The most current edition of Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, shall be construed as providing ordinary accepted meanings for any duly adopted city policy or regulation described in this chapter.

     C.     Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular.

     D.    Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.030 Massage therapy permits required.
     A.    A person may operate, maintain, run, or manage a massage therapy establishment only if that person has been validly issued a massage therapy establishment permit by the city pursuant to this chapter for the subject massage therapy establishment.

     B.     A person may perform, practice, administer, or conduct massages in exchange for money, gratuities, or any other legal consideration at a massage therapy establishment only if that person has been validly issued a personal massage therapist permit by the city pursuant to this chapter for the subject massage therapy establishment.

     C.     A person may operate, maintain, run, or manage an outcall massage therapy service only if that person has been validly issued an outcall massage therapist permit by the city pursuant to this chapter for the subject outcall massage services.

     D.    A person may perform, practice, administer, or conduct massages in exchange for money, gratuities, or any other legal consideration at their residence only if that person has been validly issued a personal massage therapist permit and a home occupation permit by the city pursuant to the applicable regulations for the subject personal massage services.

     E.     The provisions set forth in this section apply to the “establishment,” as defined in Section 5.24.020, of any massage therapy establishment or outcall massage therapy service. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.040 Location.
     Massage therapy establishments may be located as a stand alone use or as an accessory use to a barber shop or beauty parlor in any land use zone in which barber shops and/or beauty parlors are permitted or conditionally permitted provided that the proposed location of the massage therapy establishment is not located within three hundred (300) feet from a parcel upon which a sexually oriented business is located which shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.050 Special massage therapy events permit.
     A.    When extra massage therapists are required for a one-day special event at a massage therapy establishment permitted to operate in the city pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall supply the city with the following information on an application provided by the city:

     1.     The name of the applicant;

     2.     The address of the special event;

     3.     A copy of the massage therapy establishment permit validly issued by the city pursuant to this chapter;

     4.     A list of the massage therapists who will be working at the special event;

     5.     Copies of each massage therapists’ diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school of massage verifying that the massage therapist has completed at least one hundred (100) hours of massage therapy training;

     6.     Copies of any validly issued massage therapy license or permit the participating massage therapists may have from other cities;

     7.     A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by each participating massage therapist that he or she does not have any communicable disease which is capable of being transmitted to clients through the kind of physical contact normally associated with the massage activities described in this chapter;

     8.     A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by each participating massage therapist that provides that he or she has not been convicted of any of the following: (a) pandering as set forth in California Penal Code Section 266(i), (b) keeping or residing in a house of ill-fame as set forth in California Penal Code Section 315, (c) keeping a disorderly house as set forth in California Penal Code Section 316, (d) prevailing upon a person to visit a place of illegal gambling or prostitution as set forth in California Penal Code Section 318, (e) lewd conduct as set forth in California Penal Code Section 647(a), or (f) prostitution activities as set forth in California Penal Code Section 647(a) or (b);

     9.     A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by each participating massage therapist that provides that he or she has not been convicted in any other state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses set forth in California Penal Code Sections 266(i), 315, 316, 318, or 647(a) or (b);

     10.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by each participating massage therapist that provides that the applicant is not required to register as a sex offender as set forth in California Penal Code Section 290;

     11.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by each participating massage therapist that provides that he or she has not been convicted of any felony offense involving the sale of any controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058; and

     12.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by each participating massage therapist that provides that he or she has not been convicted in any other state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as a felony offense involving the sale of any controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058.

     B.     Each participating massage therapist shall provide the police department with the current processing fee and with the authorization to conduct the necessary background investigations to determine the truthfulness and correctness of the information provided by applicant.

     C.     All of the above information shall be submitted to the city at least seven days prior to the date of the special event.

     D.    The applicant shall pay an application deposit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each one-day permit at the time of filing an application pursuant to this section. If additional funds are necessary to cover the above costs, the applicant shall pay such additional costs to the city before further processing of the application may proceed. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant.

     E.     Grounds for denial of the special event permit shall include any of the grounds for denial set forth in Section 5.24.150(A) or grounds for suspension and revocation set forth in Section 5.24.430(B).

     F.     The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final.

     G.    Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit such massage therapists to perform or conduct any massage therapist activities at any other location in the city at any other time, unless such massage therapist has obtained a validly issued massage therapist permit pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.060 Temporary personal and outcall massage therapist permits.
     A.    The city manager or designee may issue a temporary massage therapy permit to any person whose application is pending for a personal or outcall massage therapy permit pursuant to this chapter, provided that the applicant has a personal or outcall massage therapy permit validly issued by another jurisdiction which has permit provisions comparable to the permit provisions of this chapter.

     B.     Comparable provisions shall include, but not be limited to, the fingerprinting, medical clearance and background clearance requirements set forth in this chapter.

     C.     All temporary permits shall automatically expire thirty (30) days after the date of issuance of the subject temporary permit or on the date a decision is made by the city manager, or designee, on the respective massage therapy permit application, whichever occurs first. The city manager shall have the discretion to extend the term of any temporary permit an additional thirty (30) days provided that the entire term of the subject temporary permit does not exceed a total period of ninety (90) days.

     D.    The decision of the city manager shall be final. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.070 Consent.
     By applying for a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the exercise by the city’s officials, representatives and employees charged with implementing and/or enforcing the provisions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.080 Certificate of occupancy.
     No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any newly constructed structure or substantial expansion or enlargement of a structure that will contain a massage therapy establishment until a massage therapy establishment permit has been validly issued for the subject premises pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.090 Business license.
     No business license shall be issued to any person for any massage therapy business unless such person has first obtained a validly issued massage therapy establishment permit or an outcall massage therapy permit pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.100 City manager’s responsibilities.
     The city manager or designee shall be responsible for granting or denying all massage therapy permits described in this chapter, and such permits shall only be granted or denied pursuant to the provisions described herein or any other applicable law. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.110 Massage therapy establishment permit application.
     A.    An application for a massage therapy establishment permit shall be made on a form provided by the city.

     B.     The following information and the following documents must be submitted with all applications for massage therapy establishment permits:

     1.     If the applicant is:

     a.     An individual, the applicant shall provide his or her legal name, any aliases, and date of birth,

     b.     A partnership, the applicant shall provide the complete name of the partnership, the legal names of all the general partners, any aliases, and dates of birth,

     c.     A corporation, the applicant shall provide the complete name of the corporation, the legal names and any aliases, dates of birth and capacity of all officers;

     2.     The name of the business;

     3.     The name of the prospective on-site manager, if different from the applicant;

     4.     The location of the proposed massage therapy establishment, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s) currently in service;

     5.     The applicant’s home and/or business address and the home and/or business address of the prospective on-site manager if other than the applicant;

     6.     A recent photograph of the applicant and the prospective on-site manager if other than the applicant;

     7.     Driver’s license number or identification number of the applicant and the prospective on-site manager if other than the applicant;

     8.     The applicant’s and the prospective on-site manager’s, if other than the applicant, fingerprints taken by the police department or other law enforcement agency within the previous sixty (60) days, and approved by the police chief;

     9.     The applicant’s and the prospective on-site manager’s, if other than the applicant, social security numbers and/or state or federally issued tax identification number;

     10.   The previous addresses of applicant and the prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant for the ten years prior to the date of the application and the dates of residency at each such address;

     11.   The names, addresses and descriptions of all current and former businesses owned, operated or managed by applicant and prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant for the ten years prior to the date of the application and the dates the applicant and the prospective on-site manager owned, operated or managed such business;

     12.   If the application is for a stand alone massage therapy establishment, a sealed certified transcript and a certified copy of the applicant’s or prospective on-site manager’s (if other than applicant) diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school of massage verifying that the applicant has completed at least six hundred (600) hours of massage therapy training;

     13.   A list of all of applicant’s and prospective on-site manager’s, if other than the applicant convictions, excluding traffic violations;

     14.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant and prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, that provides that the declarant has not been convicted of any of the following: (a) pandering as set forth in California Penal Code Section 266(i), (b) keeping or residing in a house of ill-fame as set forth in California Penal Code Section 315, (c) keeping a disorderly house as set forth in California Penal Code Section 316, (d) prevailing upon a person to visit a place of illegal gambling or prostitution as set forth in California Penal Code Section 318, (e) lewd conduct as set forth in California Penal Code Section 647(a), or (f) prostitution activities as set forth in California Penal Code Section 647(b);

     15.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant and prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, that provides that the declarant has not been convicted in any other state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses set forth in California Penal Code Sections 266(i), 315, 316, 318, or 647(a) or (b);

     16.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant and prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, that provides that the declarant is not required to register as a sex offender as set forth in California Penal Code Section 290;

     17.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant and prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, that provides that the declarant has not been convicted of any felony offense involving the sale of any controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058;

     18.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant and prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, that provides that the declarant has not been convicted in any other state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as a felony offense involving the sale of any controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058;

     19.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant and prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, regarding whether the declarant has had a previous massage therapy establishment permit, an outcall massage therapist permit, a personal massage therapist permit or any other massage permit issued pursuant to this chapter or any other similar massage permit ordinance of the city or other jurisdiction, which was denied, suspended or revoked; and if any such denial, suspension or revocation occurred, the declarant shall provide the name and location of the massage establishment for which the license or permit was denied, suspended or revoked, the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and the reason or reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation;

     20.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant and prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, regarding whether the declarant has been a sole proprietor, general partner, officer, or director of any massage establishment or other massage business that has had a previous massage establishment permit or other massage permit issued pursuant to this chapter or any other similar massage ordinance of the city or other jurisdiction which was denied, suspended or revoked and if any such denial, suspension or revocation occurred, the declarant shall provide the name and location of the massage establishment or business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and the reason or reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation;

     21.   A certified statement from the real property owner authorizing the proposed use of the premises as a massage establishment; and

     22.   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises of the massage establishment, drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the massage establishment.

     C.     The applicant shall provide proof of legal title or a possessory or leasehold interest in the real property upon which the proposed massage establishment will be operated.

 

     D.    The applicant and the prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, shall provide the police department with the current processing fee and with the authorization to conduct the necessary background investigations to determine the truthfulness and correctness of the information provided by applicant and to determine whether applicant is qualified pursuant to this chapter to receive the requested massage therapy establishment permit.

     E.     The applicant and the prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, shall date and sign the application under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true and correct.

     F.     The applicant shall pay an application deposit fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) at the time of filing an application pursuant to this section, to pay for the administrative costs associated with the community development department’s review of the application. If additional funds are necessary to cover the above costs, the applicant shall pay such additional costs to the city before further processing of the application may proceed. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.120 Personal massage therapist permit application.
     A.    An application for a personal massage therapist permit shall be made on a form provided by the city.

     B.     The following information and the following documents must be submitted with all applications for personal massage therapist permits:

     1.     The applicant’s legal name, any aliases and date of birth;

     2.     The name of the applicant’s massage therapy establishment employer or prospective massage therapy establishment employer;

     3.     The applicant’s home and business addresses;

     4.     The previous home addresses of applicant for the ten years prior to the filing date of the application and the dates of residency at each such address;

     5.     The names, addresses and descriptions of all current and former businesses owned, operated or managed by applicant for the ten years prior to the filing date of the application and the dates applicant owned, operated or managed such business;

     6.     A recent photograph of the applicant;

     7.     The applicant’s driver’s license number or identification number;

     8.     The applicant’s fingerprints taken by the police department or other law enforcement agency within the previous sixty (60) days, and approved by the police chief;

     9.     The applicant’s social security number and/or state or federally issued tax identification number;

     10.   Certified copy of the applicant’s diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school of massage and a sealed certified transcript verifying that the applicant has completed at least two hundred fifty (250) hours of massage therapy training;

     11.   A certified statement from a physician licensed to practice medicine in the United States that provides that the applicant has, within sixty (60) days prior to the filing date of the application, been examined by said physician and it has been determined that the applicant is free of any communicable disease which is capable of being transmitted to clients through the physical contact that is normally associated with the massage activities described in this chapter;

     12.   A list of all of applicant’s convictions, excluding traffic violations;

     13.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant that provides that the applicant has not been convicted of any of the following: (a) pandering as set forth in California Penal Code Section 266(i), (b) keeping or residing in a house of ill-fame as set forth in California Penal Code Section 315, (c) keeping a disorderly house as set forth in California Penal Code Section 316, (d) prevailing upon a person to visit a place of illegal gambling or prostitution as set forth in California Penal Code Section 318, (e) lewd conduct as set forth in California Penal Code Section 647(a), or (f) prostitution activities as set forth in California Penal Code Section 647(a) or (b);

     14.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant that provides that the applicant has not been convicted in any other state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses set forth in California Penal Code Sections 266(i), 315, 316, 318, or 647(a) or (b);

     15.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant that provides that the applicant is not required to register as a sex offender as set forth in California Penal Code Section 290;

     16.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant that provides that the applicant has not been convicted of any felony offense involving the sale of any controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058;

     17.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant that provides that the applicant has not been convicted in any other state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as a felony offense involving the sale of any controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058;

     18.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant regarding whether the applicant has had a previous massage therapy establishment permit, an outcall massage therapist permit, a personal massage therapist permit, or any other massage permit issued pursuant to this chapter or any other similar massage permit ordinance of the city or other jurisdiction, which was denied, suspended or revoked and if any such denial, suspension or revocation occurred, the applicant shall provide the name and location of the massage therapy establishment or business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and the reason or reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation; and

     19.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant regarding whether the applicant has been a sole proprietor, general partner, officer, or director of any massage therapy business that has had a massage therapy establishment permit, an outcall massage therapist permit, a personal massage therapist permit, or any other massage permit issued pursuant to this chapter or any other similar massage permit ordinance of the city, which was denied, suspended or revoked and if any such denial, suspension or revocation occurred, the applicant shall provide the name and location of the massage establishment or business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and the reason or reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation.

     C.     The applicant shall provide the police department with the current processing fee and with the authorization to conduct the necessary background investigations to determine the truthfulness and correctness of the information provided by applicant and whether the applicant is qualified pursuant to this chapter to receive the requested personal massage therapist permit.

     D.    The applicant shall date and sign the application under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true and correct.

     E.     The applicant shall pay an application deposit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) at the time of filing an application pursuant to this section to pay for the administrative costs associated with the community development department’s review of the application. If additional funds are necessary to cover the above costs, the applicant shall pay such additional costs to the city before further processing of the application may proceed. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 332 § 3, 2014; Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.130 Outcall massage therapist permit application.
     A.    An application for an outcall massage therapist permit shall be made on a form provided by the city.

     B.     The following information and the following documents shall be submitted with all applications for an outcall massage therapist permit:

     1.     The applicant’s legal name, any aliases and date of birth;

     2.     The jurisdictions that the applicant plans to provide outcall massage therapist services;

     3.     The applicant’s home and business address;

     4.     The name of applicant’s current or proposed business;

     5.     The business telephone number applicant is using or plans to use as a contact telephone number for clients;

     6.     The previous home addresses of applicant for the ten years prior to the filing date of the application and the dates of residency at each such address;

     7.     The names, addresses and descriptions of all current and former businesses owned, operated or managed by applicant for the ten years prior to the filing date of the application and the dates applicant owned, operated or managed such business;

     8.     A recent photograph of the applicant;

     9.     The applicant’s driver’s license number, permit number, or identification number;

     10.   The applicant’s social security number and/or state or federally issued tax identification number;

     11.   The applicant’s fingerprints taken by the police department or other law enforcement agency within the previous sixty (60) days, and approved by the police chief;

     12.   Certified copy of the applicant’s diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school of massage and a sealed certified transcript verifying that the applicant has completed at least two hundred fifty (250) hours of massage therapy training;

     13.   A certified statement from a physician licensed to practice medicine in the United States that provides that the applicant has, within sixty (60) days prior to filing date of the application, been examined by such physician and it has been determined that the applicant is free of any communicable disease which is capable of being transmitted to clients through the type of physical contact that is normally associated with the massage activities described in this chapter;

     14.   A list of all of applicant’s convictions, excluding traffic violations;

     15.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant that provides that the applicant has not been convicted of any of the following: (a) pandering as set forth in California Penal Code Section 266(i), (b) keeping or residing in a house of ill-fame as set forth in California Penal Code Section 315, (c) keeping a disorderly house as set forth in California Penal Code Section 316, (d) prevailing upon a person to visit a place of illegal gambling or prostitution as set forth in California Penal Code Section 318, (e) lewd conduct as set forth in California Penal Code Section 647(a), or (f) prostitution activities as set forth in California Penal Code Section 647(a) or (b);

     16.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant that provides that the applicant has not been convicted in any other state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses set forth in California Penal Code Sections 266(i), 315, 316, 318, or 647(a) or (b);

     17.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant that provides that the applicant is not required to register as a sex offender as set forth in California Penal Code Section 290;

     18.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant that provides that the applicant has not been convicted of any felony offense involving the sale of any controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058;

     19.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant that provides that the applicant has not been convicted in any other state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as a felony offense involving the sale of any controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058;

     20.   A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant regarding whether the applicant has had a previous massage therapy establishment permit, an outcall massage therapist permit, a personal massage therapist permit, or any other massage permit issued pursuant to this chapter or any other similar massage permit ordinance of the city or other jurisdiction, which was denied, suspended or revoked and if any such denial, suspension or revocation occurred, the applicant shall provide the name and location of the massage establishment or business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and the reason or reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation;

     21. a. A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant regarding whether the applicant has been a sole proprietor, general partner, officer, or director of any massage therapy business that has had a massage therapy establishment permit, an outcall massage therapist permit, a personal massage therapist permit, or any other massage permit issued under this chapter or any other similar massage permit ordinance of the city or other jurisdiction, denied, suspended or revoked;

     b.     If any such denial, suspension or revocation occurred, the applicant shall provide the name and location of the massage establishment for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and the reason or reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation.

     C.     The applicant shall provide the police department with the current processing fee and with the authorization to conduct the necessary background investigations to determine the truthfulness and correctness of the information provided by applicant and whether the applicant is qualified pursuant to this chapter to receive the requested outcall massage therapist permit.

     D.    The applicant shall date and sign the application under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true and correct.

     E.     The applicant shall pay an application deposit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) at the time of filing an application pursuant to this section to pay for the administrative costs associated with the community development department’s review of the application. If additional funds are necessary to cover the above costs, the applicant shall pay such additional costs to the city before further processing of the application may proceed. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 332 § 4, 2014; Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.140 Processing applications.
     A.    All applications shall be submitted to the community development department of the city.

     B.     Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application deposit fee, the city shall immediately stamp the application as received on that date.

     C.     The filing of concurrent applications by a single individual for personal and outcall massage therapist permits shall require only one application deposit fee for both applications.

     D.    The application will not be accepted unless the application deposit fee and proof of the fingerprinting are submitted with the respective application.

     E.     Not later than thirty (30) days after the city has received the application, the city shall determine in writing whether the application is complete and shall immediately transmit the determination to the applicant.

     F.     In the event the determination is made that the application is not complete, then the written determination shall specify those parts of the application that are incomplete and shall indicate the manner in which they may be made complete.

     G.    If the written determination is not made within thirty (30) days after receipt of the application, the application shall be deemed complete for purposes of this chapter.

     H.    After the application has been deemed complete, the application shall be submitted to the police department, planning division, building and safety division, fire department, and divisions thereof for their respective review and investigation to determine the accuracy of the information contained in the application and compliance with all applicable regulations.

     I.      Each department or division identified in this section shall submit their comments regarding their respective review and investigation of the subject application to the city manager or designee.

     J.      The city manager, or designee, shall grant or deny an application within sixty (60) business days of receipt of a complete application.

     K.    Upon the expiration of the sixtieth day after receipt of a complete application, if the city manager, or designee, has not provided written notice of denial or approval of the application to the applicant, the application shall be deemed tentatively granted and the applicant shall be excused from the requirement that a duly issued permit be posted at the premises until such time as a final decision is made on the subject application pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.150 Denial of application and grounds for denial.
     A.    An application for a massage therapy permit shall be denied upon a showing of any of the following:

     1.     The location of the business does not comply with all applicable zoning laws or the provisions of this chapter;

     2.     The configuration and/or proposed or actual construction of the premises, as set out in the sketch or plan submitted with the application, reveals a violation of an applicable health, fire, building, safety or zoning regulation or law of the federal government, state of California, county of San Bernardino, or ordinance of the city, including those set forth in this chapter;

     3.     The applicant or the prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, is not eighteen (18) years of age or older;

     4.     The application contains false information;

     5.     The applicant or the prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, did not receive a diploma or a certificate of graduation from a recognized school of massage which verifies that he or she has obtained the requisite number of hours of massage therapy training;

     6.     The applicant or the prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, officers, was convicted of at least one of the following offenses: (a) pandering as set forth in California Penal Code Section 266(i), (b) keeping or residing in a house of ill-fame as set forth in California Penal Code Section 315, (c) keeping a disorderly house as set forth in California Penal Code Section 316, (d) prevailing upon a person to visit a place of illegal gambling or prostitution as set forth in California Penal Code Section 318, (e) lewd conduct as set forth in California Penal Code Section 647(a), or (f) prostitution activities as set forth in California Penal Code Section 647(a) or (b);

 

     7.     The applicant, or the prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, was convicted in another state of an offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses set forth in California Penal Code Sections 266(i), 315, 316, 318, or 647(a) or (b);

     8.     The business owner, applicant, or the prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, is required to register as a sex offender as set forth in California Penal Code Section 290;

     9.     The applicant, or the prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, was convicted of a felony offense involving the sale of any one of the controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058;

     10.   The applicant, or the prospective on-site manager if other than the applicant, was convicted in any other state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as a felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058; or

     B.     If the city manager, or designee denies the application, he or she shall notify the applicant of the denial in writing and state the reason(s) for the denial.

     C.     Any subsequent information submitted to cure the grounds of a denied application shall be treated as a new application. (Ord. 285 § 1, 2008; Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.160 Exemptions.
     A massage therapy permit shall not be required for therapists that are supporting a local athletic program or event when massage services are being provided to the participants of the event. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.170 Appeal of denial.
     A.    An applicant may contest the denial of an application for any permit, other than a special massage therapy permit or a temporary massage therapy permit, described in this chapter by filing an appeal to the city council that conforms to the following requirements:

     1.     All appeals shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: (a) name(s) of the person filing the appeal (“appellants”); (b) a brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why the permit should be issued; and (c) the signatures of all parties named as appellants and their mailing addresses.

     2.     Any appeal filed that fails to provide all of the information required by this section shall be deemed incomplete.

     3.     A complete and proper appeal of the denial of a permit application shall be filed with the city clerk within ten calendar days of service of the letter denying the application.

     4.     Any appeal not timely filed shall be rejected.

     5.     A filing fee as established by city council resolution or any amendments thereto for an appeal must be paid to the city at or prior to the time of the filing of the appeal.

     6.     Any appeal of a denial of a permit application filed without payment of the filing fee shall be deemed incomplete.

     7.     Not later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date the appeal is filed, the city clerk or designee shall determine whether the appeal is complete.

     8.     If the appeal is determined to be incomplete, the city clerk, or designee, shall immediately mail to the appellant a notice of incomplete filing that shall provide a written explanation of each reason why the appeal has been determined to be incomplete.

     9.     If service of the notice of incomplete filing is completed within ten calendar days from the date the appeal is filed, the ten calendar days time period within which to file a completed appeal shall not be extended.

     B.     Failure to timely and properly file an appeal shall constitute a waiver of all rights to an appeal hearing.

     C.     As soon as practicable, after receiving the written appeal, the city clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the city council at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting for which there is sufficient time to have the matter properly noticed.

     D.    As soon as practicable, after scheduling the appeals hearing, the city clerk shall prepare a notice of appeals hearing (“hearing notice”) which shall be in substantially the same form as follows:

 

       You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the City Council at _________________ on the ____ day of _____________, ________, at the hour of _______, to hear your appeal of the City Manager’s denial of your massage permit application. You may be present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented by an attorney. You may present any relevant evidence at the hearing.

 

     E.     In addition to any other public hearing notice requirements as may be required by any applicable law, the city clerk, or designee, shall cause a copy of the hearing notice to be provided to the appellant at least ten days prior to the public hearing date either by causing a copy of the notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by causing a copy of the notice to be delivered by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal.

     F.     Proof of service of the hearing notice shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made.

     G.    The declaration pertaining to the proof of service shall be affixed to a copy of the hearing notice.

     H.    The city clerk, or designee, shall cause a copy of the hearing notice to be provided to the city manager.

     I.      The city manager, or designee, shall prepare an appeal hearing packet for the city council to review prior to the hearing.

     J.      The appeal hearing packet shall include a copy of the city manager’s findings and decision on the application for the permit, a staff report, and any other relevant evidence.

     K.    The city council shall review all relevant evidence and hear all relevant oral testimony submitted by, for and against the appellant and the appellant shall be provided with a reasonable opportunity to be heard on the matter at the public hearing.

 

     L.     The city council shall consider at the appeal hearing only those matters or issues which were specifically raised by the appellant in his or her written appeal and which are relevant to the issues of the hearing.

     M.    The city council has the authority to determine the relevance of any evidence to the hearing.

     N.    The city council has the authority to exclude unduly repetitious and cumulative evidence, regardless of its relevancy.

     O.    The city council shall not have the authority to waive any requirements of the municipal code and/or any applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations.

     P.     If the appellant fails to attend the scheduled appeal hearing, the appeal hearing shall proceed without the appellant and the appellant shall be deemed to have waived his or her rights to be orally heard at the hearing.

     Q.    The city council may take the following actions:

     1.     Reject the city manager’s findings and determinations based upon the conclusion that the city manager misapplied the provisions of this chapter and reverse the city manager’s decision;

     2.     Modify the city manager’s findings and determinations to conform with the application of the provisions of this chapter and reverse or affirm the city manager’s decision;

     3.     Accept the city manager’s findings and determinations on the grounds that the city manager properly applied the provisions of this chapter to the appellant and application and affirm the city manager’s decision; or

     4.     Remand the matter to the city manager with instructions to reconsider the application in light of new information presented to the city council prior to or at the public hearing.

     R.     The city council shall prepare and serve a written notice of decision upon the appellant(s) and the city manager within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the public hearing is deemed closed.

     S.     The notice of decision shall state whether the city manager’s decision has been either upheld in full or in part or rescinded in full or in part.

     T.     The notice of decision shall also contain a brief summary of the evidence considered, findings of fact, and the effective date of the decision.

     U.    The city clerk shall cause a copy of the notice of decision to be provided to the appellant(s) by causing a copy of the notice to be delivered to the appellant(s) personally or by causing a copy of the notice to be delivered to the appellant(s) by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to all the addresses shown on the application.

     V.    Proof of service of the notice of decision shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made.

     W.    The declaration regarding the notice of decision shall be affixed to a copy of the notice of decision.

     X.    The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.180 Current information.
     During the effective duration of the permit, the permittee shall promptly update, correct or supplement the information contained in his or her application on file with the city when necessary to keep the information contained therein current and accurate. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.190 Renewal of permit.
     A.    All permits shall expire one year from the date they are issued.

     B.     Applications for renewal of a permit shall be made thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of the permit in accordance with the applicable application procedures set forth in this chapter.

     C.     The applicant shall pay a renewal application deposit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) at the time of filing a renewal application in addition to any necessary background investigation costs of the police department. Multiple permits held by a single individual can be renewed for a single application deposit fee. If additional funds are necessary to cover the above costs, the applicant shall pay such additional costs to the community development department before further processing of the renewal application may proceed. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.200 Massage therapy establishments—Inspections.
     Representatives of the city including, but not limited to representatives of the police department, community development department, building and safety division, fire department, health department and divisions thereof, may inspect the premises of a massage therapy establishment for the purposes of insuring compliance with the law at any time such establishment is occupied or open for business pursuant to the inspection provisions set forth in the municipal code, uniform codes adopted by the city, and applicable state and local laws and regulations. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.210 Massage therapy establishments—Exterior lighting.
     All off-street parking locations entrances and exits provided for or belonging to the massage therapy establishment shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours with a lighting system that provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot candle of light on the parking surface and walkways. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.220 Massage therapy establishments—Exterior signage.
     A.    A recognizable and readable sign that complies with all sign regulations of the city shall be posted at the main entrance of the massage therapy establishment identifying the name of the massage therapy establishment.

     B.     A recognizable and readable sign that complies with all sign regulations of the city shall be posted at the main entrance of the massage therapy establishment identifying the hours of operation of the massage therapy establishment. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.230 Massage therapy establishments—Exterior views.
     All building openings, entries, windows, etc., of a massage establishment shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent an unobstructed view from the exterior of the building into dressing rooms, massage therapy rooms, restrooms, and other areas where patrons of the business may not be fully clothed. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.240 Massage therapy establishments—Posting requirements.
     A.    The massage therapy establishment permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises within the reception area of the massage establishment.

     B.     A copy of the personal massage therapy permit for each personal massage therapist shall be kept on file on the premises of the massage establishment.

     C.     A copy of each diploma or certificate of graduation for each personal massage therapist shall be kept on file on the premises of the massage establishment.

     D.    A recent photograph of each personal massage therapist shall be kept on file on the premises of the massage establishment.

     E.     A list of massage therapy services available at the massage establishment, a description of services in readily understandable language, and the cost of such services shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises within the reception area of the massage establishment. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.250 Massage therapy establishments—Reception area.
     At least one artificial light providing a lighting intensity of not less than thirty (30) foot candle power at floor level shall be installed in the reception area. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.260 Massage therapy establishments—Massage therapy rooms.
     A.    At least one artificial light providing a lighting intensity of not less than twenty (20) foot candle power at floor level shall be installed in each massage therapy room.

     B.     There shall be no locks on any massage therapy room or any other device which impedes or obstructs access to the massage therapy room.

     C.     There shall be walls installed between each massage therapy room and such walls shall contain no openings other than doors between adjacent rooms. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.270 Massage therapy establishments—Client registration.
     A.    All massage therapy establishment permittees shall maintain a client registration file that shall include the following information:

     1.     First, middle and last name of client;

     2.     Signature of client;

     3.     Complete address of client;

     4.     Date and time of visit; and

     5.     First, middle and last name of personal massage therapist who administered massage services.

     B.     Every client shall provide the information set forth above and sign his or her name on the client registration form provided by the permittee before any massage services may be provided.

     C.     All client registration files shall be made available for inspection by the police department or other law enforcement agency upon written request of the police chief within three working days of receiving such request.

     D.    The information contained in client registration files shall be maintained by permittee for a period of three calendar years of the last date the respective information was entered into the file. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.280 Massage therapy establishments—Dress and identification.
     A.    All employees shall wear nontransparent outer garments covering their specified anatomical areas.

     B.     All employees shall wear badges that identify their first and/or last names and their employment position with the massage establishment.

     C.     All massage establishment employees shall possess while on the premises of a massage establishment a valid identification with a photograph of him or herself at all times while present on the premises of the massage establishment during the hours of operation of the establishment. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.290 Massage therapy establishments—Hours of operation.
     A.    Massage therapy establishments are prohibited from operating between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m.

     B.     Permittees shall be prohibited from permitting clients to remain on the premises of the massage establishment after closing hours. (Ord. 332 § 5, 2014; Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.300 Massage therapy establishments—Showers, baths and toilets.
     A.    Only one client shall be permitted in a room containing a shower stall, bath stall or toilet facility at any one time unless otherwise permitted by any applicable local, state, or federal law or regulation or accompanied by a massage therapist for massage therapy purposes.

     B.     Each room containing a shower, bath and/or toilet shall have a door that is self closing and locking.

     C.     An artificial light providing a lighting intensity of not less than thirty (30) foot candle power at floor level shall be installed in any room containing a shower, bath and/or toilet. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.310 Massage therapy establishments—Sanitary conditions.
     A.    The premises of the massage therapy establishment shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and/or sanitizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering massages.

     B.     All nondisposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected and/or sanitized after each use on each client.

     C.     All walls, ceilings, floors, showers, bathtubs, water basins, toilets, and all other facilities must be maintained in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.

     D.    All showers, bathtubs, water basins, and toilets shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once each day the massage therapy establishment is in operation.

     E.     Water basins with hot and cold running water from a potable source and soap dispensers shall be available to clients.

     F.     A trash receptacle shall be provided in each massage therapy room and any room containing a shower, bathtub, water basin and/or toilet.

     G.    Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use.

     H.    All clients shall be provided clean and sanitary towels, sheets and linens.

     I.      Towels, sheets and linens shall be provided in sufficient quantity and shall not be used by more than one person unless such towels, sheets and linens have been relaundered.

     J.      Separate closed cabinets or containers shall be provided for the storage of clean and soiled towels, sheets and linens, and such cabinets or containers shall be plainly marked “clean linen” and “soiled linen.”

     K.    Massage table cover pads that come into contact with the body of a client shall be clean. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.320 Massage therapy establishments—Loudspeakers and sound equipment.
     Loudspeakers or sound equipment shall not be used by a massage therapy establishment for amplification of sound to a level discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building or leaseable space in which the use is conducted. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.330 Outcall massage therapy—Client registration.
     A.    All outcall massage therapists shall maintain a client registration book or appointment book that shall include the following information:

     1.     First, middle and last name of client;

     2.     Date and time of visit;

     3.     Address of location of the subject massage therapy services;

     4.     First, middle and last name of personal massage therapist who administered massage service.

     B.     All client registration or appointment books shall be made available for inspection by the police department or other law enforcement agency upon written request of the police chief within three working days of receiving such request.

     C.     A client registration or appointment books shall be maintained by permittee for each calendar year and each client registration or appointment book shall be maintained by permittee for a period of three calendar years. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.340 Outcall massage service—Dress and identification.
     A.    All outcall massage therapists shall wear nontransparent outer garments covering their specified anatomical areas while performing any massage services authorized by their respective permit.

     B.     All outcall massage therapists shall wear badges that identify their first and/or last names.

     C.     All outcall massage therapists shall possess evidence of their permits and valid identification on their person at all times during the course of providing any services authorized by the subject permit. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.350 Outcall massage therapists—Hours of services.
     A.    Outcall massage therapists are prohibited from providing massage services between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m.

     B.     Outcall massage therapists shall notify the manager of any lodging establishment at which services have been requested by a registered guest or guest of the registered guest of such lodging establishment prior to providing massage services to the registered guest or guest of the registered guest. (Ord. 332 § 6, 2014; Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.360 Prohibited activities.
     A.    Any and all employees, including any owner, operator or manager, of a massage therapy establishment and all outcall massage therapists and their clients are prohibited from exposing their specified anatomical areas (including the buttocks of the employee, owner, operator or manager) to each other during the course of the performance or administration of any service pursuant to a validly issued massage therapy permit.

     B.     Any and all employees, including any owner, operator or manager, of a massage therapy establishment and all outcall massage therapists and their clients are prohibited from touching either their own or one another’s specified anatomical areas during the course of the performance or administration of any service pursuant to a validly issued massage therapy permit.

     C.     Any and all employees, including any owner, operator or manager, of a massage therapy establishment and all outcall massage therapists are prohibited from being in a state of full nudity or semi-nudity (which includes exposure of the buttocks of any employee, owner, operator or manager) during the course of the performance or administration of any service pursuant to a validly issued massage therapy permit.

     D.    Any and all employees, including any owner, operator or manager, of a massage therapy establishment and all outcall massage therapists and their clients are prohibited from engaging in any specified sexual activities during the course of the performance or administration of any service pursuant to a validly issued massage therapy permit.

     E.     Any and all employees, including any owner, operator or manager, of a massage therapy establishment and all outcall massage therapists shall be prohibited from performing or administering any massage services to a minor unless written permission is provided by the minor’s parent or legal guardian.

     F.     Any and all employees, including any owner, operator or manager, of a massage therapy establishment and outcall massage therapists shall be prohibited from performing or administering any massage services and charging any amount that is not posted on the list of services and charges.

     G.    No permittee shall employ any person under eighteen (18) years of age.

     H.    No permittee shall operate, maintain, run or manage any massage therapy establishment or outcall massage therapy services under any business name not specified in the permit.

     I.      No permittee shall provide alcoholic beverages to clients either on the premises of a massage therapy establishment or during the course of providing any services as an outcall massage therapist.

     J.      No permittee shall be permitted to transfer or assign any permit issued pursuant to this chapter to another person, entity, or to another location which shall include another legal parcel or another address. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.370 Transfer of ownership.
     All transfers of ownership of any business operating pursuant to a permit validly issued pursuant to this chapter shall result in the automatic termination of the permit. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.380 Relocation.
     Relocation of any business operating pursuant to this chapter shall result in the automatic termination of the subject permit. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.390 Change of on-site manager.
     A change of the on-site manager of a massage establishment without submitting a new massage establishment permit application shall result in the automatic termination of the subject permit. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.400 Reference applies to amendments.
     Whenever a reference is made to any part of the municipal code or to any ordinance of the city, reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.410 Computation of time.
     A.    The time in which any act provided by this chapter is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday that is also excluded.

     B.     If the last day for the performance of any act set forth in this chapter is a holiday, then the time in which to perform the act is extended to and including the next day which is not a holiday.

     C.     If the last day for the performance of any act provided by this chapter is Saturday or Sunday, then the time in which to perform the act is extended to and including the next Monday. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.420 Nonconforming uses and permits.
     A.    All permittees legally permitted to engage in massage therapy business activities on March 26, 2003, which are in noncompliance as a result of an amendment to this chapter shall be deemed legal nonconforming and will be allowed to continue operation provided they are in compliance with all limitations and requirements of their original permit except as noted below.

     B.     Any expansion of massage services beyond those specified in the original approval shall require a newly issued permit pursuant to this chapter.

     C.     All legal nonconforming individual permittees shall come into compliance with all licensing and operational criteria identified in this chapter by March 26, 2004.

     D.    All legal nonconforming establishment applicants and the prospective on-site manager(s), if other than the applicant, shall come into compliance with all licensing and operational criteria identified in this chapter by March 26, 2005.

     E.     All legal nonconforming establishments shall come into compliance with all licensing and operational criteria identified in this chapter by March 26, 2004. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.430 Suspension and revocation.
     A.    A massage permit validly issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation for the following reasons:

     1.     The permittee, any of its employees, or massage therapists working for permittee as independent contractors engages in any of the prohibited activities described in Section 5.24.360;

     2.     The permittee, any of its employees, or massage therapists working for permittee as independent contractors are convicted of any of the following: (a) pandering as set forth in California Penal Code Section 266(i), (b) keeping or residing in a house of ill-fame as set forth in California Penal Code Section 315, (c) keeping a disorderly house as set forth in California Penal Code Section 316, (d) prevailing upon a person to visit a place of illegal gambling or prostitution as set forth in California Penal Code Section 318, (e) lewd conduct as set forth in California Penal Code Section 647(a), or (f) prostitution activities as set forth in California Penal Code Section 647(a) or (b);

     3.     The permittee, any of its employees, or massage therapists working for permittee as independent contractors are convicted in any other state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses set forth in California Penal Code Sections 266(i), 315, 316, 318, or 647(a) or (b);

     4.     The permittee, any of its employees, or massage therapists working for permittee as independent contractors are required to register as a sex offender as set forth in California Penal Code Section 290;

     5.     The permittee, any of its employees, or massage therapists working for permittee as independent contractors are convicted of any felony offense involving the sale of any controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058;

     6.     The permittee, any of its employees, or massage therapists working for permittee as independent contractors are convicted in any other state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as a felony offense involving the sale of any controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058;

     7.     The permittee fails to provide information pursuant to Section 5.24.150;

     8.     A certified statement from the real property owner is received by the city indicating that the permittee is not authorized to operate, run or manage a massage establishment on the subject premises;

     9.     The actual physical configuration of the premises does not conform with the sketch or diagram submitted with the approved application;

     10.   It is discovered by the city manager that information contained in the approved application was false;

 

     11.   Permittee has knowledge that a client has contracted a communicable disease such as tuberculosis or a sexually transmitted disease from the permittee, any of permittee’s employees, or any massage therapists working for permittee as an independent contractor through physical contact with the permittee or permittee’s employees during the course of providing massage therapy services pursuant to a massage therapy permit;

     12.   The permittee, any of permittee’s employees or any massage therapists working for permittee as an independent contractor refuse to permit representatives of the city, including, but not limited to police department, community development/planning department, building and safety division, fire department, health department and divisions thereof, to inspect the premises of a massage establishment pursuant to Section 5.24.200;

     13.   The permittee fails to comply with the following provisions:

     a.     The exterior lighting requirements set forth in Section 5.24.180,

     b.     The exterior signage requirements set forth in Section 5.24.190,

     c.     The exterior view requirements set forth in Section 5.24.200,

     d.     The posting requirements set forth in Section 5.24.210,

     e.     The reception area requirements set forth in Section 5.24.220,

     f.      The massage therapy room requirements set forth in Section 5.24.230,

     g.     The client registration requirements set forth in Section 5.24.270 and Section 5.24.330,

     h.     The dress and identification requirements set forth in Section 5.24.280 and Section 5.24.340,

     i.      The hours of operation and services requirements set forth in Section 5.24.290 and Section 5.24.350, respectively,

     j.      The shower, bath and toilet requirements set forth in Section 5.24.300,

     k.     The sanitary conditions requirements set forth in Section 5.24.310, and/or

     l.      The loudspeaker or sound equipment requirements set forth in Section 5.24.320.

     B.     Revocation or suspension of any permit validly issued pursuant to this chapter shall be accomplished pursuant to the procedures set forth in the municipal code, applicable ordinance(s) of the city, and state law. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.440 Enforcement—Separate offense for each day.
     Any person that violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any such person commits, continues, permits, or causes a violation thereof, and shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.450 Public nuisance.
     Any violation of Sections 5.24.030(A), (B), or (C), 5.24.050(A), 5.24.180, 5.24.210, 5.24.220, 5.24.230, 5.24.240, 5.24.250, 5.24.260, 5.24.270, 5.24.280, 5.24.290, 5.24.300, 5.24.310, 5.24.320, 5.24.330, 5.24.340, 5.24.350, 5.24.360 of this chapter by any person responsible for committing, causing or maintaining such violation shall constitute a public nuisance which shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 8.16 of the municipal code. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.460 Criminal penalties.
     A.    Any person who violates, causes, maintains or permits another person to violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, however the city attorney may specify in accusatory pleadings that the offense shall be an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction shall be subject to a fine to the maximum amount permitted by state law. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be subject to punishment to the maximum permitted by state law. The conviction and punishment of any person in violation of this code shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any license fees or penalties due or unpaid at the time of such conviction.

     B.     Pursuant to Government Code Section 36900(a), the city attorney may prosecute these violations in the name of the people of the state of California. (Ord. 332 § 7, 2014; Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.470 Civil fines.
     A.    Any person convicted of an infraction, for each separate violation of Sections 5.24.030(A), (B), or (C), 5.24.050 (A), 5.24.180, 5.24.210, 5.24.220, 5.24.230, 5.24.240, 5.24.250, 5.24.260, 5.24.270, 5.24.280, 5.24.290, 5.24.300, 5.24.310, 5.24.320, 5.24.330, 5.24.340, 5.24.350, 5.24.360 of this chapter, shall be subject to: (1) a fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first conviction of an offense; (2) a fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second conviction of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period from the date of the first offense; and (3) a fine in an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a third conviction of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period from the date of the first offense.

     B.     The fine for a fourth and subsequent convictions of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date from the first offense shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.480 Civil injunction.
     The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.490 Administrative remedies.
     A.    In addition to the civil remedies and criminal penalties set forth above, any person that responsible for committing, causing or maintaining any violation of this chapter may be subject to administrative remedies, as set forth by city ordinance.

     B.     Nothing in this section shall preclude the city from also issuing an infraction or misdemeanor citation upon the occurrence of the same subject offense on a separate day. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.500 Additional remedies.
     A.    Any violation of Sections 5.24.030(A), (B), or (C), 5.24.050(A), 5.24.180, 5.24.210, 5.24.220, 524.230, 5.24.240, 5.24.250, 5.24.260, 5.24.270, 5.24.280, 5.24.290, 5.24.300, 5.24.310, 5.24.320, 5.24.330, 5.24.340, 5.24.350, 5.24.360 of this chapter by the holder of any city permit and/or city license validly issued pursuant to this or any other chapter of the municipal code shall constitute grounds for modification, suspension and/or revocation of said permit and/or license pursuant to the provisions set forth in the municipal code.

     B.     Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city from pursuing other remedies provided by city ordinance, uniform codes adopted by the city, or by state or federal law including, but not limited to, denial or revocation of certificates of occupancy, issuance of stop work orders and injunctive relief. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

 

5.24.510 Regulations nonexclusive.
     The provisions of this chapter regulating massage establishments are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulation(s) pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the city. (Ord. 222 § 2, 2003)

Chapter 5.26 INSPECTION GRADING OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
5.26.010 Scope.
     The provisions of this chapter for the inspection grading of food establishments shall apply at all times, or at those times herein specified, anywhere within the city of Yucaipa that any food and/or beverage products are sold or served. (Ord. 238 § 2, 2005)

 

5.26.020 Adoption of the San Bernardino County Code.
     A.    The city adopts by reference, and makes a part of this chapter by reference, San Bernardino County Ordinance No. 3930, entitled:

 

        An Ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, Adding Chapter 14 to Division 3 of Title 3 and Adding Subsection 16.0213B(b)(17) to Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1, All of the San Bernardino County Code, Relating to Inspection Grading of Food Establishments.

 

     B.     The aforementioned sections of the San Bernardino County Code, adopted by San Bernardino County Ordinance No. 3930, are adopted as the inspection grading of food establishments program of the city (the program). (Ord. 238 § 2, 2005)

 

5.26.030 Enforcement agency designated.
     The county of San Bernardino department of public health is designated as the enforcement agency for the city and is authorized to provide the qualified personnel necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 238 § 2, 2005)

 

5.26.040 Schedule and collection of fees.
     The schedule of fees contained within San Bernardino County Ordinance No. 3930, adopted in this chapter, is adopted as the fees in effect in the city, and shall be applicable within the city to provide for the costs of administration and enforcement of this chapter. The city council finds and determines that the fees adopted herein are reasonably related to the actual cost of administration and enforcement of the program. The San Bernardino County department of public health shall administer and collect these fees for deposit with the county treasurer to offset the costs assumed by the county in administering and enforcing this program for and within the city. (Ord. 238 § 2, 2005)

 

5.26.050 Violations—Penalty.
     A.    In accordance with Section 33.1406(c) of the San Bernardino County Code, adopted by reference in this chapter and applicable to this chapter, the letter grade card posted in accordance with the program shall not be defaced, marred, camouflaged, hidden or removed. It is unlawful to operate a food establishment unless the letter grade is posted. Removal of the letter grade card is a violation of this chapter and may result in the suspension or revocation of the public health permit and shall be punishable as specified in Section 33.0112 of the San Bernardino County Code, which is adopted by reference herein and applicable to this chapter.

     B.     In addition, any violation of this section may be punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code. (Ord. 238 § 2, 2005)

Chapter 5.30 MARIJUANA ACTIVITIES
5.30.010 Purpose and findings.
     The city council finds that federal laws prohibiting the possession, sale and distribution of marijuana would preclude the opening of marijuana dispensaries sanctioned by the city, and in order to serve the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and businesses within the city, the declared purpose of this chapter is to prohibit marijuana dispensaries, marijuana deliveries, and commercial marijuana activities as stated in this chapter. (Ord. 355 § 1, 2017; Ord. 342 § 2, 2016; Ord. 291 § 1, 2009)

 

5.30.020 Definitions.
     The following terms and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section:

     “AUMA” means the Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act approved by the voters on November 8, 2016, as the same may be amended from time to time.

     “Commercial marijuana activity” is the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of marijuana and marijuana products. Commercial marijuana activity includes the activities of any business licensed by the state or other government entity under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, as they may be amended from time to time.

     However, the planting, cultivation, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming or processing of no more than six marijuana plants consistent with Section 11362.1 et seq., of the Health and Safety Code shall not be considered commercial marijuana activity provided it meets the following requirements:

     1.     The marijuana cultivation cannot occur outdoors.

     2.     The marijuana cultivation may only occur at a private residence, or inside a “fully enclosed and secure accessory structure” located upon the grounds of a private residence.

     “Concentrated cannabis” shall have the same meaning as “cannabis concentrate” as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5, as the same may be amended from time to time.

     “Cultivation” is any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming, or processing of marijuana.

     “Delivery” is the commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana products to a customer and also includes the use of any technology platform by a retailer owned and controlled by the retailer, or independently licensed under California law, that enables, arranges for, or facilitates the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of marijuana or marijuana products. “Delivery” shall also be construed to include, but not be limited to, all “delivery” activities as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5(m) as may be amended from time to time.

     “Dispensary” is any facility, location, vehicle, or activity whereby marijuana, marijuana products, or devices for the use of marijuana are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail sale, whether mobile or stationary, including an establishment that delivers marijuana and marijuana products as part of a retail sale. The term “dispensary” shall be construed to include, but not be limited to, all “dispensary” and retail facilities as defined in Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, as they may be amended from time to time. The term “dispensary” shall be broadly and liberally interpreted to achieve the purpose of this chapter.

     “Distribution” is the procurement, sale, and transport of marijuana and marijuana products between entities licensed under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, as they may be amended from time to time.

     “Fully enclosed and secure accessory structure” means any building, greenhouse or other structure which has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, which is secure against unauthorized entry, provides complete visual screening, and which is accessible only through one or more lockable doors and inaccessible to minors.

     “Manufacture” means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product.

     “Marijuana” is all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Marijuana” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana, and any product containing marijuana. “Marijuana” shall be construed to include, but not be limited to, “cannabis” as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5(f) as may be amended from time to time. It does not include:

     1.     Industrial hemp, as defined in Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code; or

     2.     The weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product.

     “Marijuana product” means marijuana that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing marijuana or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.

     “MCRSA” means the Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act as contained, codified, enacted, and signed into law on October 9, 2015, as Assembly Bill No. 243, Assembly Bill No. 266, and Senate Bill 643, and as amended by Assembly Bill 21 in 2016, as the same may be amended from time to time. The MCRSA was formerly known as the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act.

     “Outdoors” means any location that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure.

     “Person” includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular.

     “Private residence” means a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling, whether legal and conforming to the underlying zoning, or legal and nonconforming to the underlying zoning, that is currently in use as a residence. (Ord. 355 § 1, 2017; Ord. 342 § 3, 2016; Ord. 291 § 1, 2009)

 

5.30.030 Marijuana activities prohibited.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to own, manage, conduct, or operate any marijuana dispensary, or to participate as an employee, contractor, agent, or volunteer, in any manner or capacity, in any marijuana dispensary in the city. No marijuana dispensary shall locate, commence, or be allowed in any land use district, or on any parcel, or at any place, public or private, within the city.

     B.     It is unlawful for any person to own, manage, conduct, or operate any marijuana delivery service, or to participate as an employee, contractor, agent, or volunteer, in any manner or capacity, in any marijuana delivery service in the city. No marijuana delivery service shall locate, commence, or be allowed in any land use district, or on any parcel, or at any place, public or private, within the city.

     C.     It is unlawful for any person to make, arrange for, facilitate, or otherwise participate in marijuana deliveries to or from the city, whether or not the delivery commenced in the city.

     D.    It is unlawful for any person to own, manage, conduct, operate, or otherwise participate in commercial marijuana activity. No commercial marijuana activity shall locate, commence, or be allowed in any land use district, or on any parcel, or at any place, public or private, within the city. The city shall not issue any permit, license or other entitlement for any commercial marijuana activity for which a state license is required under the MCRSA or the AUMA. The city shall also not issue any local license to a non-profit entity pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 26070.5. The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply to any conduct allowable under local law pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1.

     E.     A property owner shall not rent, lease or otherwise permit any business that engages in commercial marijuana activity to occupy real property in the city. A property owner shall not allow any person or business to establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or engage in commercial marijuana activity on any real property owned or controlled by that property owner that is located in the city.

     This section shall be read and interpreted in conjunction with Section 84.0905 of the Yucaipa Development Code. It is the intent of the city council to prohibit all commercial marijuana activities and uses in the city, that are not otherwise preempted by state law, and for the state of California to not issue state licenses for such activities to operate in the city. (Ord. 355 § 1, 2017; Ord. 342 § 4, 2016; Ord. 291 § 1, 2009)

 

5.30.040 Violations—Enforcement.
     A.    Any commercial marijuana activity, use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be unlawful and may be abated by the city pursuant to Chapter 8.16 of this code. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter may also be subject to administrative remedies, as set forth in Chapter 1.13 of this code.

     B.     Notwithstanding the penalties set forth in subsection A, this chapter does not authorize a criminal prosecution, arrest or penalty inconsistent with or prohibited by Health and Safety Code Section 11362.71 et seq., or Section 11362.1 et seq., as the same may be amended from time. In the event of any conflict between the penalties enumerated under Chapter 5.30, Chapter 8.16, Chapter 1.13 and any penalties set forth in state law, the maximum penalties allowable under state law shall govern. (Ord. 355 § 1, 2017; Ord. 291 § 1, 2009)

Chapter 5.34 MULTIPLE-FAMILY AND OTHER RENTAL UNITS
5.34.010 Business license required.
     No person shall operate a roominghouse, boardinghouse, apartment house, mobile-home park, trailer court, private guest ranch, multiple-family rental accommodations for dwelling, or other property rental business without first obtaining a valid city business license. (Ord. 312 § 1, 2011)

 

5.34.020 Special business license provisions—Crime-free multiple-family rental-housing program.
     A.    Prior to obtaining a valid city business license, the owner or operator of any property (excluding mobile home parks) that contains five or more rental units that are being rented out for residential dwelling purposes must comply with all of the following crime-free multiple-family rental-housing program requirements:

     1.     Complete a crime-free multiple-family rental-housing program seminar to be provided by the Yucaipa police department (“seminar”); and

     2.     Include a crime-free lease or rental agreement addendum (“addendum”) or clause in the lease or rental agreement similar to the crime-free lease or rental agreement addendum in any leases or rental agreements that are executed, modified or extended after December 14, 2011, the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The city clerk shall maintain a sample addendum form for use by businesses subject to the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     Any current rental business license holder, at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall complete the seminar prior to the expiration date of their current rental business license, or as soon as the seminar is conducted, whichever time is later.

     C.     When a property that is subject to the provisions of this chapter is transferred to a new owner, the new owner or operator shall complete the seminar within three months after the transfer of the rental property, or as soon as the seminar is conducted, whichever time is later.

     D.    When a property that is subject to the provision of this chapter changes operators, the new operator shall complete the seminar within three months after the transfer of operations, or as soon as the seminar is conducted, whichever time is later.

     E.     Any owner or operator of any property (excluding mobilehome parks) with five or more units that are being rented out for residential purposes shall complete the seminar once every three years, and shall be deemed in compliance with this subsection so long as the owner or operator completes the seminar prior to the expiration of the business license at the end of the third year.

 

     F.     The crime-free multiple-family rental-housing program coordinator (“coordinator”), as designated by the Yucaipa police department, shall periodically provide the director of administrative services and the director of community development with a list of owners and/or operators who have completed the seminar, with the date of attendance and verification that the owner or operator has complied with this section and is eligible to obtain, maintain or renew the business license.

     G.    The crime-free multiple-family rental-housing program is a crime prevention program designed to reduce crime, drugs, and gang activities on the subject rental properties. At the seminar, the coordinator shall provide, at no cost, samples of the addendum and, if applicable, shall review any clauses within actual leases with the city attorney’s office to determine if the clause is similar to the addendum provisions designed to make criminal activity a lease or rental agreement violation. The owner or operator shall have the authority under the clause or addendum to initiate an eviction proceeding as specified in California state law. (Ord. 316 §§ 1, 2, 2012; Ord. 312 § 1, 2011)

 

5.34.030 Nuisance rental property.
     It is hereby declared a nuisance, which nuisance may be abated pursuant to this municipal code and state law, and to be declared against the health, safety, welfare, peace, and comfort of the city for any property owner and/or operator of a multiple-family dwelling unit (excluding mobilehomes), rooming house room, or a residential building, such as an apartment, with five or more rental units to allow or permit any of the following:

     The rental of any multiple-family dwelling unit (excluding mobilehomes), rooming house room, or a residential building, such as an apartment, to a tenant who allows any of the following offenses to occur relating to the tenant, member of the tenant’s household, guest or other party under the control of the tenant to occur in or on the property: murder, kidnapping, aggravated kidnapping, prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, pandering, obscenity, child pornography, harmful materials, sale of obscene publication, criminal housing management, possession of explosives, unlawful use of weapons, sale of firearms, gambling, keeping a gambling place, concealing a fugitive, violation of the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act, commission of any two or more of any other crimes under the state of California or under the Federal Government not specifically listed above, or the commission of four or more city ordinance violations in a twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 316 § 3, 2012; Ord. 312 § 1, 2011)

 

5.34.040 Violations.
     A.    Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of the Yucaipa Municipal Code. In addition, any violation of this chapter shall be grounds for suspension and/or revocation of the city business license. The language contained in this section shall not be interpreted to alter, amend, extend, increase, or have any other application to the business license fee currently required under Section 5.04.030.

     B.     The penalties in this section are non-exclusive; the penalties supplement and are in addition to other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 312 § 1, 2011)

Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 ANIMAL CONTROL
Chapter 6.08 RABIES
Chapter 6.12 DOG KENNELS
Chapter 6.16 CATTERIES
Chapter 6.18 APIARIES
Chapter 6.20 ANIMAL FOOD AND FOOD SCRAPS
Chapter 6.24 TRANSPORTATION AND MOVEMENT OF LIVESTOCK OVER PUBLIC AND PRIVATE LANDS

Chapter 6.04 ANIMAL CONTROL
6.04.010 Definitions.
     As used in this title:

     “Abandoned animal” means any animal left unattended for a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours without receiving proper care and/or treatment by its owner or caretaker.

     “Altered dog” means any dog which has been certified in writing by a veterinarian as being nonreproductive.

     “Animal” means any mammal, poultry, bird, reptile, fish or any other dumb creature.

     “Animal control officer” means any person duly appointed by the health officer and authorized to act on his or her behalf in the enforcement of the animal care and control program.

     “Animal menagerie” means any place where wild animals are kept or maintained for private or commercial purposes, including places where wild animals are boarded, trained or kept for hire.

     “Animal shelter” means all places where impounded animals are to be confined, by the county.

     “Cat” includes all domesticated felines.

     “Dog” means any dog of any age, including female as well as male.

     “Enclosure” means a pen or structure suitable to confine an animal determined potentially dangerous or vicious. The enclosure shall be defined to prevent the animal from escaping and to prevent the entry of young children and other persons.

     “Guard dog” means any dog used for the purpose of guard duty.

     “Health officer” means the San Bernardino county director of public health or any other person duly authorized to act on his behalf.

     “Impoundment” means the picking up of an animal by a duly authorized person and bringing same into an animal shelter for confinement, custody and disposition.

     “Leash” means any rope, leather strap, chain or other material not exceeding six feet in length being held in the hand of a person capable of controlling the animal to which it is attached.

     “License tag” means a piece of metal or other durable material inscribed with a date and number which has been issued by the county or city.

     “Livestock” includes all domesticated bovine, equine, caprine, new world cameloids, riatates, ovine and porcine species.

     “Owner or keeper” means any person who owns or maintains an animal, or who harbors or keeps an animal for fifteen (15) or more consecutive days, except a veterinarian or an operator of a grooming shop, a kennel or a pet shop engaged in the regular practice of this business.

     “Person” includes any person, firm, partnership, corporation, trust, and any association of persons.

     “Potentially dangerous animal” means any of the following:

     1.     Any animal, which, unprovoked, on two separate occasions within any thirty-six (36) month period, engages in any behavior that requires defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury, but only if the person and the animal are off the property of the owner or keeper of the animal when the animal behavior occurs.

     2.     Any animal, which, unprovoked, bites a person causing a less than severe injury, as defined in this section.

     3.     Any animal, which, unprovoked, kills, seriously bites or otherwise inflicts or causes injury to a domestic animal, but only if such occurs off the property of the owner or keeper of the attacking animal.

     “Pound” or “animal shelter” includes all places where impounded animals are to be confined, whether by the county or by private person or person(s) under contract or agreement with the city.

     “Rabies control officer” means any person duly appointed by the health officer and authorized to act in his behalf in the enforcement of the animal and rabies control program.

     “Registration” means any animal, which has been declared potentially dangerous or vicious shall be registered as such with the animal care and control program.

     “Severe injury” means any physical injury to a human being, which results in muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations or which re-

quires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery.

     “Stray” means any animal with no identification or with no known owner or keeper.

     “Unlicensed dogs” means any dog for which a current license has not been paid, or to which the current tag provided for in this code is not attached.

     “Vicious animal” means any of the following:

     1.     Any animal seized under Section 599aa (fighting animals) of the California Penal Code and fighting dogs as provided in subdivision (a) of Section 597.5 of the California Penal Code when there has been a conviction of the owner or keeper of the subject dogs under that subdivision of the Penal Code.

     2.     Any animal, which unprovoked, inflicts severe injury on a human being, as such injury, as defined in this section, or kills a human being.

     3.     Any animal previously determined and currently listed as a potentially dangerous animal, which after its owner or keeper has been notified of this determination continues the behavior of a potentially dangerous animal or is maintained in violation of Section 6.04.093.

     “Wild animal” means any wild, exotic, dangerous or venomous animal including but not limited to mammals, fowl, fish or reptile. (Ord. 248 §§ 2, 3, 2005; Ord. 163 § 7(A), 1997)

 

6.04.020 Impoundment of animals—Persons charged with enforcement.
     A.    The sheriff and his or her deputies, and every constable and his or her deputies, all rabies control officers and assistant rabies control officers, and every poundkeeper, and also any person employed or designated for that purpose by the city council are authorized and empowered to:

     1.     Capture, receive, take up and impound:

     a.     Any dog or other animal found running at large in violation of this code or of any law of the state of California,

     b.     Any dog or other animal which is molesting any person,

     c.     Any dog which is molesting or harassing animals, birds, pets upon the premises of any person,

     d.     Any animal including wild animals or birds being kept or maintained within a person’s premises in violation of this code of any law of the state of California,

     e.     Stray, unwanted or abandoned animals,

     f.      Dogs which are unlicensed and unvaccinated in violation of this code,

     g.     Animals delivered for disposition, after the owner has paid the required fee and released all title and interest in the animal by signing of the form provided by the health officer for this purpose,

     h.     Animals for which the owner or custodian is unable to care because of imprisonment, illness, bankruptcy, litigation or other contingency, or in cases in which the owner or custodian cannot be found;

     2.     Regularly and adequately feed, water and otherwise care for all dogs impounded under the provisions of this code, or to provide for such feed and watering;

     3.     Receive, take up and impound any sick or injured dog or cat whose owner is unknown or unidentified; to humanely destroy any such injured dog or cat, when, in the opinion of the officer or a licensed veterinarian, such destruction is necessary and humane; and to make proper disposition of such animal. Should an injured or destroyed dog be an identified dog, then the owner of the dog shall be immediately notified of its injury or destruction;

     4.     Do and perform any other acts necessary to carry out the provisions of this code and of the laws of the state of California relating to dogs.

     B.     The officer having custody of any impounded dog may, by humane methods, summarily destroy the same if:

     1.     The dog is suffering from any incurable or contagious disease as certified to by a licensed veterinarian and with approval from the chief, animal disease control branch;

     2.     It is an unlicensed vicious dog;

     3.     The animal is in the field and it is too severely ill or injured to move or where a veterinarian is not available and it would be more humane to dispose of the animal and the destruction is approved by the health officer; or

     4.     The animal is in the act of killing, wounding or persistently pursuing a human being.

     C.     Any officer having in his or her custody any unlicensed, impounded dog or cat not suffering from any infectious or communicable disease may release the same to any adult person who will pay the pound fees and charges as specified in the city fee schedule and, if a resident of any unincorporated area, will also pay for rabies vaccination and license fees if it is a dog that such resident has bought. Only male cats will be sold.

     D.    All the provisions of this code pertaining to impounded, unlicensed dogs, except the licensing provisions thereof, shall apply to impounded cats.

     E.     The poundkeeper or any duly authorized person shall have the right to reserve and dispose of dogs or cats delivered into his possession by the owners thereof and shall charge a specified fee for each dog, cat, puppy or kitten delivered into his custody.

     F.     Any impounded animal which has not been redeemed or sold and would normally have been destroyed in accordance with this chapter may, upon payment of the necessary fee, be released from the animal shelter to an agency which has been approved by the California State Department of Public Health, the health officer, and the chief of the animal disease control branch to obtain animals for medical research.

     G.    Any impounded animal which has not been redeemed or sold may be disposed of by euthanasia in accordance with state and county laws. (Ord. 248 § 4, 2005; Ord. 163 § 7(B), 1997)

 

6.04.030 Disposition of impounded animals.
     A.    An impounded dog may be redeemed by payment of a specified pound fee in addition to the daily charges and other charges, if any, for each day the dog has been impounded.

     B.     Any dog over the age of four months which has been impounded shall not be released from the pound or any shelter which is under contract with the city, unless it shall first be licensed in accordance with the provisions of this code.

     C.     Any officer acting under the provisions of this code, and impounding a licensed dog, shall give notice in person or by mail to the last known address of the owner, of the impounding of such dog. If such dog is not redeemed and owner or possessor does not pay the license fee, obtain a tag, and pay the fees required as specified in this code after notice has been given, the officer shall dispose of such dog consistent with state law. (Ord. 303 § 4, 2010; Ord. 163 § 7(C), 1997)

 

6.04.040 Record of impounded animals.
     Each poundkeeper, rabies control officer or any other duly authorized person, shall keep a record of all animals impounded by him or her which shall show:

     A.    Date of impoundment;

     B.     License tag number, if any;

     C.     Complete description of animal;

     D.    Date and manner of its disposal; and

     E.     If redeemed, or sold, the name and address of the person by whom redeemed or purchased, the amount of all fees and other monies received or collected by him or her and the disposition thereof. (Ord. 163 § 7(D), 1997)

 

6.04.050 Disposition of dead animals.
     When any dog or other animal or fowl owned by or in the custody or control of any person or found in any person’s private property dies, such person shall, within twenty-four (24) hours, provide for the burial, incineration or other disposition of the body of such dead animal or fowl in a safe and sanitary manner.

     It is unlawful for any person to dispose of the body of such dead animal or fowl in any public or private property, other than his or her own, without proper authorization from the county health department. (Ord. 163 § 7(E), 1997)

 

6.04.060 Abandoned animals.
     It is unlawful to abandon any animal in the city. (Ord. 163 § 7(F), 1997)

 

6.04.070 Control of animals.
     A.    The provisions of this section shall apply in all areas of the city except those areas designated by the city council, as described in subsection B of this section, which are rural low-density areas not requiring a high degree of animal control because of the low frequency of dog bites, livestock damage, dog packs, dog threats or unattended dogs running at large in public places, or complaints of such by residents of the district.

     B.     No areas yet designated.

     C.     No person in areas of the city not specified in subsection B of this section, owning or having control of any animal, shall permit such animal to stray or run at large upon any public streets, sidewalk, school ground, public park, playground, place of public assembly or any other public place, or any unenclosed private lot or other unenclosed private place, or upon any private place or property without the consent of the owner or person in control thereof. Parkways comprising the area between the street and sidewalk shall be included as private property for purposes of this section.

     D.    Any person who finds any animal which has strayed or is running at large upon his or her own property or any other place contrary to the provisions of this chapter, may take possession of and hold same; provided, however, that he or she shall notify the health officer or rabies control officer or the sheriff of the fact that he or she has such animal in his or her possession, within four hours after securing possession thereof, and give such health officer, rabies control officer, or sheriff full information in regard to the same, including a complete description of such animal and license number, if any, and surrender the same to the health officer, rabies control officer or sheriff upon demand.

     E.     No person, except in areas of the city specified in subsection B of this section, may lawfully bring his or her dog out of his or her premises or property unless:

     1.     The dog is restrained by a substantial leash not to exceed six feet in length and is in the charge of a person competent to restrain such dog; or

     2.     The dog is under immediate command control of its owner or some other person competent to restrain such dog; or

     3.     The dog is properly restrained and enclosed in a car, cage or similar enclosure.

     F.     Any dog found running at large, running loose or unrestrained may be impounded by the health officer, animal control officer, or sheriff. Such dog shall be held for the period of time required by state law. Any unclaimed dogs shall then be destroyed or disposed of in accordance with Section 6.04.030.

     G.    There shall be a reclaiming fee for all impounded dogs, as set forth in the city fee schedule.

     H.    A person having custody of any dog shall not permit, either wilfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, any such dog to defecate or urinate upon a public sidewalk, the floor of any common hall in any apartment house, hotel or other multiple dwelling upon any entrance way, stairway or wall immediately abutting on a public sidewalk, or upon the floor of any theater, shop, store, office building or other building used by the public. (Ord. 303 § 5, 2010; Ord. 248 § 5, 2005; Ord. 163 § 7(G), 1997)

 

6.04.075 Dogs prohibited—Exceptions.
     A.    The city council finds that it is in the public interest to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of its residents and visitors that choose to attend Market Night and certain city sponsored or approved special events by restricting the presence of dogs at such events.

     B.     At Market Nights, dogs shall be prohibited from being within twenty (20) feet of any area where food is stored or held safe, including, but not limited to, temporary food vendor booths, and shall not be allowed in the Certified Farmer’s Market portion of the Market Night area.

     C.     Unless prohibited or further restricted through conditions imposed on a special event permit or other event approval, dogs shall be permitted at city sponsored or approved events, subject to the following limitations:

     1.     Dogs shall be prohibited from being within twenty (20) feet of any area where food is stored or held safe, including, but not limited to, temporary food vendor booths.

     2.     Dog owners and event operators shall comply with applicable county health department regulations and state laws applicable to the event.

     3.     At any public event at a city facility, such as concerts in the park, staff may designate and post areas within the facility in which the event is held where dogs are prohibited.

 

     D.    Exceptions. Dogs meeting the following criteria shall be exempt from the prohibitions and restrictions in subsections B and C above:

     1.     Assistance dogs which have been specially trained and that are being used in a law enforcement or rescue capacity;

     2.     Guide dogs, signal dogs, and service dogs, as defined in Food and Agricultural Code Section 30850 et seq., which are being or have been specially trained to be used by disabled persons to aid and assist them;

     3.     Dogs used in connection with the activities authorized in the issuance of a special event permit pursuant to Sections 5.16.020 and 5.16.090 of this code. (Ord. 325 § 2, 2013; Ord. 213 § 2, 2001)

 

6.04.080 Female dogs and puppies.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person in the city to permit any female dog owned, harbored or controlled by him or her when the female dog is in heat or in season or breeding condition, to be unconfined and in such a manner that it attracts stray male dogs.

     B.     All dogs under four months of age and until vaccinated shall be confined to the premises of or kept under physical restraint by the owner, keeper or harborer. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the sale or transportation of a puppy younger than four months of age. (Ord. 163 § 7(H), 1997)

 

6.04.090 Exceptions to Sections 6.04.091 through 6.04.097.
     A.    Sections 6.04.091 through 6.04.097 do not apply to licensed kennels, humane society shelters, animal control facilities or veterinary clinics.

     B.     Sections 6.04.091 through 6.04.097 shall not apply to any dog utilized by any police department or any law enforcement officer in the performance of police or law enforcement work. (Ord. 248 § 7, 2005)

 

6.04.091 Determinations and notice process.
     A.    Determination of Potentially Dangerous or Vicious Animal. If an animal control officer, after conducting an investigation, has determined that there exists probable cause to believe that an animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, he or she shall report the results of his or her investigation in writing to the chief officer, who shall review the written report for the purpose of determining whether or not the animal in question is potentially dangerous or vicious.

     B.     Complaints and Evidence. If the written report submitted by the animal control officer is based on a complaint or complaints received from a member of the public, the animal control officer shall require the complainant to put the complaint in writing and sign it under penalty of perjury, so that it may be offered as evidence at the review hearing described below. The animal control officer may also include in the report to the chief officer:

     1.     If known, the animal’s previous history of biting, attacking, or causing injury to a human being or animal;

     2.     The nature and extent of injuries inflicted and the behavior of victims involved;

     3.     The place where the bite, attack or injury occurred;

     4.     The presence or absence of any provocation for the bite, attack or injury;

     5.     The extent to which property has been damaged or destroyed;

     6.     The extent to which the animal exhibits characteristics of aggressive or unpredictable temperament or behavior in the presence of human beings or domestic animals; and

     7.     The extent to which the animal exhibits any characteristics of being trained for fighting or attack and any evidence tending to show such training.

     C.     Hearing Before and Determination of Chief Officer.

     1.     If the chief officer, after examining the written report of the animal control officer, determines that probable cause exists that the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, he or she shall mail a written notice to the owner or keeper of the animal of a hearing to be presided over by the chief officer for the purpose of determining whether or not the animal should be declared potentially dangerous or vicious, which notice shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, not less than fourteen (14) days before the date set for the hearing, at which time the owner or keeper of the animal shall be given an opportunity to present evidence as to why the animal should not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious.

     2.     At the hearing, the chief officer shall review all relevant evidence, including the written report of the animal control officer and any evidence submitted by the owner or keeper. Following the hearing, the chief officer shall prepare a written notice of determination as to whether or not the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, and make whatever other orders are authorized by this chapter, and shall mail such notice of determination to the owner or keeper by first class mail, postage prepaid. The chief officer shall decide all issues for or against the owner or keeper of the animal if the owner or keeper fails to appear at a scheduled determination hearing, and such determination shall be final and conclusive and not subject to further review.

     D.    Notice of Determination and Review Hearing.

     1.     If a determination is made by the chief officer that the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, the owner or keeper shall comply with Section 6.04.093 in accordance with a time schedule established by the chief officer, but in no case more than thirty (30) days after the date of mailing of the notice of determination.

     2.     If the owner or keeper of the animal appeared at the hearing and contests the determination, he or she may request a review hearing of the decision of the chief officer. A written request for review must be actually received in the office of the chief officer within ten days of the mailing of the notice of determination, or the right to review shall be deemed waived and the notice of determination of the chief officer shall be final for all purposes.

     3.     Upon receipt of a request for review, the chief officer shall convene an administrative review panel to review the case. The chief officer shall mail a written notice to the owner or keeper of the animal of a hearing before the administrative review panel for the purpose of reviewing the chief officer’s notice of determination that the animal should be declared potentially dangerous or vicious, which notice shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, not less than fourteen (14) days before the date set for the hearing, at which time the owner or keeper of the ani-

mal shall be given an opportunity to present evidence as to why the chief officer’s notice of determination that the animal should be declared potentially dangerous or vicious is erroneous. At the review hearing, the panel shall review the chief officer’s notice of determination, and, if it deems it appropriate, all relevant evidence considered by chief officer at the prior hearing. The panel shall submit a written recommendation to the health officer regarding the appropriateness of the notice of determination of the chief officer and/or disposition of the subject animal, and shall mail a copy of the written recommendation to the owner or keeper by first class mail, postage prepaid. The administrative review panel may issue recommendations for or against the owner or keeper of the animal if the owner or keeper fails to appear at a scheduled review hearing, and such recommendations shall be final and conclusive and not subject to further review.

     4.     The administrative review panel shall consist of three members which shall be appointed by the chief officer: a representative of the animal care and control program, but not the investigating officer or an officer with knowledge of the case; a representative of a

 

 private veterinary or animal care provider; and a representative of another public animal control agency.

     5.     If the owner or keeper of the animal appeared at all hearings, the health officer shall review the chief officer’s notice of determination and the administrative review panel’s recommendations thereon and make a finding as to whether or not the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, and make such other orders authorized by this chapter, and shall mail a copy of the findings and orders to the owner or keeper by first class mail, postage prepaid. The findings and orders of the health officer shall be final and conclusive upon all parties. If the health officer determines that an animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, the health officer may establish a time schedule to ensure compliance with this chapter, but in no case more than thirty (30) days subsequent to the date of the mailing of the health officer’s findings and orders.

     E.     Exceptions:

     1.     An animal may be found not potentially dangerous or vicious if the chief officer, administrative review panel or health officer reasonably determines any of the following:

     a.     Any injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time the injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime upon the premises;

     b.     The person who sustained the injury or damage was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal at the time;

     c.     The animal was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an attack, assault, battery, crime or attempt to commit an attack, assault, battery or crime by the person who sustained the injury; or

     d.     Any injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal, which, at the time the injury or damage was sustained, was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal.

     2.     No dog may be declared potentially dangerous or vicious if the injury or damage to a domestic animal was sustained while the dog was working as a hunting, herding, or a predator control dog and it was on the property of, or under the control of, its owner or keeper and the damage or injury was to a species or type of domestic animal appropriate to the work of the dog. (Ord. 248 § 7, 2005)

 

6.04.092 Authority to seize animal posing immediate threat to public safety.
     If an animal control officer has investigated and determined there exists probable cause to believe an animal poses an immediate and serious threat to the safety of the public, then the animal control officer may seize and impound the animal pending the hearing to be held pursuant to Section 6.04.091(C). If confinement is not contrary to public safety, the chief officer may require the animal to be confined at the owner’s or keeper’s expense in a kennel or veterinary facility approved by the animal care and control program. (Ord. 248 § 7, 2005)

 

6.04.093 Handling of potentially dangerous or vicious animals.
     A.    Animal to be Kept Under Control at All Times:

     1.     Control While on Owner’s or Keeper’s Premises. A potentially dangerous or vicious animal, while on the owner’s or keeper’s property, shall at all times be kept indoors or in an enclosure which shall secure the yard so that the animal cannot escape and children cannot trespass. The enclosure shall be approved by the animal care and control program and meet the following criteria:

     a.     The enclosure shall be constructed to prevent the going in of the public or other animals and the entrance to the enclosure shall be locked at all times while the animal is contained within the enclosure;

     b.     The enclosure shall be six sided, consisting of four walls, a cover or roof and a permanent floor to prevent the animal from escaping by either climbing or digging under the wall. If the bottom is not secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet;

     c.     The animal shall be housed pursuant to the provisions of Section 597t of the California Penal Code (adequate enclosed area). The minimum dimensions of the enclosure shall measure five feet by ten feet and be of a height which does not restrict the animal’s natural movements and which allows the owner or keeper into the enclosure to maintain the animal;

     d.     The enclosure shall be surrounded by a perimeter fence which prevents the entry of the public onto the property of the owner or keeper but which shall not serve in any part as a primary enclosure for the animal.

     2.     Compliance Inspections. As a condition of maintaining a potentially dangerous or vicious animal, its owner or keeper shall allow access to the animal care and control program to inspect the premises to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter between the hours of nine a.m. and nine p.m. daily. Prior notification of the inspection to the owner or keeper of the potentially dangerous or vicious animal shall not be required.

     3.     Control when Off Owner’s or Keeper’s Premises. At all times, when a potentially dangerous or vicious animal is not on the premises of the owner or keeper, the animal shall be securely muzzled and restrained by a leash. The animal shall also be under the control of a person eighteen (18) years of age or older, who is physically capable of restraining the animal.

     B.     Warning Notice. The owner or keeper of the animal shall display, in a prominent place upon the premises where the animal is kept or maintained, a sign easily readable by the public using the words “DANGEROUS ANIMAL,” or “VICIOUS ANIMAL,” as ordered by the chief officer or health officer after a hearing or hearings pursuant to Section 6.04.091, in letters at least two inches in height.

     C.     Permanent Identification of Animal. The owner or keeper of the animal shall provide a permanent identification by means of either a registered tattoo or implanted microchip that shall be registered with the animal care and control program. A photograph of the animal shall be kept on record for identification, in addition to registration as a dangerous animal or vicious animal.

     D.    Notice of Change of Location or Death of Animal.

     1.     If an animal determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious dies, is sold, transferred or permanently removed from the city, the owner or keeper shall notify the chief officer of the changed condition(s) and new location of the animal in writing within two working days of the changed status.

     2.     Animals determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious may be relocated to other premises within the city only upon written notification to the animal care and control program a minimum of five working days in advance of the animal being physically transferred to new premises. Such physical transfer requires the inspection and approval by an animal control officer of the new premises’ enclosure and perimeter fencing for compliance with Section 6.04.093.

     E.     Licensing and Vaccination. All potentially dangerous and vicious dogs shall be licensed and vaccinated in accordance with Chapter 6.08 of the Yucaipa Municipal Code. The potentially dangerous or vicious dog designation shall be included in the license records of the dog. A potentially dangerous or vicious dog fee shall be charged in addition to the regular licensing fee to provide for the increased costs of maintaining the records of the dog pursuant to San Bernardino County Code schedule of fees.

     F.     Designated Potentially Dangerous and Vicious Animal Listing. All animals designated potentially dangerous or vicious shall be recorded on a listing maintained by the animal care and control program. Animals designated potentially dangerous or vicious shall remain on the listing until the animal dies, is permanently removed from the city, or is removed from designation pursuant to Section 6.04.094. (Ord. 248 § 7, 2005)

 

6.04.094 Removal of designation as potentially dangerous or vicious.
     If the owner or keeper demonstrates changes that mitigate the risk to public safety to the satisfaction of the chief officer, the designation of potentially dangerous or vicious shall be removed. (Ord. 248 § 7, 2005)

 

6.04.095 Conditions for destroying animal found vicious or potentially dangerous or vicious.
     A.    An animal determined to be a vicious or potentially dangerous animal may be destroyed by the animal care and control program when it is found, after proceedings conducted under Section 6.04.091, that the release of the animal would create a significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare. If it is determined that a vicious or potentially dangerous animal may be released, the chief officer shall impose conditions upon the ownership of the animal, including, but not limited to, the conditions set forth in Section 6.04.093 in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

     B.     An animal previously determined to be a vicious or potentially dangerous animal may be destroyed by the animal care and control program when it is found, after proceedings conducted under Section 6.04.091, that the owner or keeper of the animal has failed to comply with the provisions of section 6.04.093 (A). (Ord. 248 § 7, 2005)

 

6.04.096 Conditions for prohibiting ownership of vicious animals.
     The owner of an animal determined to be vicious or potentially dangerous may be prohibited by the health officer from owning, possessing, controlling or having custody of any other animals of dangerous propensities for a period of up to three years, when it is found, after proceedings conducted under Section 6.04.091, that ownership or possession of such an animal by that person would create a significant threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, as determined by the chief officer. (Ord. 248 § 7, 2005)

 

6.04.098 Spaying and neutering of pit bulls.
     A.    Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 122331, no person shall own or keep a pit bull over the age of four months which has not been spayed or neutered, except as provided in subsection B. For purposes of this section, “pit bull” is defined as any Staffordshire Bull Terrier, American Pit Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier breed of dog, or any mixed breed of dog which contains, as an element of its breeding, any of these breeds so as to be identifiable as partially of the breed of Staffordshire Bull Terrier or American Pit Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier.

     B.     The following pit bulls are exempt from subsection A: a purebred Staffordshire Bull Terrier, American Pit Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier, recognized by and registered with the American Kennel Club (AKC), United Kennel Club (UKC), or other national registry; a dog used by a law enforcement agency for law enforcement purposes; a qualified service or assistance dog as defined in Food and Agriculture Code Section 30850; a dog which is unable to be spayed or neutered without a high likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or death due to age or infirmity and the owner or keeper of such dog provides to the health officer written confirmation of the condition from a licensed veterinarian. (Ord. 303 § 1, 2010)

 

6.04.110 Wild, exotic or nondomestic animals in captivity.
     No person shall have, keep, maintain, breed, sell, trade or let for hire, any wild, exotic, dangerous or nondomestic animal without first applying to and receiving special authorization from the health officer. The keeping or maintenance of such animals shall also conform to the appropriate zoning codes as well as laws and regulations promulgated by the state of California and the federal government.

     The health officer may authorize the keeping or maintaining of any wild, exotic, dangerous or nondomestic animal when, in his opinion, any such animal may be kept or maintained without endangering the safety of any person, other animal or property, nor create a nuisance, provided however, that the health officer may require any such animal to be properly caged, tethered or restrained, and that he may create such additional requirements that may be necessary and proper under the circumstances; provided further, that any privately owned wild, exotic, dangerous or nondomestic animal shall require a license fee as specified in the city fee schedule, the initial fee to be paid at the time of application. He may revoke such authorization when, in his opinion, the safety of any person, other animal or property is endangered or that a nuisance is created by the keeping of such animal.

     The provisions of this chapter shall not be application to licensed circuses, carnivals, zoo, or other collections of wild animals under ju-

 

risdiction of a city, state or federal government. (Ord. 163 § 7(K), 1997)

 

6.04.120 Licensing of animal establishments other than dog kennels and catteries.
     No person shall, within the city conduct or operate any pet shop, pet grooming parlor, public aquarium, game bird farm, petting zoo, wild animal breeding or boarding facility, or animal menagerie, without first obtaining a license from the county health officer. Any such establishment shall also conform to the appropriate zoning codes. (Ord. 163 § 7(L), 1997)

 

6.04.130 Application for a license to operate.
     An application for a license to operate a pet shop, pet grooming parlor, public aquarium, petting zoo, wild animal breeding or boarding facility, or animal menagerie, shall be made in writing to the health officer. Not later than ten (10) days after receipt of application by health officer, the facilities for which the license is requested will be examined by the health officer. No license shall be issued or renewed unless and until all general regulations relating to animals as set forth by the health officer, are complied with and after payment of an annual fee as specified in the city fee schedule. Any building or structure used in the housing or maintaining of said animals shall be approved by the city building division. (Ord. 163 § 7(M), 1997)

 

6.04.140 General regulations relating to animals.
     Every person within the city who owns, conducts, manages or operates any animal establishment for which a license is required by this chapter, shall comply with each of the following conditions:

     A.    Housing facilities for animals shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair to protect animals from injury and restrict entrance of other animals.

     B.     All animals and all animal buildings or enclosures shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.

     C.     All animals shall be supplied with sufficient good wholesome food and water as often as the feeding habits of the respective animals require.

     D.    Animal buildings and enclosures shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent the escape of animals.

     E.     All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the public from the animals and animals from the public.

     F.     Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained shall be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors. Heating and cooling shall be provided as required according to physical needs of the animals.

     G.    All animal rooms, cages, and runs shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper housing for animals kept therein.

     H.    All animal runs shall be of approved construction and shall be provided with adequate waste and manure disposal and for drainage into an approved sewer or individual sewer disposal installation.

     I.      All animals shall be taken to a licensed veterinarian for examination and treatment if so ordered by the health officer.

     J.      Every precaution shall be taken to avoid the production of nuisances and any hazard to the public health as a result of the presence of these wild, dangerous and/or exotic animals.

     K.    Every violation of an applicable regulation shall be corrected within a reasonable time to be specified by the health officer.

     L.     Failure of the applicant for the license to comply with any of the foregoing conditions shall be deemed just cause for the denial of any license, whether original or renewal. (Ord. 163 § 7(N), 1997)

 

6.04.150 Expiration of license.
     Any license issued under this chapter shall expire at the end of such fiscal year in which the license is issued. (Ord. 163 § 7(O), 1997)

 

6.04.160 Renewal of license.
     The procedure for the renewal of any license shall be subject to the same conditions and shall be done in the same manner as the issuance of an original license. (Ord. 163 § 7(P), 1997)

 

6.04.170 Inspection.
     The health officer shall have the authority to enter upon any area or premises to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 163 § 7(Q), 1997)

 

6.04.180 Revocation of license.
     The health officer may revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter, whenever he shall determine from an inspection that any animal establishment fails to meet all conditions contained in Section 6.04.140 or for any other violation of this chapter.

     Any revocation of a license shall be effective until all conditions of Section 6.04.140 have been met and complied with to the satisfaction of the health officer and written notice of this fact that has been given to the license. Upon receipt of notice of compliance the license shall be deemed in full force and effect for the remainder of the original term for which issued. (Ord. 163 § 7(R), 1997)

 

6.04.190 License not transferable.
     Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable, except when original property including animal establishment within such property is sold by owner to another party and provided further, that such animal establishment shall remain within the confines of original property. (Ord. 163 § 7(S), 1997)

 

6.04.195 Animals or fowl which habitually make noise.
     It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of one or more of any animal or fowl, either willfully or through failure to exercise proper control, to allow such animal or fowl to habitually bark, howl, crow, or make any other loud noises in such a manner as to cause general annoyance or discomfort to the inhabitants of a neighborhood and interfere with the reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of life or property, excluding noise from property not zoned for residential purposes (property without an “R” is its zoning classification). If more than one neighbor lives within two hundred (200) yards of such animal owner’s premises, complaints from at least two persons living in separate residences shall be evidence of such a public nuisance. If the owner or person having control over the animal or fowl fails, upon two weeks mailed notice by the city, to abate the nuisance, said owner or person shall be guilty of an infraction and a citation may be issued to the owner or person having control of the animal or fowl. Each incident of reported nuisance noise shall constitute a separate offense after said two weeks notice. A civil action for abatement of a public nuisance may also be filed in the superior court by city enforcement officers, or in lieu of citation. The city may sue to enjoin the keeping and maintaining of animals or fowl which make such noise. Any court order or judgment issued in such a suit may include an order to city officers to impound the animal or fowl creating the noise and decree the disposition of the same. (Ord. 211 § 2, 2001: Ord. 181 § 2, 1998)

 

6.04.200 Penalties.
     A.    Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified. Each day or portion thereof such violation is in existence shall be a new and separate offense. Any person so convicted shall be:

     1.     Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense.

     2.     Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second offense.

     3.     The third and any additional offenses shall constitute misdemeanors and shall be punishable by fines not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or six months in jail, or both.

     4.     Notwithstanding the above, a first or second offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor.

     B.     Payment of any fine or service of a jail sentence shall not relieve a person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity from the responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the violation.

     C.     In addition to the above penalties, the court may order that the guilty party reimburse the city for all of its costs of investigating, analyzing, inspecting, abating and prosecuting the enforcement action against the guilty party. The court shall fix the amount of any such reimbursement upon submission of proof of such costs by the city.

     D.    The owner, manager, and operator of every activity or facility subject to this chapter shall be responsible for any violation of this chapter by an employee.

     E.     Any person who violates any section of this chapter, or who breaches or violates any condition of a permit, approval or license issued pursuant to this chapter, may be issued an administrative citation. Any person authorized to enforce this chapter may use the administrative citations procedures set forth in Section 11.0208 (Administrative Citations Actions) of the San Bernardino County Code to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 302 § 2, 2010; Ord. 248 § 9, 2005)

 

6.04.210 Injunction.
     Any violation of this chapter is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. Upon request of the health officer, an action for injunctive relief may be commenced for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. Application shall be made to such court that has jurisdiction to grant such relief to abate or remove such illegal activity and to restrain any person from engaging in such illegal activity. This remedy shall be in addition to any other civil or criminal relief or penalty. (Ord. 248 § 10, 2005)

Chapter 6.08 RABIES
6.08.010 Duty to report animal bites.
     It shall be the duty of any person having knowledge that any animal subject to rabies, whether or not the animal is suspected of having rabies, has bitten any human being within the city to immediately report that fact to the health officer or to the sheriff with full information in regard to the incident. (Ord. 163 § 8(A), 1997)

 

6.08.020 Confinement of biting animal.
     Upon receipt of a report that a person has been bitten by an animal subject to rabies (all warm-blooded mammals), any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, is empowered to enter upon any private property, including the home or residence where the biting animal is kept or has strayed, to inspect and strictly isolate, and to seize and impound if necessary, in a place and manner approved by the county health officer, any such animal for a period of ten days (for dogs and cats) and fourteen (14) days (for other animals). Excepted are rodents, (members of the order Rodentia) rabbits and hares (members of the order Lagomorpha).

     Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the health officer may authorize, with permission of the owner, if known, and other legal restrictions permitting, the euthanasia of a biting animal for the purpose of laboratory examination for rabies using the fluorescent rabies antibody (FRA) test in the county health department laboratory.

     It is unlawful for any person to remove from any place of isolation or quarantine, any animal which has been isolated or quarantined under the provisions of this chapter, without the consent of the health officer. (Ord. 163 § 8(B), 1997)

 

6.08.030 Reporting and confinement of rabid animals.
     It is the duty of any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal known to have or suspected of having rabies to report the fact immediately to the health officer. If such person is the owner or possessor or has custody of such animal, he shall immediately confine it and keep the animal strictly confined until it shall be established to the satisfaction of said official that such animal has or has not rabies.

     Where such owner or possessor does not have the proper facility for such confinement, or where the owner of such rabid or suspected rabid animal is not known, such animal shall be isolated in strict confinement under proper care and under the conservation of a licensed veterinarian in a pound, veterinary hospital, or other adequate facility in a manner approved by the county health officer, and shall not be killed or released for at least ten days after the onset of symptoms suggestive of rabies. If such animal creates a menace to the public health and safety, the health officer or his representative may kill or destroy the animal forthwith and examine it for rabies in the laboratory using the fluorescent rabies antibody (FRA) test in the county health department laboratory.

     Whenever any such owned biting animal is quarantined in a place other than the premises of its owner, all expenses incurred in its confinement shall be the liability of the owner, possessor or custodian of such biting animal. (Ord. 163 § 8(C), 1997)

 

6.08.040 Disposition of animals bitten by rabid animals.
     Any animal that is subject to rabies which has been exposed to a known rabid animal or suspected rabid animal shall, upon notification of its owner, possessor or custodian, be:

     A.    Immediately securely confined in a place and manner approved by the health officer for a period of six months; or

     B.     Immediately destroyed unless the biting animal is determined by laboratory examination to be negative from rabies; except that in the case of dogs and cats, the following alternative is permitted:

     The dog or cat shall be revaccinated and then quarantined for a period of thirty (30) days, provided such dog or cat has been vaccinated not less than thirty (30) days, with a rabies vaccine approved by the California State Department of Public Health.

     The health officer may, in his discretion, kill or quarantine the animal so bitten, in case the owner, possessor or custodian, thereof shall fail to do so immediately, or in case the owner, possessor or custodian thereof is not readily accessible or is not known.

     The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies will, upon demand, be surrendered to the health officer.

     Upon the discretion of the health officer, the county health laboratory shall examine for rabies specimens of high-risk or medium-risk animals involved in a biting incident. Specimens of low-risk animals may be examined upon payment of reasonable laboratory fees. (Ord. 163 § 8(D), 1997)

 

6.08.050 Posting of quarantine sign.
     It shall be the duty of any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter to post an appropriate sign in a conspicuous place at a location where a dog or cat or any biting, vicious or rabid animal is being quarantined or confined to warn the public of this fact. It is unlawful for anyone to obstruct the posting of such a sign or to remove or destroy such a posted sign without permission of the health officer. (Ord. 163 § 8(E), 1997)

 

6.08.060 Prohibiting the keeping and sale of skunks.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to: (a) trap or capture skunks for pets; (b) trap, capture or hold skunks in captivity for sale, barter, exchange or gift; and (c) transport skunks from or into the city, except that the importation or exportation of skunks may be permitted by the health officer for recognized zoological gardens or research institutions. (Ord. 163 § 8(F), 1997)

 

6.08.070 Possession of unvaccinated dogs.
     It is unlawful for any person within the city, to own, have an interest in, harbor and feed, or have the care, charge, custody or possession of a dog over the age of four months, whether such dog is confined or not, unless such dog has a current vaccination with the rabies vaccine approved by the California State Department of Public Health and is officially tagged as provided for in this chapter. The vaccine shall be used exclusively to vaccinate all dogs within the city. Vaccination with the vaccine shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year when administered to a dog under one year of age, or three years when administered to a dog over one year of age. (Ord. 163 § 8(G), 1997)

 

6.08.080 Vaccination.
     The rabies vaccination shall be performed only by a veterinarian who is duly licensed to practice in the state of California. Vaccination for rabies may be done in any veterinary clinic or hospital or in a low-cost rabies vaccination clinic sponsored by the county or any incorporated city. (Ord. 163 § 8(H), 1997)

 

6.08.090 License responsibility.
     A.    Every resident in the city who owns, has an interest in, harbors and feeds, or has the care, charge, custody or possession of a dog four months of age or over, and whether such dog is confined or not, shall obtain a San Bernardino County dog license for such a dog. Each dog shall have a current rabies vaccination as evidenced by a valid rabies certificate issued by the veterinarian who performed the vaccination as a requisite to licensing; provided further that rabies vaccination certificate shall not be required if the license is obtained at the time the dog is vaccinated at a county or city low-cost clinic.

     B.     While a dog is being used as a guard dog within the city, it must have a San Bernardino County dog license and the license tag must be securely fixed to the dog’s collar regardless of where the owner resides and whether a license has been obtained for that jurisdiction. (Ord. 163 § 8(I), 1997)

 

6.08.100 License application.
     Each application for a license shall be in writing upon a form to be furnished by the health officer, and shall contain such information as the health officer, by rule or regulation, shall require. (Ord. 163 § 8(J), 1997)

 

6.08.110 License fees.
     Each application for a dog license shall be accompanied by a license fee as specified in the county fee schedule, and shall be obtained:

     A.    Within a period of thirty days after expiration of a San Bernardino County dog license;

     B.     Within thirty (30) days after the dog attains the age of four months;

     C.     Within fifteen (15) days after the purchase or obtaining control, care or custody of a dog which previously attained the age of four months, and provide further the proof of recent acquisition as indicated by the date of purchase receipt as shown at the time of application;

     D.    Within thirty days after the date of establishing residency in the county provided further that, the dog has a current license from another county or a city, and within fifteen (15) days if the dog has no current license. (Ord. 163 § 8(K), 1997)

 

6.08.120 Exceptions to vaccination.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, a dog may be exempted from rabies vaccination if such vaccination would jeopardize the health of such dog to infirmity or other disability provided the owner has in his possession a written verification from a licensed veterinarian attesting to such infirmity or disability. The owner or custodian of such dog shall, within ten days after the termination of such infirmity or disability, cause such dog to be vaccinated and licensed. Any such dog with infirmity or disability shall be securely confined within its owner’s or harborer’s premises so that it does not come in contact with any other animal or person. (Ord. 163 § 8(L), 1997)

 

6.08.130 Penalty fee.
     Any person who obtains a license not in conformity with any of the provisions of Section 6.08.110, shall pay a penalty fee as specified in the county fee schedule in addition to the regular license fee. (Ord. 163 § 8(M), 1997)

 

6.08.140 Effective duration of license.
     The San Bernardino County dog license shall remain valid for a period not less than one month and not greater than thirty-six (36) months. (Ord. 163 § 8(N), 1997)

 

6.08.150 Duplicate license tag.
     When the original license tag is lost, a duplicate tag shall be obtained upon submission to the health officer such proof as he may require. The cost of each duplicate tag shall be as specified in the county fee schedule. (Ord. 163 § 8(O), 1997)

 

6.08.160 Wearing of tag.
     It shall be the responsibility of every city resident who owns, harbors, cares for, or has in custody a licensed dog, to securely attach or fasten the license tag to the dog’s collar or harness so that such tag is worn by the dog at all times except while such dog remains indoors or in any enclosed yard or pen where the dog cannot escape. (Ord. 163 § 8(P), 1997)

 

 

6.08.170 Falsification of license tag.
     It is unlawful for any person to place upon or attach to a dog any false, counterfeit or unauthorized tag for the purpose of evading the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 163 § 8(Q), 1997)

 

6.08.180 Unlawful use of tag.
     It is unlawful to attach a license tag on a dog to which the tag was not originally issued.

     It is unlawful to attach a license tag to any dog that does not have a current rabies vaccination.

     It is unlawful for an unauthorized person to remove from any dog, any collar or harness or other device to which is attached a San Bernardino County license tag for the current year or remove such tag therefrom. (Ord. 163 § 8(R), 1997)

 

6.08.190 Exemption of payment of license fee.
     The health officer may, upon his or her discretion, issue a license without payment of the required license fee to an owner or custodian of a dog, if such dog meets the following conditions:

     A.    Such dog is a guide dog and the owner is blind or deaf and can submit proof that such dog has been successfully trained to lead the blind or aid the deaf as a guide dog.

     B.     Such dog is a service dog and the owner is handicapped and can submit proof that such dog has been successfully trained to aid the handicapped as a service dog. (Ord. 163 § 8(S), 1997)

 

6.08.200 Categories of dogs not requiring license.
     San Bernardino County license is not required for the following categories of dogs, however, they must have a current rabies vaccination:

     A.    Any dog owned by or in the charge of any person who is a nonresident of the city and is traveling through the city or temporarily sojourning therein for a period of not exceeding thirty (30) days;

     B.     Any dog brought into the city and kept therein for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days for the exclusive purpose of entering the same in any bench show or dog exhibition or field trials or competition;

     C.     Any dog brought or sent into the city from any point outside thereof for the exclusive purpose of receiving veterinary care in any dog hospital, in the event that such dog is kept at all times strictly confined within such hospital;

     D.    Dogs kept for the sole purpose of being used for research in research institutions approved by the California State Department of Public Health;

     E.     Dogs over four months of age which are offered for sale in a duly licensed pet shop. (Ord. 303 § 6, 2010; Ord. 163 § 8(T), 1997)

 

6.08.210 Transfer of ownership.
     If a currently licensed dog is sold or title to the dog is otherwise transferred to a new owner, such new owner may apply to the health officer for a transfer of such dog’s tag and license and pay a transfer fee as specified in the county fee schedule. Upon receipt of such application fee, the health officer shall issue a certificate of transfer of such tag and the name and addresses of the owner and new owners. (Ord. 163 § 8(U), 1997)

 

6.08.220 Renewal of license.
     Each San Bernardino County dog license shall expire on the date recorded on the license receipt and shall be renewed prior to expiration or within a period of thirty (30) days after expiration. (Ord. 163 § 8(V), 1997)

 

6.08.230 Authority to enter any premises.
     The health officer shall have the authority to enter upon any area or premises to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 163 § 8(W), 1997)

 

6.08.240 Violation—Penalty.
     Any person who violates any section of this chapter, or who breaches or violates any condition of a permit, approval or license issued pursuant to this chapter, may be guilty of an infraction or may be issued an administrative citation. Any person authorized to enforce this chapter may use the administrative citations procedures set forth in Section 11.0208 (Administrative Citations Actions) of the San Bernardino County Code to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 302 § 3, 2010; Ord. 163 § 8(X), 1997)

Chapter 6.12 DOG KENNELS
6.12.010 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall be used:

     “Boarding and breeding kennel” means a kennel in which dogs are kept for boarding, breeding, training, marketing or other purposes.

     “Boarding kennel” means a kennel in which dogs owned by persons other than the kennel owner/operator are being cared for.

     “Breeding kennel” means a kennel in which dogs are kept for the primary purpose of breeding.

     “County health officer” means the San Bernardino County director of public health, or any other person duly authorized to act on his or her behalf.

     “Dog” means a domesticated animal of the canine type; young animal (puppies) of this type are considered as dogs.

     “Kennel” means place where five or more dogs over four months of age are kept. The term “kennel” shall not apply to animal shelters operated by governmental agencies, or nonprofit societies for the care of stray dogs nor shall the term apply to veterinary hospitals keeping animals in the course of medical treatment. (Ord. 163 § 9(A), 1997)

 

6.12.020 Requirement of permit.
     Every person, firm or corporation engaged in operating, control or management of a kennel as herein defined shall obtain a permit from the county health officer and shall pay an annual permit fee as specified in the county fee schedule. (Ord. 163 § 9(B), 1997)

 

6.12.030 Regulation.
     A.    No kennel shall be allowed to exist/operate unless proper land use regulations are met through the planning division prior to applying for a kennel permit from the department of public health.

     B.     Any building or structure used in the housing or maintaining of the animals shall be approved by the city building and safety division.

     C.     All dogs owned by, under the control of or in the possession of a kennel operator shall be subject to provisions of this chapter upon attaining the age of four months. The county health officer shall have the power, upon the giving of ten days notice by United States Postal Service to any permittee under this chapter and an opportunity to be heard, to revoke any permit granted to a kennel operator for violation of this chapter. Orders of the county health officer revoking a permit issued under this chapter shall be appealable to the city council who may appoint a hearing officer to conduct a hearing on their behalf. Permittee shall request an appeal hearing within thirty (30) days from the mailing of notice of revocation to the permittee. The decision of the city council on such revocation appeal shall be final.

     D.    All dogs being kept or boarded in kennels shall be vaccinated pursuant to Section 6.12.050 and licensed in the name of their owner. Failure to comply with this requirement shall be considered a violation of this chapter by the permittee. (Ord. 163 § 9(C), 1997)

 

6.12.040 Construction.
     A.    Adequate housing shall be provided for the protection of dogs from the elements.

     B.     Kennel runs shall be effectively enclosed by suitable fencing such as chain link, smooth concrete block, or other suitable fencing material. The exterior area of the premises shall be completely fenced or otherwise enclosed.

     C.     Outside runs or properly constructed indoor runs shall be provided in all kennels.

     1.     Boarding kennel runs shall be constructed of concrete or other suitable type nonporous material. The floor shall slope one-fourth inch per foot to a drain or to a drainway. All drains shall be properly plumbed, trapped and vented and shall be connected to an approved underground disposal system which shall consist of a septic tank or seepage pit or leaching line as required by the health officer. Adequate ventilation must be provided for kennels with indoor runs. Each run shall be separated by a solid partition.

     2.     Breeding kennel outdoor runs may be constructed of four-inch minimum thickness of pea gravel or other suitable aggregate. Indoor runs must be constructed as provided in subsection (C)(1) of this section.

     D.    Kennels shall not be constructed closer than one hundred (100) feet from any structure on adjacent property used for human habitation nor closer than forty (40) feet to any dwelling on the premises, except that of the owner/operator’s home.

     E.     Provisions shall be made in boarding and breeding kennels for the separation of kennel-owned dogs from those owned by other persons.

     F.     Kennel operators shall take such measures as may be necessary to mitigate the occurrence of excessive barking or any noise that constitutes a public nuisance. (Ord. 163 § 9(D), 1997)

 

6.12.050 Required vaccinations.
     A.    All dogs four months of age or older shall be currently vaccinated against rabies with a rabies vaccine approved by the California State Department of Health Services. The rabies vaccination shall be performed only by a veterinarian who is duly licensed to practice in the state of California.

     B.     In addition to such rabies vaccinations as may be required by this chapter, operators of boarding kennels and boarding and breeding kennels shall require proof that every dog kept, boarded or maintained at their facility shall be vaccinated against the following infectious and communicable diseases: canine distemper, Bordetella bronchiseptica infection, canine adenovirus infection, canine corona virus infection, canine parainfluenza virus infection, canine parvovirus infection, and Leptospira canicola and icterohemorrhagie. (Ord. 163 § 9(E), 1997)

 

6.12.060 Kennel operations.
     A.    Boarding kennels and boarding and breeding kennels shall maintain records of all animals being boarded which shall be available to the health officer or his or her deputy as necessary. With respect to each boarded animal, such records shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following information:

     1.     A physical description of the animal;

     2.     Documentary proof of current vaccinations as required under Section 6.12.050;

     3.     Name and address of the animal’s owner;

     4.     Date and time of the animal’s arrival at the kennel with the name and address of the person leaving the animal, if other than the animal’s owner; and

     5.     Date and time of the animal’s departure from the kennel, and the name and address of the person picking up the animal, if other than the animal’s owner.

     B.     Dogs owned by kennel operators which are allowed outside the confines of the kennel shall be vaccinated as required under Section 6.12.050, individually licensed, and shall have current license tag attached to the collar.

     C.     All kennels, runs, buildings and other equipment and facilities used for the care of dogs shall be cleaned daily and shall be disinfected as necessary to prevent the spread of disease. Boarding kennels and boarding and breeding kennels shall disinfect all facilities used in the care of the dogs between each separate usage.

     D.    All droppings shall be removed from kennel daily. Soiled papers and bedding material shall be removed from the kennel as frequently as necessary to maintain the kennel in a clean, sanitary manner. All such waste material shall be disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the health officer.

     E.     Provisions shall be made for convenient access to clean food and water. Food and water containers shall be kept clean and sanitary. Animal feed shall be properly stored and protected from contamination and vermin infestation.

     F.     The operator of every dog kennel shall be responsible to take appropriate preventive measures to preclude outbreaks of infections and contagious diseases, and external parasites.

     G.    It shall be a violation of this chapter to sell, give away, release or otherwise dispose of an animal except for euthanasia, which has or is suspected of having or has been exposed to any contagious or infectious disease transmissible to other animals or to man, including but not limited to those diseases specified in Section 6.12.050 and such other diseases as the public health officer may from time to time designate. All such disease shall be reported to the county health officer or public health veterinarian.

     H.    Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of dead animals which shall be satisfactory to the health officer.

     I.      All dogs upon reaching the age of four months shall be vaccinated against rabies as provided herein, and when sold, the purchaser shall be provided with a copy of the certificate of vaccination issued by the veterinarian and shall be advised to secure a dog license tag within thirty (30) days from the date of purchase.

     J.      The requirements of this chapter shall apply to humane societies and pet shops. (Ord. 163 § 9(F), 1997)

 

6.12.070 Violations—Penalties.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 163 § 9(G), 1997)

Chapter 6.16 CATTERIES
6.16.010 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall be used:

     “Cat” means a domestic cat belonging to the species Felis Domestica, including its young or kitten.

     “Cattery” means a place where five or more cats are kept. The term cattery shall not apply to animal shelters operated by governmental agencies nor shall it apply to veterinary hospitals.

     A cattery is subdefined as follows:

     1.     “Breeding cattery” means a cattery in which more than four cats are kept for the primary purpose of breeding.

     2.     “Boarding cattery” means a cattery in which cats owned by persons other than the cattery owner/operator are being cared for.

     3.     “Boarding and breeding cattery” means a cattery in which cats are kept for boarding, breeding, marketing or other purposes.

     4.     “Private cattery” means a place wherein more than four but not exceeding five cats three months of age or older, all belonging to the same owner and kept or maintained as pets within the premises or residence of owner for his pleasure and enjoyment. No breeding in which the kittens are intended for sale or other commercial purpose must be done.

     “Health officer” means San Bernardino county director of public health, or any other person duly authorized to act on his behalf. (Ord. 163 § 10(A), 1997)

 

6.16.020 Requirement of a permit.
     Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the operation, control or management of a cattery as herein defined, shall obtain a permit to operate from the county health officer, and shall pay an annual fee as follows:

     For a cattery having the number of cats indicated, the fees shown in the city fee schedule shall apply for the following types and sizes of catteries:

     A.    Private Cattery (limited to five cats only; if over five cats, the cattery is classified as a commercial cattery and the provisions of the commercial cattery apply);

     B.     Commercial cattery (five to ten cats, eleven to twenty cats, and twenty-one to thirty cats). (Ord. 163 § 10(B), 1997)

 

6.16.030 Construction, operation and maintenance.
     A.    All cats shall be confined and not allowed to run at large.

     B.     Adequate housing shall be provided for the protection of cats from the elements.

     C.     The building within which cats are to be housed shall be provided with adequate ventilation and lighting, and shall be constructed so as to be easily kept clean and sanitary at all times. Adequate ventilation shall be that which minimizes drafts, avoids offensive odors, and prevents moisture condensation. Cat odors shall not be allowed to persist inside the building.

     D.    Adequate heating shall be provided for in the winter.

     E.     Cat cages shall be within an enclosed building and shall be of suitable construction, e.g., fiberglass or stainless steel or other material that will prevent the escape of the animal through destruction of material of which cage is made of, and at the same time permits easy cleaning. The minimum floor space of each cage shall be three square feet for each adult cat. Each cage shall be at least two feet in height. No more than two adult cats used for breeding shall be placed inside each cage.

     F.     Inside runs shall be so constructed that a minimum space of three square feet is provided per cat, and that the maximum number of cats to be housed in each pen shall not exceed five. Wire netting used between pens shall be such that the cats cannot put their feet through the wire netting spaces. If dividers are of solid construction, this shall be of uniform material and make. Enclosures shall be constructed so as to enable the animals to remain dry and clean.

     G.    Each pen shall be provided with a cat scratching post.

     H.    Cat resting or sleeping shelves shall be provided and shall be uniform and approved construction.

     I.      All cats shall be provided with sufficient clean litter to contain excreta and these shall be disposed of daily in a manner approved by the health officer. Adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of dead animals which shall be satisfactory to the health officer.

     J.      Boarded cats shall be caged or penned individually and separated by a floor to ceiling solid partition, unless they belong to the same owner, in which case they may stay together provided there is adequate space.

     K.    The operator of every cattery shall be responsible to take the appropriate preventive measures to preclude outbreaks of infectious and contagious diseases as well as external parasites, among the cats.

     L.     Adequate disinfection shall be provided. Beddings shall be cleaned and laundered at the end of each boarding period prior to use by another cat.

     M.    Provisions shall be made for convenient access to clean food and water. Food and water containers shall be kept clean and sanitary. Animal feed shall be properly stored and protected from contamination and vermin infestation. (Ord. 163 § 10(C), 1997)

 

6.16.040 Catteries operated along with dog kennels.
     Catteries in operation prior to adoption of this chapter, whether operated in conjunction with a dog kennel or not, shall be subject to the provisions of these regulations immediately upon adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 163 § 10(D), 1997)

 

6.16.050 Inspection.
     The health officer shall have the authority to enter upon any area or premises in which a cattery is located, for the purposes of investigating a violation or suspected violation as well as for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 163 § 10(E), 1997)

 

6.16.060 Revocation of a permit.
     The health officer shall have the power, upon giving of ten days’ notice by United States mail to any permittee under this chapter, to revoke any permit granted to a cattery operator for any violation of this chapter. The permittee may within the ten (10) day period, demand a hearing for reconsideration of the revocation. The reconsideration shall be determined by a different deputy from the deputy who first acted upon the revocation. (Ord. 163 § 10(F), 1997)

 

6.16.070 Violations—Penalties.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 163 § 10(G), 1997)

Chapter 6.18 APIARIES
6.18.010 Purpose.
     The city council finds that the unregulated and improper keeping of bees and apiaries in numerous locations throughout the city has in some instances become a nuisance and a hazard to the safety of landowners, roadusers and the public generally. (Ord. 182 § 2, 1998)

 

6.18.015 Definitions.
     Any word or phrase hereinafter used and not herein defined shall be given the meaning established for such word or phrase by the California Agricultural Code as it now is or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 182 § 2, 1998)

 

6.18.020 Provisions supplement laws.
     This chapter shall in all respect be construed to supplement and harmonize with the provisions of law of the state of California pertaining to bees and the beekeeping industry. (Ord. 182 § 2, 1998)

 

6.18.025 Location of apiaries.
     A.    All apiaries owned or kept within the city of Yucaipa shall be kept and located at a place at least one hundred (100) feet from all public roads (traveled portion), other than freeways, unless there are natural barriers to prevent bees from causing a nuisance or hazard to persons using the road and at a place at least two hundred (200) feet from all freeways.

     B.     All apiaries owned or kept within the city of Yucaipa shall be kept and located at a place at least five hundred (500) feet distant from the nearest house or building inhabited as a dwelling and shall not he kept and maintained at a lesser distance thereto unless the owner of the apiary first procures permission from the occupant or person using the building or house as a dwelling so to do.

     C.     All apiaries owned or kept within the city of Yucaipa near school yards or places where people congregate shall be located and maintained behind barriers (natural or otherwise) to cause bees to fly at a high altitude over such school yard or places where people congregate.

     D.    Abatement of Public Nuisance. No apiary shall be maintained or allowed to remain in any particular location in the city, but shall be moved to another location when the code enforcement officer determines that there are substantial numbers of bees from such apiary which are entering land other than where such apiary is situated and are causing a public nuisance to the extent that the health, safety or welfare of the public is endangered, or causing property damage through such violation. The code enforcement officer shall serve a written notice of the violation to the apiary owner or person in possession of the apiary requiring removal of the apiary within forty-eight (48) hours from the time the notice is served, all as provided in Section 6.18.035 of this chapter. (Ord. 182 § 2, 1998)

 

6.18.030 Water supply.
     Prior to locating or maintaining any apiary, a plentiful supply of fresh water must be furnished and kept available to such apiary at all times, unless an apiary is so located that the closest supply of water is an isolated stream or reservoir where water is available to such bees, and all other sources of water at locations where people or animals remain are farther from the apiary than the stream or reservoir. If no such stream or reservoir is available to the bees, the owner or person in possession of said apiary shall cause to be placed and maintained a watering place within one hundred (100) yards of the apiary. (Ord. 182 § 2, 1998)

 

6.18.035 Notice of violation.
     Any person as apiary owner or possessor who violates any provision of this chapter may be the addressee of a written notice to cease or remedy such violation, the notice coming from the code enforcement officer of the city. Said notice shall require that such person cease or remedy the violation within forty-eight (48) hours. The notice required by this section shall be sent by registered mail (return receipt requested), and also shall be posted at a conspicuous place on or near the apiary where the violation has occurred. The forty-eight (48) hour period specified by such notice shall commence to run from the time both mailing and posting have been accomplished. Failure of the addressee of such notice to receive the same shall have no effect on the validity of such notice. (Ord. 182 § 2, 1998)

 

6.18.040 Authority to enter upon property.
     The code enforcement officer or his or her assistants, deputies, employees, or contracting agents may enter upon the private property for which the notice has been given and abate and/or remove the apiary to terminate the violation of this chapter. However, the code enforcement officer or his or her assistants, deputies, employees or contracting agents shall not cause the destruction of any bees or of any apiary. (Ord. 182 § 2, 1998)

 

6.18.045 Account and itemized report.
     The code enforcement officer at the time of the abatement provided for in this chapter shall keep an account of the cost of abatement and shall render an itemized report in writing to the city council showing the cost of the abatement and making the corrections necessary to bring the apiary into compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 182 § 2, 1998)

 

6.18.050 Posting or report—Notice of hearing.
     Before the report is submitted to the city council a copy of it shall be served, as provided above, on the owner and/or the possessor of such apiary with a notice of the time when the report will be submitted to the council for confirmation. (Ord. 182 § 2, 1998)

 

6.18.055 Hearing.
     At the time fixed for receiving and considering the report, the council shall consider the report and any objections of any apiary owner or possessor liable to be assessed for the work of abatement. (Ord. 182 § 2, 1998)

 

6.18.060 Modifications—Confirmation of report.
     Thereupon the council may make such modifications in the report as it deems necessary, after which, by order or resolution, the report shall be confirmed. (Ord. 182 § 2, 1998)

 

6.18.065 Special charge.
     The amounts of the cost for abating the violation of this chapter mentioned in the report as confirmed shall constitute a special charge against the apiary owner or against the possessor, who shall have received notice as provided above, and said individual or individuals shall be liable to the city of Yucaipa jointly and severally for the amount of said charge. The code enforcement officer shall recover such charges by court action if not paid within fifteen (15) days of the council’s confirmation. (Ord. 182 § 2, 1998)

 

6.18.070 Penalties.
     Any apiary, or use of property regulated by the provisions of this chapter, which is used or maintained in violation of any of said provisions shall behind the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney shall upon request of the code enforcement officer commence an action or suit for the abatement, removing and enjoining thereof, in the manner provided by law, and as seems most appropriate. All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. In the event of a criminal action, the conviction and punishment of any person hereunder shall not relieve such person from the responsibility of correcting prohibited conditions or removing property which is in violation, nor prevent the enforced correction or removal thereof. Every person, firm or corporation, as principal, agent or employee violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. No suspension of sentence or probation shall be granted to any such violator unless there is included in the terms thereof a condition that the violator shall comply with the law of which he has been convicted and shall abate or correct such illegality. (Ord. 182 § 2, 1998)

Chapter 6.20 ANIMAL FOOD AND FOOD SCRAPS
6.20.010 Food left outside for certain mammalian predators.
     A.    No person shall feed or in any manner provide food for one or more nondomesticated mammalian predators. A nondomesticated mammalian predator shall include coyotes, raccoons, foxes, opossums, bears, mountain lions and bobcats.

     B.     Exceptions. This section shall not apply in any of the following instances:

     1.     Where the person providing the food is the owner of such nondomesticated mammalian predator and the predator is kept under a valid certificate or permit issued by the state of California Department of Fish and Game; or

     2.     Where the person provides food for a trapped, injured or unweaned, nondomesticated mammalian predator between the time the agency in charge of animal control is notified and the time such predator is picked up by the agency. (Ord. 163 § 11(A), 1997)

 

6.20.020 Food left outside for any animal during certain hours.
     No person shall leave or permit to be left out-of-doors food for any animal between the hours of ten p.m. of any one day and six a.m. of the following day, unless the area where the food is left is not accessible to nondomesticated mammalian predators. (Ord. 163 § 11(B), 1997)

 

6.20.030 Garbage containing food scraps.
     No person shall leave or permit to be left out-of-doors any garbage containing food scraps without first securing the food scraps in closed containers. (Ord. 163 § 11(C), 1997)

 

6.20.040 Limited applicability.
     Sections 6.20.020 and 6.20.030 shall be applicable only in the mountainous and foothills areas of the city. (Ord. 163 § 11(D), 1997)

 

6.20.050 Violation—Penalty.
     A person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 163 § 11(E), 1997)

Chapter 6.24 TRANSPORTATION AND MOVEMENT OF LIVESTOCK OVER PUBLIC AND PRIVATE LANDS
6.24.010 Regulations, consent required.
     A. Stray Livestock. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, or controlling the possession of cattle, sheep or any other livestock, to willfully or negligently permit any such livestock to stray upon or remain unaccompanied by a person in charge or control thereof upon any private or public property located within the city of Yucaipa.

     B.     Driven Livestock. It shall be unlawful for any person to lead, drive, or conduct any animals over or across any private or public lands within the city of Yucaipa without obtaining the prior written consent of the private owner or public agency holding or governing such lands. (Ord. 178 § 1, 1998)

 

6.24.020 Violation.
     Every person who violates either of the above provisions shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment of not less than ten (10) days nor more than six months or both such fine and imprisonment. Each violation during any day shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 178 § 1, 1998)

 

6.24.030 Civil liability to city.
     Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable civilly to the city of Yucaipa for a penalty in an amount not to exceed a sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation thereof. (Ord. 178 § 1, 1998)

 

6.24.040 Injunction.
     An action may be brought by the city of Yucaipa in the superior court of the state of California for an injunction against any person violating any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 178 § 1, 1998)

 

6.24.050 Cumulative remedies.
     The remedies herein contained are cumulative and are in addition to any remedies provided by state law. (Ord. 178 § 1, 1998)

Title 7 RESERVED

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.04 ALARM SYSTEMS
Chapter 8.08 GRAFFITI ABATEMENT
Chapter 8.12 MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION PROGRAM
Chapter 8.16 NUISANCES
Chapter 8.20 REFUSE ABATEMENT
Chapter 8.24 REFUSE STORAGE
Chapter 8.26 DIVERSION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE
Chapter 8.28 WASTE MANAGEMENT
Chapter 8.30 SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF NUISANCE VEHICLES
Chapter 8.32 FIREARMS
Chapter 8.36 DISASTER RELIEF—EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS

Chapter 8.04 ALARM SYSTEMS
8.04.010 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.

     “Alarm system” means any device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on premises or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act, which device, when activated, emits a sound beyond the business premises or residential unit or dwelling protected by such device or transmits a signal or message to another location.

     “False alarm” means an activated alarm or alarm signal from any alarm system which is responded to within the city by the San Bernardino County sheriff’s department, but for which no emergency situation exists or where there is no evidence to indicate that there was an emergency situation as determined by the responding officer. “False alarm” shall not include those alarms activated by extraordinary meteorological, atmospheric, or other conditions or means as determined by the sheriff’s department.

     “Fiscal year” means the period from and including July 1st of any year to and including June 30th of the following year.

     “Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity. (Ord. 39, 1990)

 

8.04.020 Response service charges.
     A service charge which is established by resolution of the city council in order to defray costs incurred in providing law enforcement services in response to a false alarm shall be paid to the city, by each person who possesses premises, for each third and subsequent police response made to those premises generated by a false alarm during any fiscal year. (Ord. 39, 1990)

 

8.04.030 Billing.
     The city’s finance department shall cause to be issued a monthly bill for the unpaid service charges accrued during the billing period and any prior periods. Such bill shall be due and payable within fifteen (15) days after the billing date. (Ord. 39, 1990)

 

8.04.040 Enforcement.
     The amount of any service charge shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any unpaid service charges. All service charges shall be deemed delinquent fifteen (15) days after they are due and payable. (Ord. 39, 1990)

Chapter 8.08 GRAFFITI ABATEMENT
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. No. 38.

8.08.010 Purpose and intent.
     A.    The city council of the city of Yucaipa finds graffiti on public or private property a blighting element that leads to depreciation of the value of property that has been targeted by such vandalism and depreciates the value of the adjacent and surrounding properties to the extent that graffiti creates a negative impact upon the entire city.

     B.     The city council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance, and it must be eliminated by means of prevention, education, and abatement to avoid the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the city and its residents, and to prevent the further spread of graffiti.

     C.     The purpose and intent of the city council, through the adoption of this chapter, is to protect public and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement. It is the further intent of the city council, through the adoption of this chapter, to provide notice to all those who disregard the property rights of others, that the law enforcement agencies of the city will strictly enforce the law and vigorously prosecute those persons engaging in violations of this chapter. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.020 Definitions.
     Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning established by this section:

     “Aerosol paint container” means any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint, undercoating, spray insulation, or other substance capable of defacing property.

     “City” means the city of Yucaipa.

     “Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark, or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted or engraved on or otherwise glued, posted, or affixed to or on any surface of any public or private real or personal property within the city.

     “Graffiti implement” means any implement capable of marking a surface to create graffiti, including but not limited to aerosol paint containers, markers, etching devices, and gum labels.

     “Gum label” means any material such as, but not limited to, decals, stickers, posters or labels which contain a substance commonly known as adhesive or glue, which cannot be removed from the surface in an intact condition and with minimal efforts.

     “Marker” means any indelible or permanent marker, or similar implement containing any ink that is not water soluble.

     “Minor” means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.

     “Owner” means any person owning property either public or private, as shown on the last equalized assessment role for the city, or the lessee, tenant or other person having control or possession of the property.

     “Person” means any individual, and also includes any domestic or foreign corporation, or an association, a syndicate, a joint-stock corporation, a partnership of any kind, a club, a business or common-law trust, a society or an individual conducting any business in the city.

     “Sale” means the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for consideration or the serving, supplying or furnishing for a consideration of any property. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.030 Graffiti prohibited.
     A.    No person shall place graffiti upon any public or privately owned tree, rock or temporary or permanent structure located within the city, including, but not limited to, buildings, windows, walls, fences, poles, signs, flood control channels, concrete, and paving.

     B.     No owner of any real property within the city shall permit or allow any graffiti to remain on any tree, rock or temporary or permanent structure located on such property.

     C.     Declaration of Nuisance. The city council hereby declares and finds graffiti to be a nuisance subject to abatement according to the provisions and procedures contained in this chapter and in California Government Code Section 38773 et seq. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.040 Notice.
     Whenever the city manager or designee determines that graffiti exists on any permanent or temporary structure in the city which is visible from the street or other public or private property, the city manager or designee shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall have seven days after the date of the notice to remove the graffiti, or the property will be subject to abatement by the city. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.050 Service of notice.
     Any notice to abate graffiti pursuant to this chapter shall be in writing and shall be served upon the owner(s) of the affected premises, as such owner’s name and address appear on the last equalized property tax assessment rolls of the county of San Bernardino. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice required by this chapter may be served in any one of the following manners:

     A.    By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or in control of the property;

     B.     By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the last known address of the owner. If this address is unknown, the notice will be sent to the property address.

     C.     The notice shall be substantially in the following form:

 

NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE

GRAFFITI

 

Date:____________________

 

     NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required by law at your expense to remove or paint over the graffiti located on the property commonly known as _____________________, Yucaipa, California, which is visible to public view, within seven (7) days after the date of this notice: or, if you fail to do so, City employees, private contractors employed by the City, or City volunteers will enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance by removal or painting over the graffiti. The cost of the abatement by the City employees, its private contractors, or City volunteers will be assessed upon your property and such costs will constitute a lien upon the land until paid.

     All persons having any objection to, or interest in these matters are hereby notified to submit any objections or comments to the City Manager of the City of Yucaipa or his or her designated representative within seven (7) days from the date of this notice. At the conclusion of this seven (7) day period the City may proceed with the abatement of the graffiti inscribed on your property at your expense without further notice.

(Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.060 Appeal.
     Within seven days from the mailing or personal service of the notice, the owner or person occupying or controlling such premises or lot affected may appeal to the city council. At a regular meeting or regular adjourned meeting of the city council not more than twenty (20) days thereafter, the council shall proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal. The decision of the council thereupon shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.070 Removal by city.
     Upon failure of persons to comply with the notice by the designated date, or such continued date thereafter as the city manager or designated representative approves, then the city manager is authorized and directed to cause the graffiti to be abated by city forces or private contract. Subject to the provisions of Section 8.08.150, the city, its private contractors, or city volunteers are expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes. All reasonable efforts to minimize damage from such entry shall be taken by the city, and any paint used to obliterate graffiti shall be as close as practicable to background color(s). (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.080 Private property consent forms.
     Property owners in the city may consent in advance to city entry onto private property for graffiti removal purposes. The city will make forms for such consent available. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.090 Public property.
     Where a structure is owned by a public entity other than the city, the removal of the graffiti may be authorized only after securing the consent of an authorized representative of the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.100 Record of cost for abatement.
     The city manager or designee shall keep an account of costs (including incidental expenses) of abating such nuisance on each separate parcel of land where the work is done and shall render an itemized report in writing to the city council showing the cost of abatement. Before the report is submitted to the council, a copy shall be served in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, together with a notice of time when the report shall be heard by the council for confirmation.

     A.    The city council shall set the matter for hearing to determine the correctness and reasonableness of such costs.

     B.     The term “incidental expenses” shall include, but not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts and in inspecting the work, and the costs of printing and mailing required hereunder. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.110 Report hearing and proceedings.
     At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the report, the city council shall hear and pass upon the report of such costs of abatement, together with any objections or protests. Thereupon, the city council may make such revision, correction or modification in the report as it may deem just, after which, by motion, the report as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified shall be confirmed. The decision of the city council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.120 Assessment of costs against property.
     The total cost for abating such nuisance, as confirmed by the city council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the office of the San Bernardino County recorder of a notice of lien, as so made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of such assessment.

     A.    After such confirmation and recordation, a copy shall be filed with the assessor and tax collector of San Bernardino County, acting for the city, in order that the county officials may add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against the respective lots and parcels of land, and thereafter the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes; or

     B.     After such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law;

     C.     Such notice of lien for recordation shall be in form substantially as follows:

 

NOTICE OF LIEN

(Claim of City of Yucaipa)

 

     Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of Chapter 8.08 of the Yucaipa Municipal Code, the City Engineer of the City of Yucaipa did, on or about the _______ day of __________, 20____, cause the painting over or removal of graffiti at the premises hereinafter described in order to abate a public nuisance on that real property; and the City Council of the City of Yucaipa did on the _________ day of _________, 20____, assess the cost of such abatement upon the real property hereinafter described, and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof; and that the City of Yucaipa does hereby claim a lien on such costs of abatement in the amount of that assessment (the sum of $________); and the same shall be a lien upon the real property until the same has been paid in full and discharged of record.

     The real property hereinbefore mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land in the City of Yucaipa, County of San Bernardino, State of California, and particularly described as follows:

 

(Description)

 

DATED: This _______day of _________, 20____

 

________________________

                Employee Name

                City Clerk of the City of
                Yucaipa, California

 

     D.    If restitution is subsequently collected from the graffiti vandal, or other responsible party, the city will extinguish all abatement liens for the subject property. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.130 Limitation of filing judicial action.
     Any owner, lessee, occupant or other interested person having any objections or feeling aggrieved at any proceeding taken on appeal by the city council in ordering the abatement of any public nuisance under the provisions of this chapter, must bring an action to contest such decision within thirty (30) days after the date of such decision of the city council. Otherwise, all objections to such decision shall be deemed waived. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.140 Violation, penalties and civil liability of parents.
     A.    State Law. Any violation of Section 8.08.030(A) shall be prosecuted to the fullest extent possible under California Penal Code Section 594 et seq., and other applicable state statutes, including but not limited to California Vehicle Code Sections 13202.6 and 42001.71, California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 727.5, and California Civil Code Section 1714.1.

 

     B.     Criminal Penalty. Any person violating Section 8.08.030(A) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of the Yucaipa Municipal Code.

     C.     Nuisance. A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance as defined in Yucaipa Municipal Code Chapter 8.16 and may be abated by the city through the process and procedure set forth in Chapter 8.16 or through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law or this code for the abatement of such nuisances.

     D.    Civil Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates Section 8.08.030(A) shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. Each day of such conduct and each occurrence is a separate and distinct violation. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the court shall consider all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of the harm caused by the conduct constituting a violation, the nature and persistence of such conduct, the length of time over which the conduct occurred, the assets, liabilities and net worth of the person, whether corporate or individual, and any corrective action taken by the defendant. The civil penalty prescribed by this subsection shall be assessed and recovered and a civil action brought by the city attorney or by any member of the public in any court of competent jurisdiction. The civil penalty prescribed by this subsection may be sought in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedy, including, but not limited to, criminal remedies, injunctive relief, specific performance or any other remedy. In the event any such action is brought by a member of the public, any civil penalty awarded shall be awarded to and on behalf of the city or other person whose property is damaged. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.150 Abatement and enforcement.
     A.    Authorization to Use City Funds. Within the limits set forth in this section, city funds may be used to remove graffiti from publicly or privately owned trees, rocks and temporary or permanent structures including, but not limited to, buildings, walls, fences, poles, signs, flood control channels, concrete, and paving, located on property either publicly or privately owned within the city.

     B.     Limitations to Use of City Funds. The use of city funds as authorized in this section is limited to the following cases:

     1.     The city manager, or the city manager’s designee, must approve each proposed use of city funds for the removal of graffiti.

     2.     The city shall obtain the written consent of the owner of the affected public or private structures prior to removal of graffiti. The consent form shall be in a form approved by the city and shall:

     a.     Authorize entry of city employees, contractors, or volunteers on the affected property to accomplish the removal of the material;

     b.     Assign to the city of Yucaipa any cause or causes of action which the owner may have against any person or persons who deface the property with graffiti; and

     c.     Hold the city, its officers, employees, contractors, or volunteers harmless from all liability arising out of the entry on the property or the work of removing the material.

     3.     In the event that written consent to remove the graffiti is withheld, the city may obtain an abatement warrant to gain access to the subject property.

     4.     City funds shall be used only to remove the graffiti itself and may not be used for painting or repairing a larger area not inscribed by graffiti. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.160 Graffiti abatement—A condition to issuance of permits and approvals.
     A.    Conditions of Encroachment Permits. Encroachment permits issued by the city may, among other items, be conditioned on (1) the permittee applying an anti-graffiti material to the encroaching object or structure of a type and nature which is acceptable to the city manager or designee; (2) the immediate removal by the permittee of any graffiti; (3) the right of the city to remove graffiti or to paint the encroaching object or structure containing graffiti.

     B.     Conditions on Discretionary Approvals. In imposing conditions upon conditional use permits, variances, building permits or other similar land use entitlements or development or design applications, the city may impose any or all of the following conditions or other similar or related conditions:

     1.     Use of Anti-Graffiti Material. Applicant may be required to apply an anti-graffiti material and provide a landscape design of a type and nature which is acceptable to the city manager or designee, to such of the publicly viewable surfaces to be constructed on the site deemed by the city manager or designee to be likely to attract graffiti (“graffiti attracting surfaces”).

     2.     Right of Access to Remove Graffiti. Applicant shall grant to city, in writing, the right of entry over and access to such property, upon twenty-four (24) hours’ posted notice, by authorized city employees or agents, for the purpose of removing or painting over graffiti on graffiti attracting surfaces previously designated by the city manager or designee. Such grant shall be made an express condition of approval and shall be deemed to run with the land.

     3.     Supply City with Graffiti-Removal Material. Applicant, and any and all successors in interest, shall, for a specified period of years after approval, provide the city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the painting over or removal of designated graffiti attracting surfaces.

     4.     Owner to Immediately Remove Graffiti. Owners, developers or other persons applying for subdivision maps shall, as a part of any conditions, covenants and restrictions covenant, which covenant shall run with the land, in a form satisfactory to the city, require that the owners of the lots shall immediately remove any graffiti placed on publicly viewable trees, rocks and structures thereon to the city’s satisfaction. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.170 Possession of graffiti implements.
     A.    It is unlawful for a minor to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement, except for the minor’s use under the supervision of the minor’s parent, guardian, instructor or employer.

     B.     It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while upon any real or personal property of the city, other than public highways, streets, alleys or ways, except as may be authorized by the city.

     C.     No person shall have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while in a public park, next to a public monument, public art display, other public property, including, without limitation, any playground, swimming pool, or recreational facility, or while near an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, sound wall, or similar type of public infrastructure.

     D.    It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while upon any public or private property, except as may be authorized by the owner. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.180 Furnishing to minors prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, give, exchange or in any way furnish any graffiti implement to a minor, except as provided in Section 8.08.170(A). (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.190 Graffiti implements—Display regulations.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation that offers to the public any graffiti implement for sale to fail to store or cause to be stored any graffiti implement in such a manner as to be accessible to the public without employee assistance. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

 

8.08.200 Vandalism and graffiti reward system fund.
     A.    City will establish a Yucaipa vandalism and graffiti reward system fund. All civil fines paid by violators of this chapter shall be placed in the fund. The fund may also receive monetary donations from citizens, businesses and other organizations. Unless otherwise directed by the city council, the city manager or designee shall direct the expenditure of monies in the fund, including, but not limited to, for rewards pursuant to subsection B of this section, for restitution to victims of graffiti vandalism, and to offset the costs of graffiti removal and abatement efforts.

     B.     The city may, from time to time, pay rewards in amounts established by the city council for information leading to the arrest and conviction or plea of guilty of any person for violation of California Penal Code Section 594 or 640.5, or any other applicable state statutes related to vandalism, including, but not limited to, graffiti.

     C.     No employee or official of the city shall be eligible for a reward pursuant to subsection B of this section.

     D.    Claims for rewards under subsection B of this section shall be in writing and filed with the city. Each claim shall specify the following information:

     1.     The date, location, and kind of property defaced with graffiti or vandalism;

     2.     The name of the person(s) who committed the defacement;

     3.     The circumstances under which the person making the claim has knowledge that the person(s) committed the defacement;

     4.     Documentary evidence, if any, indicating that the person(s) committed the defacement;

     5.     The name of the employee or official to which the person making the claim discussed the matter; and

     6.     That the person making the claim declares under penalty of perjury that the information in the claim is true and correct.

     E.     Payment of a reward pursuant to subsection B of this section shall only be made by the city after the arrest and conviction or plea of guilty by a person committing the graffiti for violation of California Penal Code Section 594, 640.5, or any other applicable state statutes related to vandalism, including, but not limited to, graffiti.

     F.     The person committing the graffiti shall be liable for the amount of any reward paid pursuant to subsection B of this section. If he or she is a minor, the parent or legal guardian of the minor shall be liable for the reward amount and other fines and costs as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2009)

Chapter 8.12 MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION PROGRAM
8.12.010 Findings.
     The city hereby finds and declares as follows:

     A.    The city is committed to protecting the public health and safety including air quality.

     B.     Mobile sources are a major contributor to air pollution in the South Coast Air Basin.

     C.     Air quality goals for the region established by state law cannot be met without reducing air pollution from mobile sources.

     D.    The South Coast Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) calls upon cities and counties to reduce emissions from motor vehicles consistent with the requirements of the California Clean Air Act of 1988 by developing and implementing mobile source air pollution reduction programs.

     E.     To the extent that such programs place demands upon the city’s funds, those programs should be financed by shifting the responsibility for financing from the general fund to the motor vehicles creating the demand to the greatest extent possible.

     F.     Section 44332, added to the Health and Safety Code by action of the California Legislature on September 30, 1990 (Chapter 90-1705), authorizes the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) to impose an additional motor vehicle registration fee to finance the implementation of transportation measures embodied in the AQMP and provisions of the California Clean Air Act.

     G.    Forty cents ($0.40) of every dollar collected under Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code shall be distributed to cities and counties located in the South Coast Air Quality Management District that comply with Section 44243 of the Health and Safety Code, based on the jurisdictions’ prorated share of population as defined by the State Department of Finance.

     H.    The city is located within the South Coast Air Quality Management District and is eligible to receive a portion of revenues from the motor vehicle registration fees upon adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     I.      The city, after careful consideration, finds and declares that the imposition of the motor vehicle registration fee by the SCAQMD to finance mobile source air pollution reduction programs, is in the best interests of the general welfare of the city and its residents. Therefore, the city deems it advisable to adopt the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 79 § 1, 1991)

 

8.12.020 Intent.
     This chapter is intended to support SCAQMD’s imposition of the vehicle registration fee and to bring the city into compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 44243 of the Health and Safety Code in order to receive fee revenues for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles. (Ord. 79 § 2, 1991)

 

8.12.030 Definitions.
     As applied in this chapter, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows:

     “City” means the city of Yucaipa, California.

     “Fee administrator” means the finance director of the city.

     “Mobile source air pollution reduction programs” means any program or project implemented by the city to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles pursuant to the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 79 § 3, 1991)

 

8.12.040 Administration of vehicle registration fee.
     A.    Receipt of Fee. Vehicle registration fees due pursuant to this chapter disbursed by the SCAQMD and remitted to the city shall be accepted by the fee administrator.

     B.     Transfer of Funds. Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the fee administrator shall be responsible for placement of such funds into a separate account as hereinafter specified.

     C.     Establishment of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund. The fee administrator shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account in a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of city funds. Interest earned by the account shall be credited to that account and shall be used to finance mobile source air pollution reduction programs.

     D.    Audits. The city consents to audits, at least once every two years, of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues. The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the SCAQMD. The district shall deduct any audit costs incurred from the city’s fee revenues. (Ord. 79 § 4, 1991)

 

8.12.050 Liberal construction.
     The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purposes, which are hereby found and declared to be in furtherance of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience. (Ord. 79 § 5, 1991)

Chapter 8.16 NUISANCES
8.16.010 Purpose.
     This chapter shall establish minimum maintenance standards for residential, commercial, industrial or institutional properties in order to protect and preserve health, safety and neighborhood integrity. (Ord. 114 § 1, 1993)

 

8.16.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Amusement arcade” means any business establishment in which there are more than ten mechanical or electronic play devices, as defined in this section, which are available for use by the public or business invitees, or both. Any business establishment that anticipates receipt of more than fifty (50) percent of its gross income from the sale of food and beverages, and which possesses a valid county health department permit to operate a restaurant, shall not be considered an amusement arcade for the purposes of this chapter.

     “Commercial poultry ranch” means any building, structure, enclosure or premises where poultry are kept or maintained for the primary purpose of producing poultry, eggs or meat for sale or other distribution. This term shall not apply to premises where less than one hundred (100) chickens are kept.

     “Community development director” means the community development director of the city or designee.

     “Failure to maintain” means failure to care for the exterior of the property, including, but not limited to, permitting excessive foliage growth that diminishes the value of surrounding properties, failing to take action to prevent trespassers or squatters from remaining on the property, or failing to take action to prevent mosquito larvae from growing in standing water or other conditions that create a public nuisance. This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2013, or such later date as the effectiveness of California Civil Code Section 2929.3 may be extended by the California legislature.

     “Fly breeding hazard” means the accumulation, existence or maintenance of any substance, matter, material or condition resulting or likely to result in the breeding of flies in an amount or manner such as to endanger public health or safety, or to create unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment and use of life and property by others.

     “Inoperative vehicle” means any vehicle that is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or any inoperative parts thereof, that is on public or private property.

     “Mechanical play device” or “electronic play device” (referred to generally herein as “devices”) means any machine, device or apparatus whether mechanically or electronically operated, including pool and billiard tables, the operation of which is made possible by the deposit or placement of any coin, slug, disk, card, key or any other article or device, into any slot, crevice or opening, or by the payment of any fee or consideration for its use or operation, and which involves the manipulation of hand levers, electronic releases or other buttons or levers in the conduct of the game. “Mechanical rocking horses” or other simulated animals or vehicles upon which young children are seated or which are ridden are not “mechanical play devices” or “electronic play devices” for the purposes of this chapter. Sections 8.16.050 through 8.16.070 also shall not apply to mechanical play devices or electronic play devices which are used in a residence for the amusement of the occupants and/or their guests and which are not used for commercial purposes or for the purpose of receiving revenue or income therefrom. Sections 8.16.050 through 8.16.070 shall further not apply to any vending machine so operated as to sell and deliver merchandise only, equivalent in market value to the value of the coins deposited without the payment or delivery or the promise of payment or delivery of anything except the merchandise therein kept for sale.

     “Operator” means the owner or lessee of the mechanical or electronic play device(s) who install(s), maintain(s) or service(s) them.

     “Owner” means any person having a legal or equitable interest in the property.

     “Person” means an individual, partnership, corporation, association or organization, or the agent of any of the foregoing.

     “Property” means any real property which is developed with structures, is vacant or is otherwise used for development purposes.

     “Proprietor” means the owner, lessee or operator of the business, or operation in which any mechanical or electronic play device is placed for use. Proprietor shall also include the officers, employees and agents of the proprietor.

     “Public nuisance” means any violation of the maintenance requirements contained herein causing an unsafe or hazardous condition.

     “Working days” includes Monday through Friday and shall not include weekends or holidays. (Ord. 284 § 2, 2008; Ord. 148 § 3(A), 1996; Ord. 141 § 3(A), 1996; Ord. 114 § 2, 1993)

 

8.16.030 Maintenance requirements for residences.
     Any person owning, renting, occupying or having charge of any single-family residence, or any two unit/three unit or four unit residence, shall maintain the property in accordance with the following minimum standards. Failure to comply with these minimum standards shall constitute a public nuisance.

     A.    Exterior Requirements.

     1.     Property shall be free of overgrown or dead vegetation, including but not limited to weeds, trees or limbs. Weeds include sage brush, dry grass, and any other brush or vegetation which attains extensive growth and which may become a fire menace when dry.

     2.     Property shall be free of trash, litter and debris, including but not limited to, packing boxes, scrap lumber, junk, salvage materials, appliances, machinery, equipment, broken or inoperable furniture, or any other personal property causing an unsafe or hazardous condition.

     3.     Property shall be free of inoperable or abandoned vehicles and parts of vehicles unless they are safely stored in a structure consisting of four walls and roof and not visible from the public right-of-way.

     4.     Walkways, driveways and other improved surfaces shall be maintained and in a safe condition.

     5.     Property shall be free from infestation of termites, insects, vermin or rodents causing an unsafe or hazardous condition.

     6.     Damage caused by any property owner or tenant thereof to public property i.e., sidewalks, curbs, gutter etc., shall be abated in a manner acceptable to the city and all costs shall be the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 114 § 3, 1993)

 

8.16.032 Maintenance requirements for vacant residences.
     A.    A legal owner shall maintain vacant residential property purchased by that owner at a foreclosure sale, or acquired by that owner through foreclosure under a mortgage or a deed of trust. The city may impose a civil fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for a violation. If the city chooses to impose a fine pursuant to this section, it shall give notice of the alleged violation, including a description of the conditions that gave rise to the allegation, and notice of the city’s intent to assess a civil fine if action to correct the violation is not commenced within a period of not less than fourteen (14) days and completed within a period of not less than thirty (30) days. The notice shall be mailed to the address provided in the deed or other instrument as specified in subdivision (a) of Section 27321.5 of the Government Code, or, if none, to the return address provided on the deed or other instrument.

     B.     The city shall provide a period of not less than thirty (30) days for the legal owner to remedy the violation prior to imposing a civil fine and shall allow for a hearing and opportunity to contest any fine imposed. The procedures set forth in Sections 1.13.09 through 1.13.15 of this code shall apply to any such hearing and request for hearing, except to the extent such procedures conflict with this section. In determining the amount of the fine, the city shall take into consideration any timely and good faith efforts by the legal owner to remedy the violation. The maximum civil fine authorized by this section is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day that the owner fails to maintain the property, commencing on the day following the expiration of the period to remedy the violation established by the city.

     C.     Subject to the provisions of this section, the city manager may establish different compliance periods for different conditions on the same property in the notice of alleged violation mailed to the legal owner.

     D.    Notwithstanding subsection B, the city may provide less than thirty (30) days’ notice to remedy a condition before imposing a civil fine if the city determines that a specific condition of the property threatens public health or safety and provided that notice of that determination and time for compliance is given.

     E.     Fines and penalties collected pursuant to this section shall be directed to local nuisance abatement programs.

     F.     The city may not impose fines on a legal owner under both this section and other property maintenance provisions of the Yucaipa Municipal Code.

     G.    This section shall only apply to residential property.

     H.    The rights and remedies provided in this section are cumulative and in addition to any other rights and remedies provided by law.

     I.      This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2013, or as such later date as the effectiveness of California Civil Code Section 2929.3 is extended by the California legislature. (Ord. 284 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.040 Maintenance requirements for multiresidential, commercial, industrial or institutional property.
     Any person owning, renting, occupying or having charge of multiresidential, commercial, industrial or institutional property shall maintain the property in accordance with the following minimum standards. Failure to comply with these standards shall constitute a violation of this chapter.

     A.    Exterior Requirements.

 

     1.     Property shall be free of overgrown or dead vegetation, including but not limited to weeds, trees or limbs. Weeds include seedlings, sage brush, dry grass, and .any other brush or vegetation which attains extensive growth and/or becomes a fire menace when dry.

     2.     Property shall be free of trash, litter and debris, including but not limited to, packing boxes, scrap lumber, junk, salvage materials, appliances, machinery, equipment, broken or inoperable furniture, or any other personal property causing an unsafe or hazardous condition.

     3.     All inoperative vehicles or any parts thereof shall be parked/stored within a structure with four walls and roof in approved manner.

     4.     Walkways, driveways and all improved surfaces shall be maintained in good repair and safe condition. Parking lot striping and handicapped markings and signage shall be maintained in good repair and safe condition.

     5.     Property shall be free from infestation of termites, insects, vermin or rodents causing an unsafe or hazardous condition.

     6.     Damages caused by any property owner or tenant thereof to public property i.e., sidewalks, curbs, gutter, etc. shall be abated in a manner acceptable to the city and all costs shall be the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 114 § 4, 1993)

 

8.16.050 Amusement arcades—Public nuisance.
     Amusement arcades which operate between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. are hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, and shall cease operation during those hours, subject to the following:

     A.    Abatement of premises declared a public nuisance by this chapter shall be subject to the following:

     Owners, operators and/or proprietors of amusement arcades may demonstrate voluntary abatement of the public nuisance by providing documentation of the following actions, provided in writing to the director of community development:

     1.     That affirmative actions have been taken to ensure that minors that are unaccompanied by either a parent or legal guardian are not present on the premises of the amusement arcade (inside or in the parking area), and that individuals are not loitering on the arcade premises after ten p.m. and until seven a.m. Affirmative action may be accomplished by providing documentation that the establishment provides additional security between the hours of ten p.m. and one hour after closing, consisting of at least one full-time licensed and bonded security guard;

     2.     That adequate maintenance is provided to ensure that litter does not accumulate in the parking area or in any other part of the premises on which the amusement arcade is located;

     3.     That measures have been established to ensure that customers of the amusement arcade conduct themselves in an orderly manner, and that the consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited inside and outside of the arcade on arcade premises;

     B.     In addition to any and all violations of the Yucaipa Development Code, a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or any condition of a use permit or license issued pursuant to this chapter, or any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is deemed and declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as such by the city. (Ord. 141 § 3(B), 1996: Ord. 114 § 5, 1993)

 

8.16.060 Conditional use permit required for expansion of amusement arcades.
     A.    Owners, operators and/or proprietors of existing amusement arcades may not increase the number of mechanical play devices or electronic play devices at any amusement arcade without first obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to the procedure, notice and hearing requirements specified in Section 83.030120 of the Yucaipa Development Code, and as further set forth hereinbelow.

     B.     For those locations that request permission to expand an existing amusement arcade, in addition to the criteria set forth in Section 83.030120, and without limitation, the following shall be considered in issuing a conditional use permit:

     1.     The use shall be reviewed to insure compatibility with adjacent uses and will not be detrimental to surrounding uses, nor will the surrounding uses be detrimental to the proposed location.

     2.     The spacing of devices within the use shall be reviewed so that there is ample space for players, spectators and for ingress and egress during play.

     3.     The factors set forth in Section 8.16.050 may be considered, but shall not be controlling in determining whether a conditional use permit shall issue. (Ord. 141 § 3(B), 1996; Ord. 114 § 6, 1993)

 

8.16.070 Posting and transfer of license or conditional use permit.
     A.    The license or permit required by this chapter shall be permanently and prominently posted at an amusement arcade, and shall not be covered or removed from the location during the period for which the license or permit is issued or the devices are operated.

     B.     No license or permit required by this chapter shall be transferable, nor shall it apply to any premises other than one to which it is issued. (Ord. 141 § 3(B), 1996; Ord. 114 § 7(A, B), 1993)

 

8.16.080 Commercial poultry ranches—Public nuisance.
     Commercial poultry ranches that operate without an approved manure management plan are hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and shall cease operations, subject to the following:

     A.    Abatement of premises declared a public nuisance by this section shall be subject to the following:

     Owners, operators and/or proprietors of commercial poultry ranches may demonstrate voluntary abatement of the public nuisance by providing documentation of the following actions, provided in writing to the director of community development:

     1.     All ranch operations shall at all times be conducted in accordance with the requirements of an approved Manure Management Plan. Said Manure Management Plan shall be prepared in accordance with the standardized format contained in Exhibit “A” attached to Ordinance No. 347 and incorporated herein by this reference, and it shall substantially address all of the items contained in the “Guidelines to Manure Management Plans” contained in Exhibit “B” attached to Ordinance No. 347 and incorporated herein by this reference. Each Manure Management Plan shall be submitted to the County Vector Control Program before December 1st of each year for review and approval no later than December 31st of each year with a copy submitted to the city of Yucaipa. All ranch operations shall employ the frequent cleanout method of manure management unless the city of Yucaipa and County Vector Control Program approve an equally effective method that also minimizes fly breeding hazards and excessive odors such as a cage free (ground operation) method except that the coning and drying method of manure management shall be prohibited.

     2.     Each Manure Management Plan shall be specifically tailored to minimize fly breeding hazards and excessive odors, and it shall include, but not be limited to, all of the following mandatory requirements, or appropriate alternatives, if it can be clearly demonstrated that such alternative measures will be equally effective in controlling excessive fly breeding and odors:

     a.     Ranch operations employing the frequent cleanout method of manure management shall remove manure from under poultry cages at least every seventy-two (72) hours (not including federal holidays) or more frequently if necessary to prevent larvae and pupae from completing their life cycles and emerging as adult flies. Whenever manure is removed from underneath poultry cages, larvae and pupae shall also be removed from the aisle and adjacent areas. The aisles and adjacent areas of the poultry housing shall be cleaned of feathers and other debris at intervals specified in the approved proposal to prevent larvae and pupae from completing their life cycles and emerging as adult flies. Manure removed from a ranch shall be managed and disposed of in a manner that will not cause a threat to the public health and safety from fly breeding at any other location.

     b.     The on-site storage of poultry manure (raw or processed) shall not exceed three days, and “thin-spreading” of raw poultry manure shall be prohibited. The manure will be removed from the subject property on an as-needed basis as it is expelled from the poultry houses and immediately transported to an authorized location other than the poultry ranch. In no case shall on-site storage of poultry manure (raw or processed) exceed seventy-two (72) hours (not including federal holidays) from the time the manure was produced and not from cleanouts that may occur pursuant to subdivision (2)(a).

     c.     Operable spray equipment shall be maintained on each ranch at all times, in addition to a minimum number of mechanical bait stations. The numbers and types of bait stations shall be determined by the County Vector Control Program.

     d.     An aggressive program to establish viable populations of “beneficial” organisms within any breeding place for flies. Said program should be developed in conjunction with the recommendations of the University of California Agricultural Extension, and it shall employ predatory organisms in sufficient numbers as to be readily apparent during all routine inspections.

     e.     Emergency manure management procedures to be implemented when excessive fly breeding has not been brought under control within the initial two-day notice of violation period.

     f.      A ranch capital improvement program which addresses technical and physical upgrades to each ranch in a five-year time frame that will reduce fly breeding hazards and excessive odors.

     B.     All poultry ranch operations shall employ the following standards for control of other fly breeding sources:

     1.     Dead poultry shall be removed from poultry houses at least every two days (not including federal holidays) and immediately disposed of by one of the following methods, unless otherwise approved by the County Vector Control Program and specified in the approved annual Manure Management Plan:

     a.     Placed in a fly-tight container or structure for the proper off-site removal. Containers and structures shall be kept clean to prevent fly breeding. Dead poultry shall be removed from the ranch at least every two days (not including federal holidays).

     b.     Placed in a fly-tight dead poultry disposal pit.

     2.     Waste eggs shall be disposed of by one of the following methods, unless otherwise approved by the County Vector Control Program and specified in the approved annual proposal:

     a.     Placed daily in a fly-tight dead poultry disposal pit.

     b.     Placed in a fly-tight container or structure and removed from the ranch at least every two days (not including federal holidays).

     In no event shall waste eggs be disposed of in manure underneath a poultry cage.

     3.     Spoiled, unused, and spilled feed shall be managed by one the following methods, unless otherwise approved by the County Vector Control Program and specified in the approved annual proposal:

     a.     Keeping feed storage areas dry.

     b.     Frequently removing and properly disposing of spoiled, unused and spilled feed.

     4.     Spent hens shall be disposed of by one of the following methods, unless otherwise approved by the County Vector Control Program and specified in the approved annual proposal:

     a.     Picked up by a rendering company.

     b.     Sold for any legal use.

     C.     In addition to any and all violations of the County Health Code, a violation of any of the provisions of this section, or any condition of a use permit or license issued pursuant to this section, or any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this section is deemed and declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as such by the city. (Ord. 347 § 1, 2016; Ord. 216 § 3, 2002; Ord. 148 § 3(B), 1996; Ord. 114 § 8, 1996)

 

8.16.090 Notification to property owner.
     Whenever the community development director finds, upon the recommendation of an authorized representative of the community development department, that a nuisance, as defined herein exists on any property located within the city, he or she shall notify the property owner on which the nuisance is located of the nuisance and direct that it be abated. The city shall make every effort to notify the lessee and/or occupant and/or any other person having charge or control of the property by posting or by certified mail of the existence of the alleged nuisance as described herein. The notification shall detail the violations and establish a reasonable abatement period or schedule which shall not be less than ten (10) days. The notice of intention to abate a public nuisance and hearing thereon which provides the date of the hearing and other information required may be included with this notice or may be sent separately. (Ord. 114 § 9, 1993)

 

8.16.100 Voluntary abatement of nuisances.
     The owner of any building, structure or property alleged to be a nuisance under the provisions herein, may abate the nuisance at any time within the abatement period provided herein. The owner shall advise the community development department of the abatement. Once so advised, the representative shall in-

 

spect the premises to insure that the nuisance has been abated. (Ord. 114 § 10, 1993)

 

8.16.110 Failure to voluntarily abate a declared nuisance.
     If an alleged nuisance is not properly abated within the period established under the provisions of this chapter, upon the concurrence of the code enforcement committee, the property owner, if not notified of the hearing date initially, shall be served with a written notice of a hearing on the abatement of a public nuisance, in accordance with provisions contained herein by the community development director or designee. (Ord. 114 § 11, 1993)

 

8.16.120 Notice of intention to abate the public nuisance and hearing thereon.
     The notice of hearing on the abatement of a public nuisance, referred to herein, shall give notice of the time, date and place of the hearing that shall be held by the city community development director or designee on the question of the determination of the public nuisance and the abatement of the public nuisance. The hearing shall be set for a date after the time afforded for the voluntary abatement has expired. The notice referred to in this section is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 114 § 12, 1993)

 

8.16.130 Authority to enter upon land.
     The community development director or designee may enter upon the land for the purpose of posting or serving the notices required by this chapter. (Ord. 114 § 13, 1993)

 

8.16.140 Service of notices and orders.
     Service of notices and orders required under this chapter shall be made by posting a notice in a conspicuous place on or in front of the property in question and by either one of the following methods:

     A.    By personal service on the owner(s) of record; or

     B.     By certified mail addressed to the owner(s) of the property at their last-known address. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be sent to the property address. Service shall be completed at the time of deposit into the United States mail. (Ord. 114 § 14, 1993)

 

8.16.150 Hearing by the community development director.
     At the time and place stated in the notice of hearing on the abatement of a public nuisance, issued pursuant to this chapter, the community development director shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests, and shall receive sworn testimony of owners, witnesses, city personnel, and interested persons relative to such alleged public nuisance and to any proposed abatement of such alleged nuisance. The hearing may be continued from time to time. (Ord. 114 § 15, 1993)

 

8.16.160 Hearing procedures.
     All hearings held pursuant to this chapter shall be recorded by an audio-recording device unless the city chooses to use a court reporter. The hearings need not be conducted according to technical rules of evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in a civil action in a California court of competent jurisdiction. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in a civil action. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. (Ord. 114 § 16, 1993)

 

8.16.170 Decision of the community development director on the abatement of a public nuisance.
     Following the hearing on the abatement of a public nuisance, the community development director shall consider all evidence and determine whether the property, in whole or in part, or any building, or structure thereon, constitutes a public nuisance as alleged. If the community development director finds that a public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to abate the nuisance, the community development director shall make a written order entitled “Order Finding and Ordering the Abatement of a Public Nuisance.” Said order shall set forth those findings, and order to owner to abate the nuisance. The order shall further inform the owner that the administrative and incidental costs and expenses incurred in abating the nuisance, and which are proved in accordance with provisions contained herein, shall be assessed against the property and shall result in a lien until paid. The order shall also specifically direct the owner to abate the nuisance by rehabilitation, repair or demolition in the manner set forth in the order. The order shall state that if the nuisance is not abated, it will be removed and abated by the city. The order shall state that the additional costs and expenses of removal and abatement by the city, including any additional administrative and incidental expenses, together with interest on the entire amount owing, shall also be assessed and result in a lien upon the property until paid. The order shall set forth the time within which the work shall be commenced and completed. The order shall inform the property owner of his or her right to appeal the order ordering liability for incidental and administrative expenses incurred and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance, to the city council pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 114 § 17, 1993)

 

8.16.180 Service of the abatement order.
     The community development director’s order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance shall be served upon the property owner, in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.16.140. (Ord. 114 § 18, 1993)

 

8.16.190 Voluntary abatement after order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance.
     The property owner may, at his own expense, remove and abate the nuisance as prescribed by the order prior to the expiration of the abatement period set forth in the order. If the property has been inspected by a represen-

 

 

tative of the community development director and the nuisance has been abated in accordance with the order, the community development director shall not remove or abate the nuisance, but may schedule a hearing pursuant to the provisions contained herein to determine the administrative and incidental costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating the public nuisance. (Ord. 114 § 19, 1993)

 

8.16.200 Abatement by the city.
     If a declared nuisance is not completely abated within the time prescribed in the order of the community development director or designee finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance, the community development department is authorized and directed to abate the nuisance by city forces or private contract in accordance with law. Furthermore, the community development director or designee is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for the purpose of removing and abating the nuisance. A search warrant or inspection warrant shall be obtained prior to any entry if the nuisance is not located in an open area or if the nuisance is not seizable without an intrusion into privacy. (Ord. 114 § 20, 1993)

 

8.16.210 Demolition.
     No building found to be a public nuisance shall be ordered demolished if it was built in accordance with the laws in effect at the time of construction unless it is found that, in fairness and in justice, there is no reasonable way other than demolition to correct such nuisance. (Ord. 114 § 21, 1993)

 

8.16.220 Notice of intent to demolish.
     A copy of any order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance, which requires abatement by demolition of any habitable structure or any building with a floor, four walls, a roof and which is larger that one hundred and twenty (120) square feet shall be immediately recorded with the San Bernardino County recorder’s office. (Ord. 114 § 22, 1993)

 

8.16.230 Record of expenses and costs for abatement.
     A.    The community development director or designee shall keep an account of the expenses and costs of removing and abating the nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done, and shall render a written, itemized report to the city manager, showing the costs and expenses of abating the nuisance including the city’s incidental and direct administrative expenses, less any salvage value relating thereto.

     B.     The community development director shall set the matter for hearing before the city manager. The city manager shall then determine the correctness and reasonableness of such expenses and costs.

     C.     A copy of the report shall be served in accordance with this chapter on the property owner, together with a notice of the time when the report shall be heard by the city manager for confirmation.

     D.    The term “incidental expenses” or “expenses” shall include but shall not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city in preparing notices, specifications, and contracts, in inspecting the work, legal fees, and other related costs.

     E.     The prevailing party in any proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter and associated with the abatement of a public nuisance shall be entitled to recovery of attorneys’ fees incurred in any such proceeding, in accordance with Section 1.12.030(C) of the municipal code. (Ord. 221 § 3, 2002; Ord. 114 § 23, 1993)

 

8.16.240 Hearing on the cost of abatement.
     At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the report, the city manager shall hear and consider the report of the costs and expenses of abatement, together with any objections or protests. The city manager may make any revision, correction or modification in the report as he/she deems just, after which the report, as submitted or modified, shall be confirmed. The decision of the city manager shall be final, subject only to an appeal as provided herein. The city manager shall serve a copy of his or her order entitled “Order Determining the Cost of Abatement of the Public Nuisance” upon the property owner, lessee, occupant and other person having charge or control of the property. This notice shall inform the recipients of their right to appeal the determination of costs to the city council pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 114 § 24, 1993)

 

8.16.250 Assessment of costs against property.
     The order determining the cost of abatement of the public nuisance shall constitute a special assessment against the respective parcel of land to which it relates and, upon recordation in the office of the San Bernardino County recorder of a notice of lien, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.

     A.    After confirmation and recordation, a copy of the lien shall be filed with the assessor and tax collector of San Bernardino County, in order that the county assessor may add the amounts of the assessments to the next regular tax bill levied against the respective parcel and, thereafter, the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as provided for ordinary municipal taxes, and shall be subject to the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency;

     B.     After recordation, the lien may also be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law;

     C.     The form for such notice of lien for recordation is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit B and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 114 § 25, 1993)

 

8.16.260 Violations.
     A.    No owner, lessee, occupant or other person having charge or control of any property shall fail to comply with any order of abatement served as provided in this chapter.

     B.     No person shall remove any notice or order posted as required by this chapter.

     C.     No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any representative of the city, or with any person who owns, leases or occupies property, when any of them are lawfully engaged in proceedings required under this chapter. (Ord. 114 § 26, 1993)

 

 

8.16.270 Grievance with final order—Appeals to city council.
     A.    An owner, occupant or other party who has a legal or equitable interest in the property may appeal the final order of the community development director finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter. The appeal must be in writing and must be filed with the city council no later than fourteen (14) days from the date of service of the community development director’s order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance, after which time the order is deemed final and may longer be appealed.

     B.     An owner, occupant or other party who has a legal or equitable interest in the property may appeal the final order of the city manager determining the cost of abatement. The appeal must be in writing and must be filed within fourteen (14) days from the date of service of the city manager’s order, after which the order determining the costs of abatement is final. Unless a timely appeal was filed pursuant to subsection A of this section, this appeal is limited to evaluating the fairness and accuracy of determining the costs of abatement pursuant to the provisions contained herein.

     C.     All written appeals shall be filed in triplicate with the city clerk and be accompanied by the required fee and they shall state the grounds for such appeal and the specific factual and/or legal errors committed by the community development director or designee or the city manager in issuing either the order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance or the order determining the cost of abatement. Any appeal shall contain:

     1.     A specific identification of the subject property;

     2.     The names and addresses of all appellants;

     3.     A statement of appellant’s legal interest in the subject property;

     4.     A statement, in ordinary and concise language, of the specific order or action protested and the grounds for appeal, together with all supporting material facts;

     5.     The date and signatures of all appellants;

     6.     The verification of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.

     D.    The city clerk shall then transmit one copy of each of the written appeal to the city manager and the community development director.

     E.     No later than twenty-one days from the date of the city manager’s receipt of the written appeal, he/she shall transmit to the city council the records of all hearings and copies of all papers submitted, and orders given. The community development director or designee shall also submit a written report, stating the factual and legal basis upon which the community development director or designee reached his or her decision.

     F.     Within forty-five days from the date of the city’s acceptance of the written appeal, the city council shall, after review of the entire record, the community development director or designee’s report, and appellant’s written appeal, and without further hearings on the matter, issue a resolution affirming, reversing or modifying, in whole or in part, either the order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance or the order determining the cost of abatement. Such resolution shall be served upon the owners, or other appellants in accordance with this chapter and shall inform the appellants of their right to file a judicial action to appeal the decision within thirty (30) days pursuant to this chapter. The decision of the city council shall be final.

     G.    On the date a written appeal is filed under this section, all proceedings in furtherance of the order appealed from shall be stayed until the final determination by the city council of the appeal, unless the community development director or designee finds that conditions on the property constitute an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of persons or property and must be abated immediately. (Ord. 114 § 27, 1993)

 

8.16.280 Limitation of filing judicial action.
     An owner or other person who has an interest in the property aggrieved at any proceeding taken on appeal by the city council affirming, reversing or modifying in whole or part either the order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance or the order determining the cost of abatement must bring judicial action to contest such decision within thirty (30) days after the date of such decision of the city council. Otherwise, all objections to such decision shall be deemed waived. (Ord. 114 § 28, 1993)

 

8.16.290 Alternatives.
     Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city council from ordering the city attorney to commence a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance as an alternative to the proceedings set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 114 § 29, 1993)

 

8.16.300 Emergency abatement.
     Whenever the community development director or designee, finds that conditions on a parcel of property constitute an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of persons or property, then the community development director or designee may order the summary abatement of the conditions constituting the threat without the notice or hearing described herein. A record of and a hearing to confirm the expenses and costs of abatement shall be held pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 114 § 30, 1993)

 

8.16.310 Community development director or designee—Authority.
     The community development director or designee, is designated as the proper city official to remove nuisances and vehicles or parts thereof considered abandoned within the city limits. (Ord. 114 § 31, 1993)

 

8.16.320 Violations—Penalties.
     No person shall violate any provision, or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violation of a specific provision of this chapter, every act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter is punishable as a misdemeanor. Where the city attorney determines that such action would be in the interest of justice, he/she may specify in the accusatory pleading that the offense shall be an infraction. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly.

     In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as such. Each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.

     All remedies herein are stated to be cumulative and nonexclusive. (Ord. 157 § 11, 1996: Ord. 114 § 33, 1993)

 

8.16.330 General penalty.
     Except in cases where a different punishment is specifically prescribed elsewhere in this chapter, every misdemeanor offense is punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both; and every offense prosecuted as an infraction shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same provision within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same provision within one year. Any person who has previously been convicted two or more times during any twelve (12) month period for any crime made punishable as an infraction shall be guilty of a misdemeanor upon the third violation. (Ord. 157 § 11, 1996: Ord. 114 § 34, 1993)

 

8.16.340 Criminal penalties.
     Any person or entity who violates any provision of the ordinance codified in this section shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; and a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second conviction within one year. The third and additional convictions within one year shall be punishable as misdemeanors and shall be punished by a fine not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months, or both, and such convicted person or entity may, in the discretion of the court, be adjudged, in addition to the above penalties, to be liable to the city for all necessary costs incurred in investigation, discovery, analysis, inspection, clean-up, and other actual costs incurred by the city or its agents pertaining to the violation.

     Each day or portion thereof in violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 165 § 2, 1997)

Chapter 8.20 REFUSE ABATEMENT
8.20.010 Adoption of county refuse abatement code.
     Chapter 3 of Division 2 of Title 2 of the county code, providing regulations and procedures for refuse abatement as amended by the county, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk is adopted by reference, subject to the additions, deletions and amendments set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 25 § 2, 1990)

 

8.20.020 Definitions.
     Whenever the term “county” or “county of San Bernardino” is named or referred to, the term “city” or “city of Yucaipa” shall be substituted therefor unless the content makes such construction inconsistent.

     Whenever the term “board of supervisor’s” is used, the term “city council,” “city of Yucaipa” will be substituted.

     Whenever the term “agency” is used it means the “San Bernardino County department of agriculture” or “county agricultural commissioner.”

     Whenever the term “board of appeals” or “appeals board” as used herein means the appeals board established in Section 23.034 of the county code who is designated as the board of appeals for this part. (Ord. 25 § 2, 1990)

 

8.20.030 Refuse abatement code amendments.
     The refuse abatement code is hereby amended and changed in the following respects:

     A.    Whenever the abatement code specifies county areas this will include the incorporated area within the city limits.

     B.     Section 23.031A. Delete this section in its entirety.

     C.     Section 23.033. Add the following statement to the notice to remove, “This weed abatement program is conducted by the county on behalf of the city pursuant to Ordinance 25 of the city of Yucaipa.” (Ord. 25 § 2, 1990)

 

8.20.040 Duty to abate refuse.
     It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant and person in control of any land or interest therein in the city to abate therefrom and from all sidewalks, parkways and from the untraveled portions of any public highway or public road easement adjacent to such, all noxious weeds or vegetation, dry grass, Russian thistle (tumbleweeds), dead trees, and all combustible rubbish or noxious vegetation that constitutes a fire, health or safety hazard which may endanger or injure neighboring property, or the health, safety or well-being of persons or property.

     In the case of any parcel or contiguous parcels under the same ownership upon which exists over five contiguous acres of vegetation which may constitute a fire hazard, the requirements of this section shall be satisfied if there is cleared, and maintained cleared, a forty (40) foot wide strip of land at the boundaries of such land, and through such land so that there shall not be any portion of the land larger than two and one-half acres which is not enclosed by itself within such a strip, which shall be a firebreak. The agricultural commissioner’s office may require firebreaks exceeding this forty (40) foot width or solid disking of larger than five acre parcels if larger breaks or solid disking are deemed necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and where the neighboring properties are very sensitive to the effects of a fire, including, but not limited to, schools, hospitals, mobilehome parks, retirement residences and chaparral/develop-ment interfaces. It shall be the landowner’s responsibility to notify the enforcing agency, in writing, if the landowner is desirous of utilizing those provisions for fire breaks as set forth in this section. (Ord. 163 § 3, 1997)

Chapter 8.24 REFUSE STORAGE
8.24.010 Statement of purpose and authority.
     The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the storage of generally nontoxic/nonhazardous wastes within this jurisdiction. (Ord. 163 § 12(A), 1997)

 

8.24.020 Definitions.
     “Garbage” includes, but is not restricted to, every accumulation of animal, vegetable or other material:

     1.     Resulting from the preparation and consumption of edible foodstuffs; or

     2.     Resulting from decay, dealing or storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruits and vegetables, including the cans, containers or wrappers wasted along with such materials; or

     3.     Such industrial, domestic and organic solid wastes or residue of animals sold for meat; or

     4.     Fruit, vegetable and animal matter from kitchens, dining rooms, markets, food establishments or any other place using, dealing in or handling meats, fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables, grains or other foodstuffs; or

     5.     Offal, or the carcasses of animals, fish or fowl.

     “Refuse” includes both garbage and/or rubbish as defined within this chapter.

     “Rubbish” includes, but is not restricted to, all putrescible and nonputrescible waste or debris such as paper, cardboard, grass, tree or shrub trimmings, rugs, straw, clothing, wood or wood products, crockery, glass, rubber, metal, plastic, construction waste and debris litter and other similar materials. (Ord. 240 § 2, 2005; Ord. 163 § 12(B), 1997)

 

8.24.030 Refuse removal.
     Refuse removal shall be in accordance with the following unless modified elsewhere in this code:

     A.    All refuse created, produced or accumulated in or about a dwelling, house or place of human habitation shall be removed from the premises at least once each seven-day period to an approved disposal facility.

     B.     All garbage created, produced or accumulated at hotels, restaurants, boarding houses or other business houses where refuse containing garbage is accumulated, shall be removed from the premises at least twice each seven-day period to an approved disposal facility. All other refuse shall be removed from the premises at least once each seven-day period to an approved disposal facility.

     C.     Code enforcement may require a greater number of collections per week upon finding that an unhealthful, unsightly or public nuisance condition is created by adhering to the minimum collection frequency. (Ord. 163 § 12(C), 1997)

 

 

8.24.040 Accumulation of rubbish prohibited.
     No person, owner, agent, entity or occupant of any premises, whether vacant or improved, shall allow any accumulation of refuse to remain thereon for longer than thirteen (13) consecutive days if such refuse is within four hundred (400) feet of any dwelling or commercial building, nor for more than four weeks if beyond said distance, nor for any period of time beyond that specified by code enforcement where code enforcement determines a public nuisance exists. (Ord. 163 § 12(D), 1997)

 

8.24.050 Storage of refuse.
     All refuse generated on a premises shall at all times be stored in approved containers and in a manner which complies with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 163 § 12(E), 1997)

 

8.24.060 Transportation of refuse (nonpermittees).
     All vehicles transporting refuse shall be adequately covered and/or otherwise equipped to prevent the blowing out of refuse, leaking of liquids from refuse, or refuse falling from the moving vehicle upon the roadway and adjacent properties. (Ord. 163 § 12(F), 1997)

 

8.24.070 Violations—Penalties.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 163 § 12(G), 1997)

Chapter 8.26 DIVERSION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE
8.26.010 Declaration of purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to promote the diversion of construction and demolition waste in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to meet the city’s obligations under the California Waste Integrated Management Act (Cal. Pub. Res. Code Section 4000 et seq.). (Ord. 333 § 1, 2014)

 

8.26.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:

     A.    “Applicant” means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, contractor, subcontractor, or any other person or entity whatsoever who is required to apply to the city for the applicable permits to undertake any construction or demolition, as herein defined, project within the city.

     B.     “Completion” means the earliest of the following dates: the date a temporary certificate of occupancy is issued by the city for a project, the date a certificate of occupancy is issued by the city for a project, or the date the final city inspection approving the project is completed.

     C.     “Construction” means the building, rehabilitation, remodeling, renovation, repair or enlargement of any facility or structure, or any portion thereof, and includes alterations or improvements to an existing structure.

     D.    “Construction and demolition waste” or “C&D waste” means used or discarded materials removed from premises during construction or renovation or a structure resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on any pavement, house, commercial building, or other structure.

     E.     “Covered project” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 8.26.050.

     F.     “Demolition” means any dismantling, intentional deconstruction or removal of any pavement, house, commercial building, or other structure.

     G.    “Divert,” “diverted” or “diversion” means to recycle, reuse or salvage, or a combination of recycling, reusing, and salvaging, C&D waste to avoid disposal in a landfill.

 

     H.    “Diversion requirement” means the percentage of construction and demolition waste for each project that must be diverted from landfills.

     I.      “Non-covered project” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 8.26.050.

     J.      “Project” means any activity that requires an application for a building or demolition permit or any similar permit from the city.

     K.    “Recycling” and “reuse” means the process of collecting, sorting, treating, and reconstituting C&D waste that would otherwise be disposed of in a landfill, for use as raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet industry standards.

     L.     “Renovation” means any change, addition or modification in an existing structure.

     M.    “Salvage” means the controlled removal of materials from a project for the purpose of reuse or storage for later reuse.

     N.    “Security deposit” means the deposit required as security for performance for covered projects to ensure that the applicant complies with the requirements of this chapter.

     O.    “Waste hauler” means a company that possesses a valid permit, franchise or contract with the city to collect and transport solid wastes from individuals or businesses for the purpose of recycling or disposal under the city’s name.

     P.     “Waste management and diversion plan” or “WMP” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 8.26.090.

     Q.    “Waste management plan compliance official” or “WMP compliance official” means the director of general services/city clerk, or designee.

     R.     “Waste management plan summary report” means a completed form submitted by an applicant for any covered project approved by the city for the purpose of compliance with this chapter. The form is submitted after completion of a project. (Ord. 333 § 1, 2014)

 

8.26.030 Diversion requirement.
     All covered projects shall reuse, recycle, or divert the minimum percentage amount of designated recyclable and reusable materials as set forth by city council resolution from landfills or disposal sites. (Ord. 333 § 1, 2014)

 

8.26.040 Diversion requirement exemption.
     A.    Application for Exemption. If an applicant for a covered project experiences circumstances that the applicant believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for a diversion requirement exemption at the time that he or she submits the waste management and diversion plan required under Section 8.26.060 of this chapter.

     B.     Meeting with Waste Management Plan (WMP) Compliance Official. The WMP compliance official shall review the information supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss feasible ways of meeting the diversion requirement. Based on the information supplied by the applicant, the WMP compliance official shall determine whether it is feasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement.

     C.     Granting of Exemption. If the WMP compliance official determines that it is infeasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirements, he or she shall determine the maximum feasible diversion rate for waste generated by the project and shall indicate the new diversion requirement that the applicant shall be required to meet, and will inform the applicant in writing of the new requirement. The applicant shall then have ten calendar days to resubmit another WMP, which is in compliance with the new diversion requirement. If the applicant fails to resubmit, or if the resubmitted WMP does not comply with Section 8.26.060, the WMP compliance official shall deny the WMP in accordance with Section 8.26.090. (Ord. 333 § 1, 2014)

 

8.26.050 Covered and non-covered projects.
     A.    Covered Projects. Except as specifically exempted pursuant to subsection B of this section, all construction, renovation and demolition projects within the city requiring a permit, in accordance to the covered project threshold as set forth by city council resolution, are required to divert the designated recyclable and reusable materials from landfills. Concurrent permits at the same site shall be considered “one” covered project.

     B.     Non-Covered Projects. The following shall not constitute covered projects for purposes of this chapter:

     1.     A project that is under the threshold as set forth by city council resolution.

     2.     The re-roofing of any residential or commercial structure that does not include the tear-off of any portion of the existing roof (excluding concrete roof tiles and wood shake roofing).

     3.     Residential pool, spa, and retaining wall projects.

     4.     Projects in which only plumbing, electrical, or mechanical permit is required.

     5.     Seismic tie-down projects.

     6.     Projects where no structural building modifications are required.

     7.     Emergency demolition projects required to protect public health or safety as determined by the WMP compliance official.

     8.     Other projects that the WMP compliance official determines shall produce no, or only a de minimis quantity of, C&D waste.

     9.     Installation of pre-fabricated patio enclosures and covers where no foundation or other structural building modifications are required.

     10.   Installation of pre-fabricated accessories such as signs or antennas where no structural building modifications are required.

     11.   A project for which a valid building or demolition permit has been lawfully issued by the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     C.     Compliance with this chapter shall be listed as a condition of approval on any building or demolition permit issued for a covered project. (Ord. 333 § 1, 2014)

 

8.26.060 Waste management and diversion plan required.
     A.    Prior to starting the project, every applicant shall submit a properly completed waste management and diversion plan (WMP) to the WMP compliance official on a form prescribed by the city, as a portion of the building and/or demolition permit process.

     B.     The WMP compliance official is authorized to create guidelines setting forth the information to be included in a WMP, as well as the form thereof. At a minimum, the WMP shall delineate all of the following:

     1.     The C&D waste to be generated by the covered project.

     2.     The square footage of the proposed project.

     3.     The estimated weight of the C&D waste to be generated by the covered project, listed by material types.

     4.     The estimated weight of the C&D waste to be generated by the covered project to be diverted, listed by material types.

     5.     The facility or facilities to which C&D waste will be taken, listed by material types.

     6.     The estimated weight of C&D materials that will be landfilled.

     7.     Project proposed diversion method.

     C.     Pursuant to Yucaipa Municipal Code Chapter 8.28, only the city’s franchise waste hauler is authorized to provide roll-off bins and bin service. (Ord. 333 § 1, 2014)

 

8.26.070 Administrative fee.
     As part of any application for, and prior to the issuance of, any building or demolition permit that involves the creation of construction and demolition debris, the applicant shall pay to the city a cash fee sufficient to compensate the city for all expenses incurred in reviewing the WMP and reviewing performance of the plan. The amount of this fee shall be set forth in a resolution of the city council. (Ord. 333 § 1, 2014)

 

8.26.080 Security deposit required.
     Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, every applicant shall, as part of the application for a building or demolition permit for a covered project, post a security deposit with the city in the amount set forth by resolution of the city council. The security deposit shall be remitted at the same time the permit application is filed, and shall be in the form of cash or cash equivalent, such as a cashier’s check, money order, or credit card payment to the city. (Ord. 333 § 1, 2014)

 

8.26.090 Review of the waste management and diversion plan.
     A.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no building or demolition permit shall be issued by the city for any covered project prior to approval of the WMP by the WMP compliance official. Approval shall not be required if emergency demolition is required to protect public health or safety in accordance with Section 8.26.050(B)(7) of this chapter.

     B.     The WMP compliance official shall approve a WMP only if:

     1.     The WMP provides all the information set forth in Section 8.26.060 and complies with all guidelines as may be established by the WMP compliance official; and

     2.     The WMP indicates that the minimum diversion requirement, as established by council resolution, of all C&D waste generated by the project shall be diverted (or new diversion goal set in accordance with the applicant’s approved diversion exemption request); and

     3.     The applicant has paid the security deposit required by Section 8.26.080. (Ord. 333 § 1, 2014)

 

8.26.100 On-site practices.
     A.    During the term of the covered project, the applicant shall recycle and reuse the required percentage of waste, and keep records of the tonnage or other measurements approved by the city that can be converted to tonnage amounts. The WMP compliance official will evaluate and may monitor each covered project to determine the percentage of waste salvaged, recycled or reused from the covered project as well as the tonnage of materials that was subject to disposal. For covered projects including both construction and demolition, diversion of materials shall be tracked and measured separately. To the maximum extent feasible, project waste shall be separated on-site if this practice increases diversion. For construction and/or demolition projects, on-site separation shall include salvageable materials (e.g., appliances, fixtures, plumbing, metals, etc.) and dimensional lumber, wallboard, concrete and corrugated cardboard.

     B.     All on-site roll-off containers must be provided by the city’s franchise waste hauler.

     C.     Applicants shall make every structure planned for demolition available for salvage, recycling, and reuse prior to demolition and to recover the maximum feasible amount of salvageable, recyclable, and reusable materials prior to demolition. Salvaged, recyclable, or reusable materials from the demolition shall be counted towards the diversion requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 333 § 1, 2014)

 

8.26.110 Reporting requirement.
     A.    Within thirty (30) calendar days following the completion of the demolition phase of a covered project, and again within thirty (30) calendar days following the completion of the construction phase of a covered project, the applicant shall, as a condition precedent to release of security deposit, submit documentation to the WMP compliance official reporting on compliance with the requirements of Sections 8.26.030 and 8.26.060. The documentation shall consist of a final completed “WMP report summary” showing actual waste tonnage data, supported by original or photocopies of receipts and weight tags or other records of measurement from recycling companies, landfill and/or disposal companies. In addition, where materials were recovered or salvaged recyclables and reusable materials were given away or sold on the premises, or removed to a reuse facility for storage or sale, the applicant shall provide written supporting documentation such as letters of donation, bills of sale or other information that shall clearly document the final destination of the recovered or salvaged materials, the quantity or items that were recovered or salvaged, and the recipient of those materials. Receipts and weight tags will be used to verify whether waste generated from the covered project has been or are to be recycled, reused, salvaged or disposed. The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all designated recyclable and reuse waste salvaged or disposed are measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available.

     B.     To the extent practical, all construction and demolition waste shall be weighed in compliance with all applicable regulatory requirements. For construction and demolition waste for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose. If a covered project involves both demolition and construction, the report and documentation for the demolition project must be submitted and approved by the WMP compliance official before issuance of a building permit for the construction phase of a covered project.

     C.     The security deposit posted pursuant to Section 8.26.080 shall be forfeited if the applicant does not timely meet the reporting requirements of this section, and the requirements of this section shall remain applicable notwithstanding such forfeiture of the security deposit. (Ord. 333 § 1, 2014)

 

8.26.120 Refund of security deposit.
     A.    The WMP compliance official shall authorize the refund of a security deposit in the following circumstances:

     1.     If the WMP compliance official determines the security deposit was erroneously collected by the city;

     2.     If the building and/or demolition permit application for the covered project is withdrawn or cancelled before any work has begun; or

     3.     If the applicant timely submits the WMP summary and supporting documentation in compliance with Section 8.26.110, demonstrating the diversion requirement required by Section 8.26.030 or 8.26.040 (if applicable) has been met.

     B.     The WMP compliance official may authorize a partial refund of a security deposit if the applicant timely submits the WMP summary in compliance with the requirements of Section 8.26.110, but less than the minimum diversion requirement is met. The partial refund shall not exceed a percentage of the security deposit that is equal to the demonstrated diversion rate for C&D waste generated by the covered project.

     C.     The WMP compliance official may return all of the security deposit if the diversion requirement of Section 8.26.030 or 8.26.040 (if applicable) is not met, but the WMP compliance official has determined that the applicant has demonstrated a good faith effort to comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 333 § 1, 2014)

 

8.26.130 Forfeiture of security deposit.
     If the WMP compliance official determines that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, or the applicant fails to timely submit a complete and accurate WMP summary including supporting documentation pursuant to Section 8.26.110, the deposit shall be forfeited to the city. (Ord. 333 § 1, 2014)

 

8.26.140 Appeals.
     Upon payment of an appeal fee set forth in a resolution of the city council, the applicant may appeal to the city manager a decision of the WMP compliance official to deny an exemption or withhold all or any portion of a security deposit. Notice of appeal from the decision of the WMP compliance official must be filed with the city manager’s office within ten calendar days from the date of the ruling of the WMP compliance official. The notice of appeal shall set forth in concise language the particular decision or decisions complained of and the reason why the person feels aggrieved thereby. Determinations subject to appeal would include, but not necessarily be limited to: (1) the granting or denial of an exemption; (2) whether the applicant has acted in good faith; and (3) the amount of deposit to be released. Failure to file a notice of appeal and pay the required appeal fee within the time prescribed herein constitutes a waiver of any objection to the decision(s) of the WMP compliance official and such decision(s) shall be final. If an appeal is timely filed, the decision of the city manager is final. (Ord. 333 § 1, 2014)

 

8.26.150 Enforcement.
     Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of Title 1 of this municipal code, including administrative penalties pursuant to Chapter 1.13, and state law.

     In addition to any remedies provided in Title 1, in the event that an applicant who is subject to the requirements set forth in this chapter fails to comply with Section 8.26.060 (Waste management plan) prior to commencement of work on a covered project, the project shall be subject to a “stop work” order issued by the city until such WMP is submitted as required and has been approved by the WMP compliance official pursuant to Section 8.26.090. (Ord. 333 § 1, 2014)

Chapter 8.28 WASTE MANAGEMENT
8.28.010 Definitions generally.
     For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. Words and phrases not ascribed a meaning by this section shall have the meaning ascribed by Division 30, Part 1, Chapter 2 of the Public Resources Code, Sections 40105 through 40200.

     “Act” means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, as it may be amended from time to time.

     “Authorized recycling contractor,” as used in this chapter, means a person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity authorized under and by virtue of a contract with the city to collect recyclable waste material in the city.

     “Bulky waste” means and includes, but not by way of limitation, discarded white goods (i.e., major household appliances), furniture, tires, carpets, mattresses and similar large items which cannot be placed in a covered container.

     “City” means the city of Yucaipa.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city or the city manager’s duly authorized representative.

     “Collection” means the act of collecting solid waste, recyclables or compostables at the place of generation by an approved collector.

     “Collector” means, depending upon the context in which used, either the city, another local agency or a contractor.

     “Commercial bins” means bins provided by a collector, one and one-half cubic yards capacity or greater designed for the deposit of refuse, charged at commercial rates.

     “Commercial premises” means all premises in the city, other than residential premises, where refuse is generated or accumulated, however, mobilehome parks may be included.

     “Container” means any bin, vessel, can or receptacle used for collecting solid wastes for removal, whether owned by the collector, property owner or tenant.

     “Contractor” means a person, persons, local agency, firm or corporation franchised, authorized or permitted by the city to provide refuse, recycling or compostable collection services within the city.

     “Curb collection” means the collection of refuse placed at a location not more than five feet from the street, curb or alley abutting the occupied residence.

     “Designated recycling collection location,” as used in this chapter, means the place designated in the contract between the city and an authorized recycling contractor from which the authorized recycling contractor has contracted to collect recyclable waste material. This location will customarily be the curbside of a residential neighborhood or the service alley of an commercial enterprise.

     “Detachable bin” means a metal container designed for mechanical emptying and provided by the city or contractor for the accumulation and storage of refuse.

     “Disposal” means the complete operation of treating and disposing of the accumulation of garbage, rubbish waste material and the product or residue arising from such treatment.

     Dwelling, Multiple. “Multiple dwelling” means a residential building designed for occupancy by more than one family, consisting of more than one living unit, even where there is no more than one water meter on such premises but excluding hotels, motels, and lodges.

     Dwelling, Single-Family. “Single-family dwelling” means a detached building designed for occupancy by one family and consisting of a single living unit, including condominium units.

     “Franchise” means the right and privilege to: (1) collect; (2) transport to landfill or other licensed disposal facilities as determined by city; and/or (3) recycle from collected solid waste and recyclable all solid waste kept, generated and/or accumulated within the city from the franchise area as defined in the franchise agreement. Any franchise is subject to all of the provisions of the franchise agreement, and to any rights held by any other solid waste enterprise holding rights pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 49520.

     “Franchise fee” means the fee or assessment imposed by the city on contractor solely because of its status as contractor. The term “franchise fee” does not include:

     1.     Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both businesses and contractor or their services but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against contractor or its customers); or

     2.     Requirements, reimbursements, charges or fees incident to the awarding, administering, enforcing, transfer or renewal of a franchise, including payments of bonds, consultants, administrative expenses, fees described in this title, attorneys’ fees, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages.

     “Garbage” means the putrescible animal, fish, fowl, food, fruit, bakery goods, or vegetable matter resulting from the preparation, storage, processing, handling, decay, distribution, manufacturing or consumption of such substance, except suet, tallow, bones or meat trimmings that are not rejected by the owner or producer as worthless or useless.

     “Garbage hauler” means any person, firm or corporation that transports garbage from a central collection point to a commercial garbage feeding hog ranch.

     “Gross revenues” means any and all revenue or compensation in any form derived directly or indirectly by the contractor, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents and any person or entity in which the contractor has a financial interest, from the collection of refuse pursuant to a franchise, including, but not limited to, monthly customer fees for collection of refuse and recyclables, special pickup fees, bin and drop box rental and collection fees, fees for redelivery of bins and drop boxes, and revenue from the sale of recyclables, without subtracting franchise fees or any other cost of doing business; provided, however, that the amount of gross revenues may be reduced by the amount of any bad debts incurred by the contractor or refunds returned to customers; provided, that the revenue with respect thereto has been included in the computation of gross revenues.

     “Hazardous refuse” means any compound, mixture, substance or article which, if improperly used, handled, transplanted, processed or stored, may constitute a hazard to health or may cause damage to property and contaminate the water table by reason of being explosive, flammable, poisonous, corrosive, radioactive or otherwise harmful to the environment, including wastes or refuse defined as hazardous under state or federal law.

     “Health officer” means the city manager or designated representative.

 

     “Industrial waste” means solid waste resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations, including, but not limited to, wholesale and volume food processing waste, boiler house cinders, lumber scraps and shavings, metal scraps and shavings, and chemical wastes.

     “Noncombustible rubbish” means ashes, bottles, broken crockery, glasses, tin cans and other metallic substances and like or similar articles or substances that will not incinerate.

     “Operator receipts” means that portion of gross revenues which is retained by the operator, i.e., all receipts except landfill and franchise fees.

     “Place” or “premises” means every dwelling house; dwelling unit; apartment house or multiple dwelling building; trailer or mobilehome park; store; restaurant; rooming house; hotel; motel; office building; department store; manufacturing, processing, or assembling shop or plant; and every other place or premises where any person resides, or any business is carried on or conducted within the city or any other site upon which garbage, wastes, or refuse is produced or accumulates.

     “Property owner” means the person, persons, partnership or corporation to whom the taxes on the property are assessed, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the county of San Bernardino, or alternatively, from such other records of the county assessor or tax collector as contain more recent information.

     “Recyclable waste material,” as used in this chapter, means discarded materials such as, but not limited to, newspapers, cardboard and other paper products, glass, plastic, aluminum and metal cans, and compostables which are separated from other garbage or refuse for the purpose of recycling.

     “Recycling,” as used in this chapter, means the process of collecting and turning used products into new products by reprocessing or remanufacturing them.

     “Refuse” includes both garbage and rubbish and means putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste or debris, except sewage, whether combustible or noncombustible, and includes garbage and rubbish defined in this section.

     “Refuse collector” means any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of collecting refuse from residential and commercial establishments.

     “Residential” includes single-family residences, including apartments and condominiums, but does not include hotels or motels.

     “Rubbish” means nonputrescible unwanted or discarded material or debris, either combustible or noncombustible including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, grass, tree or shrub trimmings, straw, clothing, wood or wood products, crockery, glass, rubber, metal, plastic, construction or demolition material, recyclable, compostables, bulky wastes, and other municipal solid waste.

     “Single-family residential” includes single-family residences and any other residences that do not require bin services.

     “Small generator” means the occupants of a residential unit who regularly generate quantities of rubbish which can be held within a container equivalent to thirty-two (32) or sixty-four (64) gallons.

     “Solid waste or waste matter” means “rubbish” as defined in this section.

     “Standard residential refuse container” means a container of a size, design and weight prescribed by the city council by resolution, for single-family residential solid waste collection, designed and manufactured for the accumulation and storage of residential refuse. The top diameter of the container shall in no case be smaller than the diameter of the receptacle at the bottom.

     “Tax roll” means the assessment roll upon which general taxes of the city are collected by the county.

     “Tax roll billing” means the collection of single-family residential refuse fees, and any associated penalties and interest, on tax roll.

     “Yard waste” means all leaves, cuttings and trimmings from trees, shrubs and grass. Yard waste does not include heavy or bulky articles such as trees, tree limbs or logs. (Ord. 373 § 1, 2019; Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.020 Provision of service.
     The city shall provide for or furnish integrated waste management services relating to collection, transfer and disposal of refuse, recyclables and compostables within and throughout the city. Such services may be furnished by any one or combination of the following:

     A.    City officers and employees;

     B.     Contractors franchised or licensed by the city; or

     C.     Agreement with another local agency. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.030 Manner, time and frequency of collection.
     The city council may establish by resolution, the manner in which integrated waste management services are provided within the city, specifying the hours, days and frequency of collection. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.040 Categories.
     The city council may determine by resolution, waste management collection categories, i.e., residential, single-family residential, multifamily residential, commercial, industry, special, special event, household hazardous waste recycling, and other; and may make or impose collection requirements which vary for such categories. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.050 Refuse collection service— Mandatory.
     Every person who owns and every person who occupies any developed real property within the city, whether at a residential, commercial or industrial location, or otherwise shall make or cause to be made with the city’s authorized agent, appropriate arrangements for regular refuse collection services and it is unlawful for any such person to fail, refuse or neglect to do so. An occupant of property shall be deemed to have complied with this section if the owner of the property has caused to be made such appropriate arrangements for collection of refuse upon all portions of the property occupied by the occupant. It is further unlawful, and a public nuisance, for any person to occupy or inhabit any property within the city for which appropriate arrangements have not been made and kept in full force and effect for regular refuse collection services. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.055 Mandatory commercial recycling/diversion.
     A.    For purposes of this section, “business” means a commercial or public entity including, but not limited to, a firm, partnership, proprietorship, joint-stock company, corporation, or association that is organized as a for-profit or nonprofit entity, strip mall, school, school district, special district, federal, state, local, regional agency or facility. “Business” also includes a multifamily residential dwelling or mobilehome park of five or more units.

     B.     On or before July 1, 2012, any business generating four or more cubic yards of solid waste per week and any multifamily residential dwelling of five or more units shall reuse, recycle, compost, or otherwise divert its commercial solid waste from disposal by taking one, or any combination, of the following actions:

     1.     Source separate recyclable materials from the solid waste being discarded and subscribe with the city’s franchise hauler, for the pickup of the recyclable materials separately from the solid waste to divert the recyclable materials from disposal.

     2.     Source separate recyclable materials from the solid waste and self-haul them to a certified materials recovery facility (MRF) or other mixed waste processing facility for diversion from disposal.

     a.     Each business subject to this section that does not subscribe with city’s franchise hauler for pick-up of its recyclable materials shall be responsible for ensuring and demonstrating its compliance with the requirements of this section to the city manager or designee with satisfactory proof of acceptable levels of waste diversion on a quarterly basis (March, June, September and December).

     b.     To comply with subsection B of this section, property owners of multifamily complexes may require tenants to source separate their recyclable materials. Tenants must source separate their recyclable materials as required by property owners of multifamily complexes subject to this section.

     C.     The city shall implement a commercial solid waste recycling program that consists of education, outreach and monitoring of businesses, that is designed to divert commercial solid waste from businesses.

     D.    Nothing in this section is intended to prevent or limit the existing right of any business to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of its recyclable materials as provided by Section 41952 of the Public Resources Code. (Ord. 314 § 1, 2012)

8.28.057 Mandatory commercial organics recycling/diversion.
     A.    For purposes of this section, “business” means a commercial or public entity including, but not limited to, a firm, partnership, proprietorship, joint-stock company, corporation, or association that is organized as a for-profit or nonprofit entity, strip mall, school, school district, special district, federal, state, local, regional agency or facility. “Business” also includes a multifamily residential dwelling or mobilehome park of five or more units.

     B.     For purposes of this section, “organic waste” means food waste, green waste, landscape and pruning waste, nonhazardous wood waste, and food-soiled paper waste that is mixed in with food waste.

     C.     On or before September 1, 2018, any business generating four or more cubic yards of organics waste per week and any multifamily residential dwelling of five or more units generating four or more cubic yards of green waste per week shall recycle, compost, or otherwise divert its commercial solid waste from disposal by taking one, or any combination, of the following actions:

     1.     Source separate organic waste from the solid waste being discarded, and subscribe with the city’s franchise hauler for the pick-up of the organic materials separately from the solid waste to divert the materials from disposal.

     2.     Source separate organic waste from the solid waste and self-haul them to a certified organic processing and recycling facility for diversion from disposal.

     a.     Each business subject to this section that does not subscribe with the city’s franchise hauler for pick-up of its organic materials shall be responsible for ensuring and demonstrating its compliance with the requirements of this section to the city manager or designee with satisfactory proof of acceptable levels of organics recycling on a quarterly basis (March, June, September and December).

     b.     To comply with subsection C of this section, property owners of multifamily complexes may require its contracted landscapers to recycle the green waste materials and provide satisfactory proof that the materials are being properly recycled.

     D.    The city’s franchise hauler shall implement a commercial organics recycling program that consists of education, outreach and monitoring of businesses, that is designed to divert organic materials from businesses.

     E.     Nothing in this section is intended to prevent or limit the existing right of any business to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of its organics materials as provided by Section 41952 of the Public Resources Code. (Ord. 370 § 1, 2018)

 

8.28.060 Fees, franchises and permits.
     A.    Pursuant to Division 30, Part 3, Chapter 8 of the Public Resources Code Sections 41900 et seq., the city may issue one or more contracts, permits or franchises and may levy fees upon contractors and premises for refuse collection, transfer and disposal, and the collection and transfer of recyclable and compostables. Such fees may include charges for the use of dumpsters, landfills and may include costs of preparing and implementing source reduction and recycling elements and integrated waste management plans. The city may also impose and collect from its contractor, permittee or franchisee a fee for the long-term right to use the city streets, as compensation for the grant of a right-of-way to provide vital public services with a degree of permanence and stability. The city may determine to collect all or part of such charges on the tax roll, or by such other means as the council may elect, whether or not delinquent.

     B.     City council may by resolution, waive permit or franchise fees for recyclers and collectors of compostables. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.070 Residential refuse collection franchises, contracts and permits.
     A.    The city council may award one or more franchises, contracts and/or permits for refuse collection from all or a portion of residential properties in the city. Any such franchise, contract or permit shall be granted by the city council by resolution, upon a determination that the public convenience and necessity are served by the award of a franchise, contract or permit.

 

     B.     The franchise, contract or permit shall be granted on such terms and conditions as the city council shall establish in its sole discretion. At a minimum, the franchise, contract or permit shall provide as follows:

     1.     Residential collection rates by categories (e.g., dwelling, single-family; dwelling, multiple; small generator);

     2.     A franchise fee to be paid to the city for a residential franchise as a percentage of operator receipts. The percentage shall be adopted by the city council by resolution;

     3.     The franchisee shall be required to cooperate with city in solid waste generation studies, waste stream audits, and to implement measures to achieve the city’s solid waste and recycling goals mandated by the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.080 Commercial refuse collection franchises, contracts and permits.
     A.    The city council may award one or more franchises, contracts and/or permits for refuse collection from commercial properties (including industrial, governmental, institutional, mobilehome parks and all other nonresidential). Such franchise, contract or permit shall be granted by the city council by resolution, upon a determination that the public convenience and necessity are served by the award of the franchise, contract or permit.

     B.     The franchise, contract or permit shall be granted on such terms and conditions as the city council shall establish in its sole discretion. At a minimum, the franchise, contract or permit shall provide as follows:

     1.     Commercial collection rates set according to different classes of commercial rates, based on volume, frequency of collection, and waste stream composition.

     2.     A franchise fee to be paid to the city for commercial franchises as a percentage of operator receipts. The percentage shall be adopted by the city council by resolution.

     3.     The franchisees shall be required to cooperate with city in solid waste generation studies, waste stream audits, and implementing measures to achieve the city’s source reduction, recycling, and waste stream diversion goals mandated by the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.090 Hazardous waste collection franchise contracts and permits.
     A.    The city council may award additional franchises, contracts and/or permits for hazardous waste collection from commercial properties including industrial, governmental, institutional and all other nonresidential properties. Such franchise, contract or permit shall be granted by the city council by resolution, upon a determination that the public convenience and necessity are served by the award of the franchise, contract or permit.

     B.     The franchise shall be granted on such terms and conditions as the city council shall establish in its sole discretion. Any such franchise shall be granted by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.100 Permits.
     No person shall construct or operate a solid waste management facility including but not limited to a materials recovery facility, landfill, composting facility, or buy-back recycling center without a permit issued by the city, upon satisfying all city requirements for land use and other approvals. Fees for such permits shall be set by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.110 Liability for fees.
     A.    Every person or property owner required to arrange for refuse collection or the collection of recyclables or compostables shall be liable for the fees and charges for such collection, whether or not collection services are utilized, except as otherwise provided herein. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.115 Collection of solid waste collection service charges for single-family residential service.
     Pursuant to the provisions of Division 5, Part 3, Chapter 6, Article 4 of the Health and Safety Code of the State (commencing with Section 5470), as may be amended from time to time, and subject to the exceptions hereinafter set forth, the solid waste collection service charges for single-family residential service shall be levied as an annual charge in an amount computed in conformance with this chapter, and collected for each fiscal year on the tax roll in the same manner, by the same persons, and at the same time as, together with and not separately from, its general taxes, provided that in any year the city council may by resolution provide an alternative procedure for collection of the solid waste collection service charges. For any fiscal year that all or a portion of the solid waste collection service charge is not collected on the tax roll, the city may either: (1) collect all or a portion of the solid waste collection service charge for such year on the tax roll in the following fiscal year or years; or (2) bill the user in the same manner as the solid waste collection service charges for commercial and multi-family residential services. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2019)

 

8.28.120 Collection fees.
     A.    Every property owner in the city who has the occupancy, charge or control of any place or premises, within the city, where any refuse accumulates, shall pay, or cause to be paid, to the city or its authorized contractor a fee in such amounts and in such manner as shall be established or required by resolution of the city council for the service of having such refuse collected and removed from the place or premises. In the case of single-family residential service, the property owner of record shall be responsible for payment of the fees pursuant to Section 8.28.115. In the case of multi-family dwelling and commercial properties, the property owner of record shall be responsible for payment of the fees in the amount and in accordance with the procedures established by resolution.

     B.     For multi-family dwelling and commercial rental units, including mobile home parks, nothing in this section is intended to prevent an arrangement, or the continuance of an existing arrangement, under which payments of refuse fees are made by a tenant or tenants, or any agent, on behalf of the owner. However, any such arrangement will not affect the property owner’s obligation to make payment of refuse fees to the city or its contractor. (Ord. 373 § 3, 2019; Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.130 Fees to be based on types of occupancies—Types of occupancies defined.
     The fees to be paid for the service of having refuse, garbage and recyclable collected and removed by occupants or other persons having charge or control of any place or premises in the city shall be based on the type of occupancy and use of the place or premises in the city. The different occupancies and uses are defined as follows:

 

 

 

     A.    Commercial Use. Premises upon which is located any type of business requiring a business license under the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances and resolutions of the city.

     B.     Residential Use. Premises upon which is located one or more dwelling units. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.140 Mobilehome parks and trash collection.
     The city has addressed the issue of trash collection within mobile home parks in its rent stabilization ordinance which indicates that park owners may charge residents separately for refuse services or incorporate it into rent. If the service was heretofore incorporated into the monthly rent and the park owner desires to extract this service from rent and bill separately then, the rent charged to the coach owner must be reduced by the same initial amount. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.150 Refuse collection fee a debt.
     The refuse collection fee shall be a civil debt owing or due to the city or its authorized agent or contractor from the occupant or property owner required to have service under this chapter.

     An invoice for refuse collection service unpaid thirty (30) days after mailing, is considered delinquent. A penalty of ten percent shall be charged, and an additional one and one-half percent per month shall be charged until the charges and penalties are paid in full.

     The city or its authorized agent or contractor may pursue collection of delinquent accounts through collection agencies, small claims courts, or any other means provided by law, and may recover reasonable attorney’s fees and costs as permitted by law. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.160 Collection procedure for delinquent accounts— Creation of lien.
     Any fees authorized pursuant to this chapter which remain unpaid after the delinquent date as set forth herein may be collected by the city as provided in this section.

     A.    The city council shall cause a report of delinquent refuse fees to be prepared periodically. The council shall fix a time, date and place for hearing and report and any objections or protests thereto.

     B.     The city council shall cause notice of hearing to be mailed to the property owners listed on the report not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing.

     C.     At the hearing, the city council shall hear any objections or protests of property owners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees. The city council may make such revisions, corrections or deletions to the report as it deems just, after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed.

     D.    The delinquent fees set forth in the report as confirmed shall constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of land, and may be placed as a lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees plus legal fees and administration costs. A certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the city clerk, or auditor appointed by the city council, for the current assessment roll. The lien created attaches upon recordation, in the office of the county recorder, of a certified copy of the resolution of confirmation. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of city ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessment. (Ord. 139 § 2, 1995; Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.170 Containers—Location.
     It is the duty of every person designated under Section 8.28.050 in possession, charge, or control of any place within the city in or from which refuse accumulates or is produced, to keep in a suitable place, containers capable of holding without spilling all refuse which would ordinarily accumulate on the premises between the time of two successive collections. The suitable place shall be the location defined by the city’s development code, zoning code or general plan, and generally out of direct view from the adjoining public street. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.180 Use of containers.
     A.    Every person designated under Section 8.28.050 who is in charge of residential or commercial premises shall deposit or cause to be deposited all refuse and/or recyclable in standard containers or bins as approved by the city manager and the collector.

     B.     No person shall maintain or place for collection any container not in conformance with the standard container or bin designated by the city.

     C.     No container shall be delivered or provided by grantee to a location not authorized by this chapter or the city’s development code.

     D.    No container shall be placed adjacent to a street or public right-of-way for collection service more than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the normal collection time.

     E.     Containers shall be removed from the street or right-of-way location within twelve (12) hours after collection.

     F.     Dead animals and bulky waste shall not be set out for collection. Bulky waste shall be collected only during annual cleanups or by contractual arrangements between the resident or business and the contractor.

     G.    Tree trimmings and brush shall be cut into four-foot lengths and tied bundles of not larger than twenty-four (24) inches in diameter for ease in pickup.

     H.    All residential solid waste must be placed out at the curb pickup site by six a.m. on the designated pickup day.

     I.      It shall be the duty of every person served to keep the refuse receptacle used in the service of such person in a clean and sanitary condition.

     J.      Any yard waste must be placed in a separate container, as specified by the city manager. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.190 Unlawful acts.
     It is unlawful for any person to place refuse in, or to otherwise use the refuse containers of another person. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.200 Frequency of removal.
     A.    Persons in charge of the day to day operation of properties other than commercial food preparation establishments, shall make arrangements to have removed, not less frequently than once a week, from the property upon which the residence or residences are located, all refuse on the premises.

     B.     Every person in charge of commercial food preparation establishments, shall cause all refuse to be removed from the property not less frequently than twice a week.

     C.     The city manager may specify the frequency of collection of refuse created, produced or brought upon the premises of commercial or multifamily residential premises, and the size and number of bins required.

     D.    Collection shall be made only between the hours of six a.m. and five p.m. of any day, Monday through Saturday. Commercial pickup may begin at five a.m. if the commercial location is not adjacent to residential uses. Earlier pickup time may be authorized only upon prior written approval of the city manager which shall include requirements for the contractor to notify the affected customers prior to implementing the change.

     E.     In order to prevent problems of traffic, noise, wear and tear on the highway, or other problems having the potential to adversely affect health, safety or the environment, which may develop in any specific area as a result of solid waste collection, the city manager may regulate the routes, intervals, delivery points and times for collection by all contractors operating within the city. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.210 Containers—Located for collection.
     During the hours for collection, residential containers shall be placed at the curb or right-of-way for collection and shall be accessible for mechanized pick-up. Commercial bins shall be accessible to the contractor. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.220 Public nuisance designated.
     The keeping of refuse in containers or bins other than those prescribed by this chapter, or the keeping upon premises of refuse which is offensive, obnoxious or unsanitary is unlawful, constitutes a public nuisance and may be abated in the manner now or hereafter provided by law for the abatement of nuisances. It is unlawful, and a public nuisance, for any person to occupy, inhabit, or maintain any property within the city for which appropriate arrangements have not been made and kept in full force and effect for regular refuse removal services. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.230 Removal of refuse.
     No person, other than the person in charge of any premises, or the person authorized by law to remove any container or bin from the location where the container was placed by the person in charge of storage or collection, shall remove any refuse or recyclable waste material from any container or bin, or move the container or bin from the location in which it was placed for storage or collection, without prior written approval of the person in charge of such premises.

     No person other than those authorized by the city shall gather, collect or remove any refuse, waste or recyclable materials, convey or transport any refuse, waste or recyclable material in, along or over any public street, alley or highway in the city, or take any refuse, waste or recyclable material from any receptacle in which the same may be placed for collection or removal, or interfere with or disturb any such receptacle, or remove any such receptacle, or remove any such receptacle from any location where the same is placed by the owner thereof, except as follows:

     A.    Contractors or builders removing debris, rubbish and trash from construction sites;

     B.     Any person holding a valid city business license to engage in the nursery or gardening business, or to any person removing shrubbery, grass, tree cuttings, tree trimmings or other agricultural debris from any property owned or occupied by such person;

     C.     Any person removing industrial wastes, or any person removing large or oversized items of rubbish from their premises;

     D.    Any person removing animal feces from their own property or any person hauling feces with a valid city business license. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.240 Bulky waste.
     No person shall place bulky waste adjacent to a street or public right-of-way for collection or removal purposes without prior approval and arrangements with the collector. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.250 Containers intended primarily for pedestrian use.
     It is unlawful for any person to place or deposit residential, institutional, commercial, industrial, special or hazardous waste in any container placed upon the public street by public authority, and meant primarily for the disposal of refuse by pedestrians using the sidewalk. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.260 Refuse burning.
     No person shall burn any refuse within the city, except in an approved incinerator or transformation facility or other device for which a permit has been issued by the appropriate public official, and which complies with all applicable permits and other regulations of air pollution control authorities, and provided any such act of burning in all respects complies with all other laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.270 Franchise—Applicability.
     At such times as one or more franchises for collection covering all or part of the city is in force, it is unlawful for any person other than the franchisee or its agents and employees, to collect any refuse or recyclable waste material for hire from premises covered by the franchise. This section shall not, however, be deemed to apply to the following persons:

     A.    Any persons holding valid city business license to engage in the nursery or gardening business and collecting and disposing of shrubbery, grass, tree cuttings, tree trimmings or other agricultural debris;

     B.     Any person removing shrubbery, grass, tree cuttings, tree trimmings or other agricultural debris from any property owned or occupied by the person; or

     C.     Hazardous or special waste haulers. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.280 Special collections.
     The city council may authorize, and subscribers to a refuse collection service may request, special collections of such things as discarded furniture, white goods, Christmas trees, and other items too large to fit in standard containers; city-wide cleanups; and household hazardous waste round-ups, subject to city council approval, and the payment of rates established by the city council, by resolution. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.290 Contractor equipment.
     Each contractor shall provide sufficient collection equipment in accordance with the terms of the contract with the city authorizing such contractor to provide collection, transfer and disposal services. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.300 Trucks—Standards.
     Any truck used for the collection or transportation of waste matter shall be leak proof and equipped with a close-fitting cover which shall be affixed in a manner that will prevent spillings, droppings or blowing of any refuse upon the public right-of-way during collection or transportation. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.310 Trucks—Maintenance.
     All trucks used for collection or transportation of refuse shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, neatly and uniformly painted, and shall carry a shovel, broom and fire extinguisher. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.320 Trucks—Identification.
     The owner of each truck used for collection or transportation of refuse shall have the owner’s name, telephone number and truck number printed on each side of all trucks in letters not less than five inches high. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.330 Trucks—Cleaning.
     All refuse-conveying trucks shall be washed, cleaned and disinfected both on the inside and outside at least weekly, or more frequently if necessary to protect public health. The outside of all such trucks shall be kept free from refuse at all times. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.340 Containers—Condition.
     The collector shall maintain in good repair and, as necessary, replace containers and bins furnished to customers. Containers shall be cleaned, as necessary, to control vector problems. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.350 Trucks—Noise.
     The noise level for the collection vehicles during the stationary compaction process shall not exceed seventy-five (75) decibels at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the collection vehicle and at an elevation of five feet from the horizontal base place of such vehicles. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.360 Authorized dump sites.
     Each person, firm or corporation collecting and disposing of solid waste refuse shall deposit such solid waste only at disposal or dumping sites, recycling or composting facilities as approved by the city manager, and shall not deposit, leave, dump, drop, place or otherwise dispose of such refuse or other waste upon any street, alley, waterway or other unauthorized or unimproved lot or any other place within the city. Such person, firm or corporation shall report the type, quantity, volume, and weight of refuse removed, to the city manager, at such times as the manager may specify. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.370 Spills.
     In transporting refuse any person, firm or corporation shall take any and all necessary steps to guarantee that refuse is not scattered. Each person, firm or corporation shall be responsible for cleaning up refuse spilled or dumped during removal or transport within the city. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.380 Misdemeanor.
     Violation of Sections 8.28.360 and 8.28.370 shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.390 Ownership of recyclable waste material.
     Upon placement of recyclable waste material at a designated recycling collection location for collection by an authorized recycling contractor, the recyclable waste material shall become the property of the authorized recycling contractor. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.400 Unauthorized collection of recyclables prohibited.
     During the twenty-four (24) hour period commencing at six p.m. on any day preceding a day designated for collection of recyclable waste material, no person, other than the city or its authorized recycling contractor, shall remove recyclable waste material which has been placed at a designated recycling collection location. Any and each such collection in violation hereof from one or more designated recycling collection locations during the twenty-four (24) hour period shall constitute a misdemeanor and a separate and distinct offense punishable in accordance with Section 8.28.470. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.410 Right of individual to dispose of recyclable waste material.
     Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of an individual person, organization or other entity to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of recyclable waste material, provided that any such disposal is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.420 Enforcement—Authority.
     The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of Sections 8.28.390 through 8.28.410. This authority shall be in addition to the authority granted to police officers pursuant to the municipal code ordinances of the city. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.430 Civil action by authorized recycling contractor.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of an authorized recycling contractor to bring a civil action against any person who violates Section 8.28.400, nor shall a conviction for such violation exempt any person from a civil action brought by an authorized recycling contractor. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.440 Unlawful dumping.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or dump solid waste of any kind whatsoever upon any property, within the city, or to cause, suffer or permit such solid waste to be placed, deposited, or dumped upon any property, in the city, without first having obtained a conditional use permit pursuant to the zoning laws of the city, as now or hereinafter amended, or pursuant to any other zoning law that may be hereinafter adopted in the place and stead of the zoning laws of the city.

     B.     Enforcement. Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5, the director of planning and any city code enforcement officer are authorized to enforce the provisions of this section and as well as those of California Penal Code Sections 374, 374a, 374.2, 374.3, 374.4, 374d, 374.7, and 375; California Government Code Section 68055 et seq.; and

California Vehicle Code Sections 23111 and 23112. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.450 Special permits in hardship cases.
     Where practical difficulties make it impossible or extremely difficult to carry out the strict letter of this chapter with respect to any particular premises, special written permits may be issued by the city authorizing exceptions from the provisions of this chapter, subject to such terms and conditions as deemed necessary to protect the public health and safety so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public health and safety secured, and substantial justice done.

     A.    Exception to Container Placement for Residential Use. In cases where the property consists of large parcels over two and one-half acres or where the lot or residence is extremely removed from the street, an exception to Section 8.28.170 may be granted waving the placement of standard containers, provided, that:

     1.     The containers are screened from the street as required by the city’s development code;

     2.     The city’s code compliance officer validates the necessity of such an exception.

     B.     Variance to Small Business Owners. In cases where property owners have a business located within the city, residential waste removal fees may be waived if:

     1.     The owner can effectively use the remaining capacity of the container located at the business or residential waste;

     2.     The business has a current city license.

     C.     Variance to Handicapped. All handicapped individuals upon showing handicapped status are entitled to free carry out to the collection vehicle. (Ord. 301 § 1, 2010; Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.460 Cleanup responsibility.
     Until picked up by a collector, each person shall be responsible for the cleanup of any and all refuse which that person has generated, dumped, spilled or otherwise loose or littered, notwithstanding human or animal interference with bins or containers (whether or not standard containers were used), wind or other natural forces, and whether during storage, collection, removal or transfer. The city or contractor shall be responsible for any refuse spilled during its storage, collection, removal or transfer. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

 

8.28.470 Violation.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, violations of this chapter are punishable as set out in Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 119 § 2, 1993)

Chapter 8.30 SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF NUISANCE VEHICLES
8.30.010 Nuisance vehicles.
     Any vehicle used to illegally dump refuse in violation of Section 8.28.440 is declared a nuisance, and the vehicle shall be enjoined and abated as provided by this chapter. Any person or his or her servant, agent, or employee who owns, leases, possesses, or maintains any vehicle (hereinafter referred to as the “property”), used for any of the purposes or acts set forth in this section is guilty of a nuisance. (Ord. 228 § 2, 2004)

 

8.30.020 Declaration by court.
     Upon proof that the property was used for any of the purposes set forth in Section 8.28.440, the court shall declare the property a nuisance and order that the property be forfeited, sold, and the proceeds distributed as set forth in Section 8.30.090. (Ord. 228 § 2, 2004)

 

 

8.30.030 Right, title and interest in property.
     All right, title and interest in any property described in Section 8.30.020 shall vest in the city upon commission of the act giving rise to the nuisance under this chapter. (Ord. 228 § 2, 2004)

 

8.30.040 Process.
     Vehicles subject to forfeiture under this chapter may be seized by any peace officer upon process issued by any court having jurisdiction over the property. Seizure without process may be made if any of the following situations exist:

     A.    The seizure is incident to an arrest or a search under a search warrant.

     B.     There is probable cause to believe that the property was used in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 228 § 2, 2004)

 

8.30.050 Receipts.
     Receipts for vehicles seized pursuant to this chapter shall be delivered to any person out of whose possession such vehicle was seized, in accordance with Section 1412 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 228 § 2, 2004)

 

8.30.060 Evidence.
     Property seized pursuant to Section 8.30.040, where appropriate, may be held for evidence. The city attorney shall institute and maintain the proceedings. (Ord. 228 § 2, 2004)

 

8.30.070 Forfeiture.
     A.    Except as provided in subsection G of this section, if the city attorney determines that the factual circumstances do warrant that the vehicle described in Section 8.30.010 is subject to forfeiture, the city attorney shall file a petition for forfeiture with the superior court of San Bernardino County.

     B.     A petition for forfeiture under this section shall be filed as soon as practicable, but in any case within one year of the seizure of the property which is subject to forfeiture.

     C.     The city attorney shall cause a notice of the seizure and of the intended forfeiture proceedings, as well as a notice stating that any interested party may file a verified claim with the superior court of San Bernardino County, to be served by personal delivery or by registered mail upon any person who has an interest in the seized vehicle. Whenever a notice is delivered pursuant to this section, it shall be accompanied by a claim form as described in Section 8.30.080 and directions for the filing and service of a claim.

     D.    An investigation shall be made by the Yucaipa police department as to any claimant to a vehicle whose right, title, interest, or lien is of record in the Department of Motor Vehicles or appropriate federal agency. If the Yucaipa police department finds that any person, other than the registered owner, is the legal owner thereof, and such ownership did not arise subsequent to the date and time of arrest or notification of the forfeiture proceedings or seizure of the vehicle, it shall forthwith send a notice to the legal owner at his or her address appearing on the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles or appropriate federal agency.

     E.     All notices shall set forth the time within which a claim of interest in the property seized or subject to forfeiture is required to be filed pursuant to Section 8.30.080. Trial shall be before court or jury. The presiding judge of the superior court shall assign the action brought pursuant to this chapter for trial.

     F.     With respect to vehicles described in Section 8.30.010 for which forfeiture is sought and as to which forfeiture is contested, the city of Yucaipa shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used as set forth in Section 8.28.440. Trial shall be before court or jury. The presiding judge of the superior court shall assign the action brought pursuant to this chapter for trial.

     G.    The city attorney may, pursuant to this subsection, order the forfeiture of vehicles seized under this chapter. The city attorney shall provide notice of the proceedings under this subsection, including:

     1.     A description of the vehicle;

     2.     The date and place of seizure;

     3.     The violation of law alleged with respect to forfeiture of the property;

     4.     The instruction for filing and serving a claim with the city attorney pursuant to section and time limits for filing a claim.

     H.    If no claims are timely filed, the city attorney shall prepare a written declaration of forfeiture of the vehicle to the city and dispose of the property in accordance with Section 8.30.090. A written declaration of forfeiture signed by the city attorney under this section shall be deemed to provide good and sufficient title to the forfeited property. The city attorney ordering forfeiture pursuant to this section shall provide a copy of the declaration of forfeiture to any person who received notice of the forfeiture proceedings.

     I.      If a claim is timely filed, then the city attorney shall file a petition for forfeiture pursuant to this section within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the claim. (Ord. 228 § 2, 2004)

8.30.080 Interest claim.
     Any person claiming an interest in the vehicle seized pursuant to Section 8.30.040 must, at any time within ten days from the date of the notice of seizure, file with the superior court of San Bernardino County a claim, verified in accordance with Section 446 of the Code of Civil Procedure, stating his or her interest in the property. An endorsed copy of the claim shall be served by the claimant on the city attorney within ten days of the filing of the claim.

     A.    If a verified claim is filed, the forfeiture proceeding shall be set for hearing on a day not less than thirty (30) days therefrom.

     B.     The hearing shall be before the court.

     C.     The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply to proceedings under this chapter unless otherwise inconsistent with the provisions or procedures set forth in this chapter. However, in proceedings under this chapter, there shall be no joinder of actions, coordination of actions, except for forfeiture proceedings, or cross-complaints, and the issues shall be limited strictly to the questions related to this chapter. (Ord. 228 § 2, 2004)

 

8.30.090 Sale of vehicles.
     In all cases where vehicles seized pursuant to this chapter are forfeited to the city, the vehicles shall be sold, or if cash is paid as a settlement in lieu of forfeiture of the vehicle, then the proceeds of sale shall be distributed and appropriated as follows:

     A.    To the bona fide or innocent purchaser, conditional vendor, mortgagee or lien holder of the property, if any, up to the amount of his or her interest in the property, when the court or city attorney declaring the forfeiture orders a distribution to that person.

     B.     To the city for all expenditures made or incurred by it in connection with the publication of the notices set forth in Section 8.30.070, and the sale of the vehicle, including expenditures for any necessary repairs, storage, or transportation of any vehicle seized under this chapter.

     C.     The remaining funds shall be distributed to the city of Yucaipa.

     D.    All the funds distributed to the city pursuant to subsection C of this section shall not supplant any funds that would, in the absence of this subdivision, be made available to support the law enforcement and prosecutorial efforts of this agency. (Ord. 228 § 2, 2004)

Chapter 8.32 FIREARMS
8.32.010 Discharge of firearms.
     It is unlawful for any person to fire, shoot or discharge any rifle or pistol, or to discharge a slug from a shotgun which slug has a maximum diameter greater than one-half of the bore of the shotgun within the city. (Ord. 163 § 2(A), 1997)

 

8.32.020 Shotguns and rifles in restricted areas.
     It is unlawful for any person to have in his possession or under his control a rifle with a shell in the chamber or magazine or a shotgun with a slug in the chamber or magazine within the city, and for any person to have in his possession or under his control a shotgun with a shell in the chamber or magazine within the city. (Ord. 163 § 2(B), 1997)

 

8.32.030 Exemptions.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any peace officer in the regular discharge of his duties; nor to any officers or employees of the city acting in their official capacity or within the scope of their employment upon city property in compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations governing the use of firearms and with the approval of the city council; nor to persons engaged in the protection of crops or livestock; nor to any contest conducted by and under the supervision of a bona fide rifle or pistol organization at a public shooting gallery or rifle and pistol range; nor to discharge of bow and arrows at any archery course or rifles or pistols at any rifle or pistol range; provided that, the location and construction of such public gallery or such rifle and pistol range or archery course must first be approved by the city council; and provided further that, approval of any such public shooting gallery or rifle and pistol range or archery course may be canceled by the council whenever in its judgment public safety or welfare may require such cancellation; nor shall the provisions of this chapter apply to any person in the due protection of life or property. (Ord. 163 § 2(C), 1997)

 

8.32.040 Purchase of firearms.
     No person except a parent or guardian shall purchase from, sell, exchange, give, lend or furnish to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, a revolver or pistol of any description, shotgun or rifle, which may be used for the explosion of cartridges, or any airgun; “B-B” gun, gas-operated gun or spring gun, or any knife or knives having the appearance of a pocketknife, the blade or blades of which can be opened by a flick of a button, pressure of the handle or other mechanical devices, or any instrument, toy or weapon commonly known as a “sling slot,” or any bow made for the purpose of throwing or projecting missiles of any kind by any means whatsoever, whether such instrument is called by any name set forth above or by any other name. Any such weapon possessed in violation of this chapter may be confiscated by any peace officer. (Ord. 163 § 2(D), 1997)

 

8.32.050 Prohibiting firearms—Possession by minors.
     No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall have in his possession, care, custody or control, any of the articles mentioned in Section 8.32.040 of this chapter except within his own domicile or except when accompanied by and under the immediate supervision of a parent, guardian, or responsible adult. This section shall not apply to any person possessing a valid California hunting license. (Ord. 163 § 2(E), 1997)

 

8.32.060 Disposition of confiscated firearms.
     Every peace officer taking a weapon used in violation of this chapter, shall deliver the same to the sheriff to be held by him until the final determination of the prosecution for the offense, and upon the finding of guilt it shall then be the duty of the sheriff on a first offense to return the weapon to the owner and on a second offense the sheriff is authorized to confiscate and destroy it. (Ord. 163 § 2(F), 1997)

 

8.32.070 Throwing of missiles.
     It is unlawful for any person to throw a snowball, ice or any missile or object whatsoever, at or into an automobile or other vehicle at any time when such vehicle is in motion, or when such vehicle is occupied by one or more persons. (Ord. 163 § 2(G), 1997)

 

8.32.080 Retail licenses.
     The community development director of the city shall be the licensing authority for the city responsible for accepting applications and granting licenses under the provisions of California Penal Code, Section 12071. The director shall collect an annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each license issued pursuant to Penal Code Section 12071. License fees collected under this section shall be deposited in the city general fund. (Ord. 163 § 2(H), 1997)

Chapter 8.36 DISASTER RELIEF—EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
8.36.010 General purposes.
     The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the preparedness and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the city in the event of an emergency or disaster; the direction of the emergency disaster functions of the city with the county and all other public agencies, corporations and organizations, and affected private persons. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.020 Expenditures.
     Any expenditures made by the city in connection with emergency disaster activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.030 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Local emergency” shall mean the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial limits of a county, city and county, or city, caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, or earthquake or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of that political subdivision and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat, or with respect to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage requires extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the California Public Utilities Commission.

     “State of emergency” means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions and disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the state caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, the governor’s warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy or conditions causing a “state of war emergency,” which conditions, by reason of the magnitude, are, or are likely to be, beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of any single county, city and county, or city and require the combined forces of a mutual aid region or regions to combat, or with respect to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage requires extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the California Public Utilities Commission.

     “State of war emergency” means the condition which exists immediately, with or without proclamation of the governor, whenever this state or nation is attacked by an enemy of the united states, or upon receipt by the state of a warning from the federal government indicating that such an enemy attack is probable or imminent.

     Other terms used herein shall have the meanings as used in the California Emergency Services Act. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.040 Disaster council established.
     The city of Yucaipa, “disaster council” is hereby created and shall consist of the following individuals; provided, however, that the disaster council shall not exceed fifteen (15) members at any time:

     A.    The mayor of the city, who shall chair the disaster council;

     B.     The director of disaster services who shall be the city manager or shall be designated by the city manager and who shall serve as vice-chair of the disaster council;

     C.     The assistant director of disaster services for the city at such time as an assistant is appointed by the city manager.

     D.    Such chiefs of emergency service as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city adopted pursuant to this chapter.

     E.     Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the coordinator of the office of emergency services with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.045 Disaster council powers and duties.
     It shall be the duty of the Yucaipa disaster council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the council’s chair or, in the absence of the mayor from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the council’s vice-chair. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.050 Disaster corps.
     The city “disaster corps” consists of all officers and employees of the city and its agencies, together with all volunteers and all groups, organizations and persons commandeered under the provisions of the California Emergency Services Act and this chapter, with all equipment and material publicly owned, volunteered, commandeered or in any way under the control of the aforementioned personnel, for the support of the aforementioned personnel in the conduct of disaster operations. The disaster corps shall be composed of such elements as are provided for in the disaster operations plan of the city. The officers of the city shall have the authority and duty to plan for mobilization, operation and support of that segment of the disaster corps for which each is responsible as provided for in the disaster operations plan of the city, and to conduct the activities thereof. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.060 Disaster corps—Activation.
     The disaster corps shall be activated and shall function as a disaster relief body, only:

     A.    Upon the existence of a “state of war emergency;”

     B.     Upon the declaration by the governor of the state, or of persons authorized to act in his or her stead, of a “state of emergency” affecting and including the city;

     C.     Upon the declaration of a “local emergency” by the city council of the city, or by persons herein authorized to act in its stead. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.070 Disaster director.
     The city manager shall be the disaster director (the “director”). In the city manager’s absence or inability to act, the city manager shall automatically be succeeded as the director by the officials and persons named for this purpose, and in the order specified, in the disaster operations plan of the city. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.075 Disaster director—Powers and duties.
     The director shall have the following powers and duties:

     A.    To request the city council to proclaim the existence of a “local emergency” if said council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if said council is not in session, subject to ratification by the city council at the next regular meeting of the city council. If such action is not ratified by the city council as provided herein, the proclamation of the director shall have no further force or effect;

     B.     To request the city council to request the governor to proclaim the existence of a “state of emergency” if said city council is in session, or to issue such request if said council is not in session, subject to ratification by the city council at the next regular meeting of the city council, when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

     C.     To make key appointments, and to make all other appointments or delegate the making of the same, within the disaster corps;

     D.    To represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matter pertaining to emergencies as defined herein;

     E.     During the existence of a “state of war emergency”, as defined in Government Code Section 8558(a), or the proclaimed existence of a “state of emergency” by the governor or the director of the State Office Emergency Services, or a “local emergency” affecting the city, to:

     1.     To control and direct the activities of the disaster corps and all other facets of the emergency organization of the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

     2.     To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, that such rules and regulations must be ratified at the earliest practicable times by the city council;

     3.     To use all city resources for the preservation of life and property and to reduce the effects of the disaster;

     4.     To direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of the city and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility which may arise between them;

     5.     To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other property found needed and lacking for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

     6.     To delegate elected and appointed officials of the city such duties and authority as the director deems necessary;

     7.     To require emergency services of any city officer or employer and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the city, or a “state of war emergency” to command the aid of as many citizens of the city as the director deems necessary in the execution of the duties required of him/her by this chapter; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers;

     8.     To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency;

     9.     To execute all of the ordinary powers of the city manager; all of the special powers conferred upon the director by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan adopted by the city council; all powers conferred upon the director or city manager by statute or agreement approved by the city council; and any other lawful authority granted to the director in that capacity or the capacity of city manager;

     10.   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by any condition proclaimed an emergency as provided herein;

     11.   To exercise complete authority over the city and to exercise all police power vested in the city by the constitution and general laws.

     F.     In addition to the powers granted herein, the director shall have such powers incidental to the performance of his or her duties as shall be necessary to allow him/her to carry out the disaster operations plan of the city, it being the intent of this chapter that the enumerated powers herein are not limitations upon his or her powers;

     G.    The director shall designate the order of succession to his office subject to approval by the city council; which shall be in effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.080 Assistant director of disaster services.
     There is hereby created the office of assistant director of disaster services for the city of Yucaipa, which office shall be filled at the time deemed necessary in the discretion of the director. Any appointment to fill this office shall be ratified by the city council. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.085 Powers of assistant director of disaster services.
     The assistant director of disaster services when appointed shall have such powers and duties as may be delegated to him/her by the director. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.090 Office of disaster preparedness.
     There is created the city office of disaster preparedness, which shall consist of such positions as may be established by the city manager. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.100 Powers of succession.
     A.    Each person who shall succeed to each position or office as provided herein, and as provided in the disaster operations plan of the city shall succeed to all the powers and duties of the office succeeded to immediately upon such succession; provided, however, that the succession of authority for members of the city council shall be governed by subsection (B) of this Section 8.36.100.

     B.     The line of succession of the position of mayor during a state of emergency, war emergency, local emergency or other condition of disaster, unless otherwise ordered by the city council, shall be mayor pro tempore, followed by the remaining city council members in the order of their seniority, excluding standby successors who may have been appointed pursuant to Section 8638 of the Government Code of the state. When two or more members of the city council are elected at the same time, seniority shall be determined by the vote received by each such member at the last election with seniority being afforded such city council members in the same rank as the vote attained by each, the higher vote count equating to greater seniority. When two or more city council members have been appointed to the city council, the city clerk shall draw lots to determine seniority for purposes of seniority hereunder. Seniority shall always be afforded elected members of the city council over appointed members of the city council. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.110 Orders by members of disaster corps.
     During the existence of a “state of war emergency,” or of a proclaimed “state of emergency” or “local emergency” affecting the city, each member of the disaster corps shall have authority to require that all persons shall follow reasonable orders given by him/her within the scope of his or her functions in order to execute the disaster operations plan of the city, and the willful failure of any person to follow such reasonable order or orders is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.120 Emergency organization.
     All officers and employees of this city, volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, persons, commandeered into service under the provisions of Section 8.36.075 (d) (7) of this chapter, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, be charged with duties incidental to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency shall constitute the emergency organization of the city of Yucaipa. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.130 Emergency plan.
     The disaster council shall be responsible for development of the city of Yucaipa “emergency plan,” which shall provide for the effective mobilization of resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of emergency organizations. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.140 Prohibited acts during emergencies.
     It shall be unlawful and a criminal act and a misdemeanor, for any person, during a “state of emergency,” “war emergency,” “local emergency” or other condition of disaster:

     A.    To willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the disaster corps in the enforcement of any law or lawful rule, regulation or order issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon such disaster corps member by virtue of this chapter;

     B.     To do any act forbidden by any lawful rule, regulation or order issued pursuant to this chapter if such is of such nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy, or to imperil life or property, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection of persons or property; or

     C.     To wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency services of disaster or civil defense agencies of the federal or state governments. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.150 Proclamation of emergency—Determination—Authority.
     Whenever riots, general civil disobedience, multiple law violations or the threat of the same occur in the city, the director, or in the event of his or her inability to act, the chief of police may determine that a local emergency disaster exists at such time, the director shall forthwith proclaim in writing the existence of a state of local emergency. He/she shall cause widespread publicity and notice to be given to such proclamation. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.160 Proclamation of emergency—Effective when—Termination.
     The proclamation of local emergency by the city council or the director, as provided herein, shall become effective immediately upon its issuance and shall be disseminated to the public by appropriate news media. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the local emergency shall not remain in effect for a period in excess of the time between its proclamation and the next regular meeting of the city council unless it has been ratified by the city council. The city council shall review, at least every fourteen (14) days, until such local emergency is terminated, the need for continuing the local emergency and shall proclaim the termination of such local emergency at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

 

8.36.170 Proclamation of emergency—Rules and regulations—Powers of disaster director.
     After the issuance of a proclamation of local emergency, the director shall have the power to make, issue and enforce rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by said emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations shall be confirmed as soon as practicable by the city council. In addition to those powers and duties set forth in Section 8.36.075, the director is granted, but shall not be limited to, the following powers:

     A.    Curfew. The director may order a general curfew applicable to the entire city or such geographical areas thereof as he/she deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare and morals;

     As used herein “curfew” means a prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing, riding or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or private property except as authorized by the owner, lessee or person in charge of such private property. Persons officially delegated to duty with reference to such civil emergency and representatives of news media, physicians, nurses, ambulance operators performing medical services, firemen and law enforcement officers and other such personnel as well as those specifically authorized to duty by duly delegated authority are exempt from the foregoing curfew requirements;

     B.     Business Closing. The director may order the closing of any business establishments anywhere within the city; such businesses to include, but not be limited to, those selling alcoholic beverages, gasoline or firearms;

     C.     Alcoholic Beverages. The director may order that no person shall consume any alcoholic beverages in a public street or place which is publicly owned or in any other public or private area on which the consumption of such alcoholic beverages shall be found by the director, on just cause, to precipitate a clear and present danger to the well-being of the community during the emergency;

     D.    Weapons. The director may order that no persons shall carry or possess any gun, bomb, fire bomb, knife, rock or other weapon or item, the use of which would tend to inflict great bodily harm on persons or damage to property;

     E.     Closed Area. The director may designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicular parking area closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic during the course of such an emergency;

     The foregoing specific authorizations of authority vested in the director and other such authorizations as may be deemed necessary during such emergencies are declared to be imminently necessary for the protection of life and property during such period. (Ord. 173 § 2, 1997)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.04 GAMBLING
Chapter 9.08 CURFEW REGULATIONS
Chapter 9.12 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINERS
Chapter 9.16 REGULATION OF SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, IN-LINE SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES ON POSTED PROPERTY AND WITHIN MARKET NIGHT AREA
Chapter 9.20 OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
Chapter 9.24 RESPONDING TO DISORDERLY GATHERINGS
Chapter 9.26 DISPLAY OF MATERIAL THAT IS HARMFUL TO MINORS—BLINDER RACKS REQUIRED

Chapter 9.04 GAMBLING
9.04.010 Permitting illegal games.
     It is unlawful for any person within the city, to keep, maintain, conduct, control, have charge of, be present at or visit any house, room, place or apartment where any game is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice or other device or contrivance for money, checks, chips, credit or any other representative or thing of value. (Ord. 163 § 9(A), 1997)

 

9.04.020 Participation in illegal games.
     It is unlawful for any person within the city, to deal, play, carry on, participate in or bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards or other device or contrivance for money, checks, chips, credit or any other representative or thing of value. (Ord. 163 § 9(B), 1997)

Chapter 9.08 CURFEW REGULATIONS
9.08.010 Curfew hours.
     Every person under the age of eighteen (18) years who loiters about the public streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, parks or public places of the city, between the hour of ten p.m. and the time of sunrise the following day, when not accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian having legal custody and control of such person, or spouse of such person over twenty-one (21) years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 163 § 5(A), 1997)

 

9.08.015 Market Night curfew.
     It is unlawful for any minor to be in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, public buildings or other places open to the public, places of amusement, eating establishments, or any vacant lots, buildings or structures during the period from eight p.m. on the evening of the city’s sponsored Market Night until six a.m. the following day within the Market Night outdoor area and all public property located within twenty (20) feet of the Market Night outdoor area. For purposes of this subsection, the Market Night outdoor area is defined as the geographical area bounded by Acacia Avenue on the north, Avenue D on the south, Bryant Street on the east, and 2nd Street on the west. (Ord. 326 § 4, 2014; Ord. 249 § 2, 2005)

 

9.08.018 Defenses to prosecution under Sections 9.08.010 and 9.08.018.
     A.    It shall be a defense to prosecution under Sections 9.08.010 and 9.08.018 that the minor is:

     1.     Accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian, or other person having the care or custody of the minor; or

     2.     Engaged in or going directly to or returning directly from any lawful activity with the written permission of the minor’s parent or legal guardian, without any detour or stop; or

     3.     Acting within the course and scope of gainful employment, or traveling directly to or from his or her place of gainful employment, or to or from a medical appointment and the minor can produce written evidence of same, without any detour or stop; or

     4.     Traveling directly to or from a meeting, entertainment, recreational or school activity, or dance, with the written consent of the minor’s parent or legal guardian, without detour or stop; or

     5.     Exercising rights protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article I of the California Constitution, including, but not limited to, free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and/or freedom of assembly, provided such minor has in his or her possession a form of written consent signed by the minor’s parent or legal guardian. The form of consent must state the hours during which the minor is permitted to be away from home, the nature of the permitted activity involving the exercise of constitu-tional rights, and the specific location where the minor is permitted to be during such hours; or

     6.     Legally married, or emancipated pursuant to the laws of any state, provided the minor maintains written evidence of such emancipation in his or her possession during curfew hours; or

     7.     In a motor vehicle involved in interstate or intrastate travel provided that in the event the minor is not accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, the minor possesses a parent’s or guardian’s written consent thereto; or

     8.     On any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to his or her residence; or

     9.     Involved in an emergency. As used herein, “emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

     B.     Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a police officer shall ask the minor’s age and reason for being in the public place or other location, during the time covered under Sections 9.08.010 and 9.08.015 of this chapter. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this chapter unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under this section is applicable. (Ord. 248 § 3, 2005)

 

9.08.020 Responsibility of parents.
     Every parent, guardian or other person having the legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who allows or permits such person to violate any provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 163 § 5(B), 1997)

Chapter 9.12 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINERS
9.12.010 Possession of open alcoholic beverage container on premises of, or on sidewalk adjacent to, premises of retail package license—Licensee posting.
     A.    It is unlawful and an infraction for any person who has in his or her possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, to enter, be, or remain on the posted premises of, including the posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensees licensed pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with Section 2300) of the Business and Professions Code, or on any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed and posted premises. As used in this chapter, “posted premises” means those premises which are subject to licensure under any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage license, the parking lot immediately adjacent to the licensed premises and any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed premises on which clearly visible notices indicate to the patrons of the licensee and parking lots and the persons on the public sidewalk, that the provisions of this chapter are applicable. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to a private residential parking lot which is immediately adjacent to the posted premises.

     B.     All retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensees licensed pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with Section 23000) of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California shall install and maintain signs on the licensed premises, clearly visible to patrons of the licensee and to persons or on any parking lot or public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed premises, which notify all such persons that the provisions of subsection A of this section are applicable. Any licensee violating any provision of this subsection shall be guilty of any infraction. (Ord. 163 § 4, 1997)

Chapter 9.16 REGULATION OF SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, IN-LINE SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES ON POSTED PROPERTY AND WITHIN MARKET NIGHT AREA
9.16.010 Findings, purpose and intent.
     A.    The city council of the city of Yucaipa finds that unregulated and uncontrolled skateboarding, roller skating and in-line skating on public sidewalks, in public parking lots and in other locations frequented by the public creates a hazardous condition which presents the imminent risk and potential of injury to the participants and others who are lawfully using the same facilities.

     B.     The city council finds and declares that the immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare posed by unregulated and uncontrolled skateboarding, roller skating and in-line skating on public sidewalks, in public parking lots and in other locations frequented by the public constitutes a public nuisance which can only be addressed by regulation and, in some heavily accessible areas, by prohibition.

     C.     The purpose and intent of this chapter are to provide regulations applicable to the use of skateboards, roller skates and in-line skates on public and private property where the interests of the skaters conflict with those of others, and to prohibit, by appropriate signage, these activities in certain areas where there exists such particular risk of injury to the public or interference with the public’s rights that the activities constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 191 § 1, 1999)

 

9.16.020 Skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates and similar wheeled devices prohibited on posted property.
     A.    It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to ride a skateboard, or utilize roller skates, in-line skates, or any similar self-powered wheeled device having wheels less than six inches in diameter, upon any public property or private property where notice of such prohibition has been posted and is clearly visible, at minimum, within two entrances to the prohibited area or in the immediate area where such activity is prohibited.

     B.     It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to ride a skateboard, or utilize roller skates, in-line skates, or any similar self-powered wheeled device having wheels less than six inches in diameter in any municipal parking facility.

     C.     It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to ride a skateboard, or utilize roller skates, in-line skates, or any self-powered wheeled device having wheels less than six inches in diameter on any public sidewalk where notice of such prohibition has been posted in the designated areas of prohibition.

     D.    This section shall not apply to persons participating in any city sponsored program, event or class in which use of self-powered wheeled devices described herein are utilized, permitted or required. (Ord. 191 § 1, 1999)

 

9.16.025 Bicycles, unicycles, skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates and similar devices prohibited at Market Night.
     A.    The city council finds that it is in the public interest to prohibit the use of bicycles, unicycles, skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates and similar devices at Market Night to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of its residents and visitors who attend the event. Market Night is a city approved event generally occurring on a weekly basis or at other times as approved by the city council within the city’s Uptown Historic district that includes, but is not limited to, the following components: a Certified Farmer’s Market, merchandise vendors, produce vendors, and food vendors. The public health, safety and general welfare will be enhanced by restricting the presence of bicycles, unicycles, skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates and similar devices at Market Night.

     B.     It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to ride a bicycle, unicycle, or similar self-powered wheeled device; or to ride a skateboard, utilize roller skates, in-line skates, or any similar self-powered wheeled device having wheels less than six inches in diameter, upon any public street, public sidewalk or public property located adjacent to the Market Night perimeter.

     C.     This section shall not apply to persons participating in any city sponsored program, event or class in which use of self-powered wheeled devices described herein are utilized, permitted or required. (Ord. 326 § 3, 2014)

 

9.16.030 Penalties.
     With respect to the provision of this chapter, a person who violates a provision of this chapter as adopted by the city is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) but not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation, a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) but not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second violation, and a fine not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) but not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third violation within one year. The fourth and any additional violations within one year shall each constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or six months in jail, or both. (Ord. 191 § 1, 1999)

Chapter 9.20 OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
9.20.010 Findings, purpose and intent.
     A.    The city council finds that there is an increase in the operation of motorcycles and other motor-driven vehicles for recreational purposes on private property and on public property in the city, and that there is a need for control of the traffic generated from this source.

     B.     It is further found and determined that:

     1.     The California Vehicle Code provides for the regulation of vehicles and operators on the public streets and highways of the state;

     2.     The off-road operation of licensed and unlicensed motorcycles and other motor-driven vehicles on private property and public property in the city:

     a.     Can generate excessive amounts of irritating dust, noxious exhaust fumes and noise;

     b.     Creates a high risk of igniting brush and grass fires;

     c.     Creates erosion on the hilly areas of the city and on unimproved property in the city;

     d.     Creates unimproved roads and pathways which constitute a danger and threat of accident to persons in such areas;

     e.     Has an adverse effect upon the public health, safety and convenience of the persons residing in the community, which constitutes a public nuisance to the residents of the city; and

     f.      Promotes blight and depreciates land values.

     C.     After examination and investigation of the existing situation it is determined that the operation of motorcycles and other motor-driven vehicles on private and public land, except the public streets and highways, is a public nuisance, that such a public nuisance exists, and that certain controls must be imposed upon the off-road use of motorcycles and other motor-driven vehicles on private and public property in the city. (Ord. 166 § 1, 1997)

 

9.20.020 Scope.
     This chapter is designed to regulate the off-road vehicle traffic on private and public lands, except for public streets and highways, of registered and unregistered motorcycles and other motor-driven vehicles by all persons, whether they possess a valid California motor vehicle operator’s license or not. (Ord. 166 § 2, 1997)

 

9.20.030 Prohibition.
     No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle on lands belonging to or occupied by another without having in his or her immediate possession and, upon request of a peace officer, displaying written permission from the owner of such lands, his or her agent, or the person in lawful possession thereof; provided, however, that this section shall not be applicable to persons having visible or lawful business with the owner, agent or person in lawful possession. (Ord. 166 § 3, 1997)

 

9.20.040 Limitations.
     The operation of any off-road vehicle is subject to the following limitations:

     A.    Operation of vehicles shall only be conducted between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m.

     B.     Operation of vehicles shall not be conducted within two hundred (200) yards of an occupied dwelling, church, assembly hall, school, office, medical facility, recreation facility or other facility occupied or operated by human beings; nor within two hundred (200) yards of a barn, stable, other structure or pasture used for the keeping of animals.

     C.     Operation of vehicles shall be confined to the property for which written permission has been obtained.

     D.    Operation of vehicles shall only be conducted during the hours and for the length of time stated in the written permission.

     E.     The vehicle being operated must be of the type identified in the permission. The property owner may include permission to operate more than one type of vehicle if so stated in the consent from the owner, lessee or renter.

     F.     The permittee shall at all times while operating vehicles under this chapter have in his or her possession a current and valid letter of permission and shall present it upon request to a law enforcement officer, or agent or employee designated by the city manager to enforce this chapter, for verification of the right to operate vehicles on the property.

     G.    The vehicles operated by the permittee shall at all times be equipped with spark arrestors and muffler systems lawful in the state, in good operating condition, not of a model or size which will create unreasonable noise which will likely interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring properties, and, if adjustable, adjusted so as to minimize noise emission and still permit the vehicle to operate with reasonable effectiveness. (Ord. 166 § 4, 1997)

 

9.20.050 Exempt vehicles.
     This chapter shall not apply to the use of farm vehicles for agricultural purposes, vehicles being used for grading or construction purposes, vehicles being used of governmental purposes, or golf carts being used on golf courses. (Ord. 166 § 5, 1997)

 

9.20.060 Penalties.
     No person shall violate any provision, or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Every act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter is punishable as an infraction. Where the city attorney determines that such action would be in the interest of justice, he or she may specify in the accusatory pleading that the offense shall be a misdemeanor. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord. 166 § 6, 1997)

Chapter 9.24 RESPONDING TO DISORDERLY GATHERINGS
9.24.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “Loud and/or disorderly gathering or party” means a loud and/or disorderly activity attended by a group of persons on public or private property which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the area.

     “Person responsible” for a loud and/or disorderly gathering or party shall be deemed to be, in order of priority:

     1.     The owner(s) of the premises where the loud and/or disorderly gathering or party takes place, if the premises are owner-occupied property;

     2.     The tenant(s) of the premises where the loud and/or disorderly gathering or party takes place, if the premises are tenant-occupied property;

     3.     The person(s) responsible for organizing the loud and/or disorderly gathering or party. If the person is a minor, then the parent or guardians of that minor will be jointly or severally liable for reimbursement of the police expenses and any other public safety expenses incurred.

     “Special security assignments” mean the assignment of police officers and other public safety service personnel during a second or subsequent call to a location after providing a warning that the loud and/or disorderly gathering or party violates the law. (Ord. 309 § 1, 2011; Ord. 228 § 3, 2004)

 

9.24.020 Duty to maintain public peace.
     Each person responsible for a gathering or party, or who allows his or her property to be utilized for a gathering or party, shall prevent it from becoming a loud and/or disorderly gathering or party. Violation of this duty constitutes a public nuisance.

     The city manager and designee, including, but not limited to, police officers and code enforcement officers, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 309 § 2, 2011; Ord. 228 § 3, 2004)

 

9.24.030 Cost of police and other public safety service personnel response.
     When a loud and/or disorderly gathering or party occurs, the person or persons responsible will be held jointly and severally liable for payment of the public safety service expenses for special security assignments. (Ord. 228 § 3, 2004)

 

9.24.040 Billing of public safety expenses.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the city’s finance department shall cause the person responsible for a loud and/or disorderly gathering or party to be billed the actual cost for the police services provided in responding to the disturbance and any other city and/or public safety expenses incurred (these costs shall include, but shall not be limited to, damages to city property and/or injuries to city personnel, and city administrative costs. The police department shall accumulate the costs of all services provided in responding to the disturbance and forward same to the finance department within fifteen (15) days of the disturbance for billing). Such bills shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days after the billing date. (Ord. 228 § 3, 2004)

 

9.24.050 Appeal process.
     Any person receiving a cost recovery fee bill for public safety services pursuant to this chapter may, within fifteen (15) days after the billing date, file with the city clerk a written request appealing the imposition of such charges. Any billing sent pursuant to this chapter shall inform the billed party of the right to appeal said billing. All appeals shall be made in writing, shall state the grounds for such appeal, shall specify the factual basis for the appeal and shall contain a signature verifying the truth of all matters asserted. Any appeal regarding such billing shall be heard by the city manager, or by designee, as the hearing officer. Notice of the hearing shall be sent by certified or registered mail to the appellant (unless such mail is refused or unclaimed, then the city shall subsequently send the mail via first class postage prepaid mail and such mailing shall be deemed actual service). Within ten days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall give written notice of the decision of the hearing officer. If the appeal is denied in part or in full, all amounts due to the city shall be paid within thirty (30) days after notice of the decision of the hearing officer is sent by certified or registered mail to the appellant (unless such mail is refused or unclaimed, then the city shall subsequently send the mail via first class postage prepaid mail and such mailing shall be deemed actual service). The decision of the hearing officer may be appealed pursuant to Section 1.04.130. If such a decision is not appealed, then the decision is final. (Ord. 228 § 3, 2004)

 

9.24.060 Recovery of public safety expenses.
     All amounts under this chapter shall be a debt to the city by the property owner and all persons responsible for the loud and/or disorderly gathering or party, and may be collected as set forth in Section 2.32.020. (Ord. 228 § 3, 2004)

Chapter 9.26 DISPLAY OF MATERIAL THAT IS HARMFUL TO MINORS—BLINDER RACKS REQUIRED
9.26.010 Definitions.
     A.    “Blinder rack” means an opaque cover, blocking from view the lower two-thirds of the material that is harmful to minors, and the bottom edge of which is placed a minimum of at least five feet up from the floor in the place where such material is sold, distributed or displayed, whether with or without consideration.

     B.     As used in this chapter, “material that is harmful to minors” and “material” means “harmful matter,” as that term is defined in California Penal Code Section 313. (Ord. 236 § 2, 2004)

 

9.26.020 Prohibition—Blinder racks required.
     No material that is harmful to minors shall be displayed in a public place, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, unless blinder racks are placed in front of the material so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view. (Ord. 236 § 2, 2004)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 OVERWEIGHT AND OVERSIZED VEHICLE RESTRICTIONS
Chapter 10.08 TRANSPORTATION CONTROL SUBREGIONAL IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
Chapter 10.12 HIGHWAYS AND TRAFFIC

Chapter 10.04 OVERWEIGHT AND OVERSIZED VEHICLE RESTRICTIONS
10.04.010 Findings, purpose and intent.
     A.    There exist within the city large commercial vehicles which travel or park in such a way that they pose a threat to public health and safety because they generate a disproportionate number of calls for police services, thus reducing the general availability of police officers to other areas of the community, and unduly pose a burden on police services.

     B.     The city council has received reports from the police department documenting substantial occurrence of problems associated with large commercial vehicles that are parked or traveling in areas that create hazardous conditions for residents and other drivers.

     C.     The city council has received numerous complaints from citizens, including residents and business owners, regarding excessive noise and safety hazards resulting from the presence of large commercial vehicles within residential areas. The city council finds that the operation of large commercial vehicles within residential areas detrimentally affects the community and its neighborhoods, as well as a considerable number of persons and businesses surrounding these areas.

     D.    It is for the best interests of the residents of the city, and the orderly handling of traffic, that truck routes and parking regulations be established within the city for trucks, tractors, trailers and other commercial vehicles exceeding a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds, or ten feet or more in height (referred to herein as “commercial vehicle(s)” or “vehicle(s)”).

     E.     All California Vehicle Codes shall be applicable and adhered to in the administration of parking violations. Nothing in this chapter shall supersede any provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 162 § 1, 1997)

 

10.04.020 Parking on public streets, highways, alleys or rights-of-way and on residential property.
     A.    Except as provided for in this section:

     1.     It is unlawful for any person to park, or allow to be parked, any commercial vehicle consisting of a truck tractor, motor truck, semi-trailer, or a combination thereof, exceeding a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds, upon any street, highway, alley, public right-of-way or residential property within the city.

     2.     It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any commercial vehicle consisting of a truck tractor, motor truck, semi-trailer or a combination thereof, exceeding a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds, to allow such vehicle to remain standing upon any street, highway, alley, public right-of-way or residential property within the city.

     3.     It is unlawful for any person to park, or allow to be parked, any trailer which has been detached from a truck tractor or truck, or which is not in itself capable of being driven, upon any street, highway, alley or public right-of-way within the city.

     4.     It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing within one hundred (100) feet of any street intersection, or within one hundred (100) feet of any official traffic control device, any vehicle which is ten feet or more in height, including the height of any load thereon.

     5.     It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any street, highway, alley or public right-of-way within the city, any commercial vehicle consisting of a truck tractor, motor truck, trailer, semi-trailer or combination thereof, exceeding a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds, so that any part of such vehicle is within thirty (30) feet of any driveway opening, other than the driver’s own driveway.

     6.     It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any street, highway, alley or public right-of-way within the city, any commercial vehicle consisting of a truck tractor, motor truck, trailer, semi-trailer or combination thereof, exceeding a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds, so that any part of such vehicle is within fifty (50) feet of any part of any other truck tractor, motor truck, trailer, semi-trailer or combination thereof.

     B.     Commercial truck tractors, motor trucks, semi-trailers, or combinations thereof, exceeding a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds, may be parked on public streets, highways, alleys, public rights-of-way, or residential property as follows:

     1.     On designated truck routes for a period of time not exceeding two consecutive hours;

     2.     While making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares or merchandise from or to any property adjacent to or abutting upon streets or highways which are not designated truck routes;

     3.     When such vehicle is parked in connection with, and in aid of, the ongoing performance of a service to, or on, a property in the block in which such vehicle is parked or left standing;

     4.     The restrictions and prohibitions set forth in subsection A(1), (2) and (3) of this section shall not apply to commercial vehicles which have valid and effective permits issued pursuant to Section 10.04.030.

     C.     The provisions of this section shall not apply in the community industrial land use district. (Ord. 162 § 2, 1997)

 

10.04.030 Permits.
     A.    Any owner or operator of a vehicle or property which is subject to this chapter may apply to the city planner, or the designee of the city planner for, and the city planner, or the designee of the city planner, may issue, a permit for an exemption from the restrictions and prohibitions of Section 10.04.020(A)(1) through (3). The permit shall be in such form as may be approved by the city planner. Application for such a permit shall be made on a form approved by, and subject to such verification as may be required by the city planner.

     B.     Permits shall expire one year after the date of issuance. Applications for renewal of a permit shall be submitted to the city planner at least ten (10) days prior to the expiration date of the then-current permit.

     C.     Permits, if issued to nonresident visitors, shall expire three days after the date of issuance. Not more than three nonresident visitor permits may be issued to any one person in any twelve (12) month period of time.

     D.    Permits shall be nontransferable and shall apply only to the particular property or location described in the application, and the rights granted therein shall be limited to the term of the permit.

     E.     The city planner may revoke any permit issued hereunder prior to the permit’s expiration date upon a determination by the city planner that good cause exists for such revocation. Good cause for revocation is established by a finding by the city planner that the permittee, or any person operating a permitted vehicle with the permittee’s consent, has violated one or more of the provisions of this chapter or any other provision of this code or of state law relating to the operation, licensing, maintenance or parking of vehicles. (Ord. 162 § 3, 1997)

 

10.04.040 Permit conditions.
     Each permit issued pursuant to Section 10.04.030 shall be subject to the following conditions:

     A.    No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on the paved portion of any street, highway or alley unless the paved portion of the half-width roadway is at least twenty-two (22) feet wide.

     B.     No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any street, highway, alley, public right-of-way, or vacant property within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any dwelling except with the written consent of the owner of the parcel on which the vehicle is left parked or standing, and from the owners or residents of the adjacent parcels.

     C.     No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on that portion of any roadway which abuts a parcel upon which there exists a public facility, including, but not limited to, parks, schools and civic buildings.

     D.    The operator of the vehicle shall not idle the vehicle’s engine for longer than thirty (30) minutes within any four-hour period, nor race the vehicle’s engine, nor blow its air horns.

     E.     No vehicle shall be loaded or unloaded or have cargo transferred to or from the vehicle except during the first twenty-four (24) hours during which a vehicle is mechanically disabled.

     F.     No refrigeration unit on the vehicle shall be operated between the hours of eight p.m. and eight a.m.

     G.    One truck tractor with a trailer or semi-trailer may be parked on the owner or operator’s residential lot if such lot is at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size. One additional truck tractor with a trailer or semi-trailer, up to a maximum of three such vehicles, may be parked on the owner or operator’s residential lot for each additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet which said lot contains. No vehicle shall be parked or left standing pursuant to this subsection unless all parts of the vehicle are at least five feet from each interior property line and at least fifteen (15) feet from all public rights-of-way and easements, and unless the owner/operator has obtained the express written consent of the current residents of all adjacent parcels.

     H.    Truck tractors may be parked in the driveway of the owner or operator’s residential lot of any size, subject to the following conditions:

     1.     The truck tractor must be completely clear of all public streets, sidewalks and easements, except that this condition may be waived or modified by the city planner on original review, or on appeal to the city planner by an applicant from a decision by a delegate of the city planner, that a permit may not be issued without this condition. Exercise of the discretion to waive or modify this decision may not be delegated by the city planner.

     2.     No mechanical work, nor any routine maintenance or repair work which causes an excessive amount of noise may be performed before eight a.m. or after eight p.m.

     3.     The owner/operator provides the express written consent of the current residents of all adjacent parcels. (Ord. 223 § 2, 2003; Ord. 211 § 3, 2001: Ord. 162 § 4, 1997)

 

10.04.050 Legal nonconforming use—Grandfather clause.
     Commercial vehicles consisting of a truck tractor, motor truck, semi-trailer, or a combination thereof, exceeding a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds, that were parked on residential property that was registered with the state as a truck terminal as of the first reading of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or which are verified by the director of community development, based on objective evidence submitted by the property owner, to have been parked on residential property for a period of at least five years prior to the introduction of said ordinance, shall not be subject to the limitation on vehicle numbers herein contained in Section 10.04.040(G). The number of allowed vehicles in excess of those permitted by this chapter shall be established pursuant to the criteria set forth herein, and shall not be expanded thereafter. Parking of said vehicles shall in all other ways fully comply with the requirements of all other sections of this chapter. Any alteration or expansion of a nonconforming use shall be subject to the requirements of Chapter 8 of Division 4 of the Yucaipa development code. (Ord. 162 § 5, 1997)

 

10.04.060 Truck routes.
     A.    Except as otherwise permitted herein, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds shall only use designated truck routes except when necessary to traverse another street to a destination for the purpose of loading or unloading, or parking pursuant to a permit issued under Section 10.04.030, but then only by such deviation from the nearest truck route as is reasonably necessary. The provision of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission.

     B.     Official truck routes shall be limited to those public streets and highways so designated by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 162 § 6, 1997)

 

10.04.070 Violations—Penalties.
     No person shall violate any provision, or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Every act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter is punishable as an infraction. Where the city attorney determines that such action would be in the interest of justice, he/she may specify in the accusatory pleading that the offense shall be a misdemeanor. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly.

     It shall be a defense to a citation issued for a violation of Section 10.04.030(C) that the violation occurred at a time when City Hall was closed so that a permit could not be issued, and that the infraction would have been legal had the permit been available. (Ord. 162 § 7, 1997)

 

10.04.080 Appeals.
     An applicant may contest the denial of an application for any permit described in this chapter by filing an appeal to the city council that conforms with the city’s appeal requirements. A written notice of the appeal concisely stating the facts of the case and the grounds of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten calendar days of service of the letter denying the permit, and it shall be accompanied by the required appeal processing fee. Any appeal not timely filed shall be rejected. The city clerk shall have the matter set for hearing at a regular meeting of the city council and shall give the appellant written notice of the time and place of the hearing at least ten days before the hearing. The decision of the city council taken after the appellant has had an opportunity to be heard is final. (Ord. 223 § 3, 2003)

Chapter 10.08 TRANSPORTATION CONTROL SUBREGIONAL IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
10.08.010 Core actions.
     The city adopts all of the core actions defined in the following table:

 

 

 

 

 

CORE ACTIONS

 

DESCRIPTION:

 

Core actions need to be adopted by all jurisdictions in the South Coast Basin, i.e., the Valley and Mountain Portions of San Bernardino County. The core program consists predominantly of design standards for new development. Application of these measures to existing development may be considered at the regional level for certain actions, such as requiring the installation of bicycle parking facilities.

 

ACTION CATEGORY

CORE ACTIONS

STANDARD LEVEL OF IMPLEMENTATION

Design Standards for Development

1.   Require bicycle parking facilities as a percentage of auto parking spaces in new non-residential development or require secured lockers.

New non-residential and multi-family (of 10 or more units) development or remodel when discretionary review is required. Parking racks secured lockers at a rate of 1 per 30 parking spaces with a minimum of a three-bike rack.

 

2.   Provide on-site pedestrian walkways and bicycle facilities to connect each building in the development to public streets.

New non-residential and multi-family (of 10 or more units) development.

 

3.   Require shower facilities for persons bicycling or walking to work.

New non-residential development meeting CMP thresholds (250 or more peak hour trips). Minimum of one shower facility accessible to both men and women.

 

5.   Require passenger loading areas in locations close to building entrances and so as not to interfere with vehicle circulation.

New non-residential and multi-family (of 10 or more units) development with at least 100 parking spaces.

Loading Area = equivalent to a minimum of 5 parking spaces.

 

6.   Require designation of preferential parking spaces for vanpools near building entrances. As appropriate, vertical clearances must be no less than nine′.

New non-residential development.)

Designated parking spaces at a rate of [1 — 2] parking spaces per 100 spaces with a minimum of one.

 

8.   Provide transit improvements such as buss pullouts, bus pads, and bus shelters. Need for and nature to be defined in cooperation with Omnitrans.

All new residential and non-residential development along existing or planned transit routes.

 

14. Provide telecommuting center or contribute toward development of a telecommuting center.

New residential development of 500+ units.

 

15. Provide on-site video conferencing facilities.

Office park developments for 1000+ employees.

 

17. Reduce parking space requirements to account for increased ridesharing and other modes of transportation.

New non-residential development linked to other actions that reduce trips.

New Facilities

6.   Develop bicycle route system consistent with SCAG’s Regional Mobility Element.

To be determined based on countywide bicycle plan to be released in August 1993.

 

(Ord. 123 § 1 (Attach. A))

 

 

10.08.020 Additional provisions.
     A.    The city adopts the following recommended actions from Attachment B of the ordinance codified in this chapter:

     1.     Designate park-and-ride lots for area commuters.

     7.     Install or widen sidewalks, where appropriate, to safely accommodate pedestrians.

     8.     Develop bus shelter retrofit programs.

     B.     The city adopts the following discretionary actions from Attachment C of the ordinance codified in this chapter:

 

     DESIGN STANDARDS FOR NEW

     DEVELOPMENT:

 

     4.     Require a percentage of all parking spaces to be reserved for employee rideshare vehicles and located in preferential locations.

 

     NEW FACILITIES:

 

     5.     Implement bus turn-out or bus pad retrofit programs.

 

     LAND USE PATTERNS:

 

     7.     Require residential subdivisions to incorporate supportive daily services that are centrally located and conveniently accessible to pedestrians and bicyclists.

 

     C.     The city will consider the following actions from Attachment D of the ordinance codified in this chapter for adoption, and support their adoption regionally only to the extent necessary to achieve San Bernardino’s portion of the regional trip reduction target:

 

     EMPLOYER - BASED RIDESHARE

     PROGRAMS

 

     1.     Require submission of trip reduction plans for employers of less than 100 employees or multitenant work sites.

     2.     Require provision of a centrally located commuter information area for employers of less than 100 employees.

     3.     Require implementation of a home based telecommuting program for employers of less than 100 employees.

     4.     Require implementation of alternative work week schedules for employers with less than 100 employees.

 

     MARKET INCENTIVES:

 

     1.     Require parking lot fees to be structured based on vehicle occupancy.

     2.     Restructure vehicle registration based on emission/use of vehicle.

     3.     Gasoline taxes.

(Ord. 123 §§ 2 — 4, 1993)

 

10.08.030 Development of local plan and program.
     A.    The city will develop a local implementation plan which meets the federal and/or regional criteria for enforceability, identifying resources, funding and schedule for implementation of local actions that have, or will be adopted as part of the short-term subregional implementation program.

     B.     The city will develop a local monitoring program to monitor implementation of actions taken locally to reduce trips.

     C.     The city will participate with SANBAG and other local jurisdictions to develop a centralized monitoring program to provide information needed to periodically update the subregional transportation model, to track implementation of local actions which have, or will be, taken as part of both the subregional implementation program, and assist in determining the effectiveness of the actions. (Ord. 123 §§ 5 — 7, 1993)

Chapter 10.12 HIGHWAYS AND TRAFFIC
10.12.010 Scope.
     A.    The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or official traffic control device.

     B.     The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the vehicle code or an ordinance of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Ord. 212 § 2, 2001)

 

10.12.020 Standing prohibited between roadways.
     No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any median strip between roadways or within any traffic island or other area designed to separate or guide the movement of traffic. (Ord. 212 § 2, 2001)

 

10.12.030 Stopping or standing prohibited in specified places.
     A.    The city engineer is hereby authorized to prohibit stopping, standing or parking and to place signs or curb markings at any of the following places when such prohibition, as indicated by a traffic engineering investigation, will alleviate dangerous or hazardous traffic conditions, facilitate the full use of the roadway, or serve the convenience of the public:

     1.     At any place within one hundred (100) feet of the intersection of two or more highways.

     2.     Adjacent to either side of a crosswalk or driveway entrance for a distance not to exceed twenty (20) feet from either side of such crosswalk or driveway.

     3.     Adjacent to any fire hydrant when it has been determined that stopping, standing or parking of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, would present some special hazard or would prevent ready access to the fire hydrant.

     4.     At any place in connection with a street or highway vehicular parking layout or plan.

     B.     When the city engineer, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because of which stopping, standing or parking was prohibited as authorized in subsection A no longer exist, he or she shall remove such signs and such curb markings from such portion of such street or highway. (Ord. 212 § 2, 2001)

10.12.035 Alley parking restrictions.
     No person shall park any vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.

     The city engineer is authorized by the city council to place appropriate signs or markings indicating no parking within any alley or a portion thereof.

     Per Section 21102.1 of the California Vehicle Code, delivery of freight by commercial vehicles will not be prohibited and operation of emergency vehicles will not be adversely affected in alleys. (Ord. 331 § 1, 2014)

 

10.12.040 Restriction or prohibition of parking.
     A.    Basis for Regulation. Whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that it is necessary to prohibit stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on certain highways or portion thereof at all or certain hours of the day in order to facilitate the movement of traffic or to eliminate hazardous conditions, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to place appropriate signs or curb markings on such highways or portions thereof.

     B.     Basis for Lifting Parking Regulations. Whenever the city council, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because of which it was necessary to prohibit the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles at all or certain hours of the day as provided in subsection A no longer exist, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to remove such signs and curb markings from such highways or portion thereof.

     C.     Temporary No Parking. Whenever the city engineer determines that traffic congestion or traffic hazard of an emergency nature is likely to result form the operation, stopping, standing or parking of vehicles during the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or during the construction, alteration, repair or improvement of any highway, or for any other reason, he or she may place or cause to be placed, temporary signs prohibiting the operation, stopping, standing or parking of vehicles during the existence of such emergency.

     D.    Parking Parallel with Curb—Angle Parking.

     1.     No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway or street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of traffic and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb line or edge of the roadway, except that on one-way streets, vehicles may be stopped or parked facing in the same direction as traffic movement, adjacent to the left-hand side of the roadway, but the left-hand wheels of vehicles so stopped or parked must be within eighteen (18) inches of the curb line or edge of roadway. All parking shall be parallel, except upon those streets that have been marked or signed by the city engineer for angle parking upon which streets vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks or signs and not otherwise.

     2.     No person shall disobey instructions of any official traffic sign requiring the manner in which vehicles must be parked, including signs regarding angle parking. (Ord. 317 § 1, 2012; Ord. 212 § 2, 2001)

 

10.12.050 Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited.
     A.    No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle(s) shall park such vehicle(s) upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours.

     B.     In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street in excess of a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours, the police or any member of the highway patrol of the state of California may remove said vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements of the vehicle code. (Ord. 212 § 2, 2001)

 

10.12.060 Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
     No person shall park a vehicle upon any highway or right-of-way for the principal purpose of:

     A.    Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.

     B.     Using such vehicle to support a sign.     C.         Vending, except adjacent to the premises of the purchaser when taking orders or delivering any commodity. (Ord. 212 § 2, 2001)

Title 11 RESERVED

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.04 CITY PARKS
Chapter 12.06 UNLAWFUL CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY IN PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.08 MAINTENANCE AND LIABILITY ASSOCIATED WITH THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Chapter 12.12 NEWSRACKS

Chapter 12.04 CITY PARKS
12.04.010 Definitions.
     The following words shall have the meaning indicated when used in this chapter:

     “Amplified sound” means music, sound wave, noise, vibration or speech projected or transmitted by electronic or mechanical equipment, including amplifiers.

     “Director” means the community services director, or any other person authorized by him, pursuant to law, to act in his stead.

     “Park” means any park, playground, athletic field, or any outside recreation area operated by the city by itself or in conjunction with any other governmental or private entity.

     “Risk manager” means the city manager, or any other person authorized by him/her, pursuant to law, to act in his or her stead.

     “Special event permit” or “facility reservation permit” means written authorization for exclusive use of parks or buildings or portions thereof, as provided for and defined in this chapter.

     “Vehicle” means any device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn, excepting a device moved by human power. (Ord. 127 § 1, 1994)

 

12.04.020 Compliance required.
     No person shall enter, be or remain in any park unless he/she complies at all times with all of the regulations set forth in this chapter applicable to such park and with all other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. (Ord. 127 § 2, 1994)

 

12.04.030 Rules and regulations.
     The rules and regulation set out in this chapter apply to all parks in the city, unless expressly stated otherwise in this chapter. (Ord. 127 § 3, 1994)

 

12.04.035 Additional regulations for skate park facilities.
     A.    No person shall ride a skateboard or wear inline or roller skates or permit a minor for whom he or she is responsible to ride a skateboard or wear inline or roller skates in a skate park facility unless the person, while riding the skateboard or wearing inline or roller skates, is wearing a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads.

     B.     No person shall use a skate park facility one-half hour after sunset or one-half before sunrise of the following day without an approved facility reservation permit.

     C.     No food and/or drink is allowed on the skating surface.

     D.    Additional obstacles or other materials (i.e., ramps, jumps, etc.) shall not be brought into a skate park facility.

     E.     Bicycling or motorized vehicles are prohibited.

     F.     Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 188 § 1, 1998)

 

12.04.040 Hours of operation.
     No person shall be in any city park or park facility between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. of the following day, without an approved facility reservation permit. (Ord. 127 § 3.1, 1994)

 

12.04.050 Vehicle, bicycle and other nonmotorized equipment operation.
     A.    Roads for Public Use. The provisions of the California Vehicle Code are applicable in the city parks upon any way or place of whatever nature which is publicly for purposes of vehicular travel. All violations of the Vehicle Code shall be enforced and prosecuted in accordance with the provisions thereof.

     B.     Surfaces Other than Roads for Public Use. No person shall drive or otherwise operate a vehicle in a city park, and no person shall ride a bicycle or other nonmotorized equipment, including skateboards, roller skates and roller blades (as defined in the California Vehicle Code) in a city park, upon surfaces other than those maintained and open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or specifically designated for such purposes, except upon temporary parking areas as may be designated from time to time by the director, and further excepting vehicles in the service of the city.

     C.     No person shall park or stand any vehicle, except by written permission from the community services director, on any road, path or other area except at places designated for parking. Designated parking areas shall be used for no other purpose than for the parking of vehicles. The driver or operator of the vehicle, as well as the owner thereof shall be subject to citation for violation of this provision. Any vehicle parked in violation of this provision will also be towed pursuant to applicable provisions of the vehicle code and city ordinance.

     D.    It shall be a violation of this chapter to drive a vehicle in any park at a speed greater than is reasonably prudent, and in any event at a speed in excess of five miles per hour. (Ord. 127 § 3.2, 1994)

 

12.04.060 Solicitation and hawking/ sales prohibited.
     No person shall practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any occupation, business or profession in any city park, or sell or offer for sale any merchandise, goods, article or anything whatsoever, without full compliance of Section 12.04.210. (Ord. 127 § 3.3, 1994)

 

12.04.070 Animals prohibited— Exceptions.
     No person shall cause, permit or allow any animal owned or possessed by him, or any animal in his care, custody, or control to be present in a park except:

     A.    Horses (equine animals) being led or ridden under reasonable control upon any bridle paths or trails provided for such purposes;

     B.     Horses (equine animals) which are hitched or fastened at a place expressly designated for such purpose;

     C.     Dogs or cats when led by a leash, cord or chain not more than six feet long, or when confined within the interior of a vehicle;

     D.    Dogs which have been specially trained and are being used by blind or disabled persons to aid and guide them in their movements;

     E.     Small pets which are kept on the person of the possessor at all times;

     F.     In connection with and within the written scope of activities authorized in writing by the director. (Ord. 127 § 3.4, 1994)

 

12.04.080 Duty to care for animals.
     A.    It is the mandatory duty of all persons owning, possessing, in control of, or otherwise responsible for a dog, a cat, or horse in a city park to promptly collect, pick up and remove all fecal matter left behind by the animal in or upon the park, this section shall not, however, apply to guide dogs for blind or disabled persons.

     B.     The community services director shall cause signs to be posted within all city parks notifying persons owning or in control of animals of their obligation to comply with the provisions of this section and the penalties for violation hereof. (Ord. 127 § 3.5, 1994)

 

12.04.090 Amplified sound—Purpose of regulations.
     The city has enacted those sections of this chapter regulating amplified sound for the sole purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, safety and welfare of its citizenry. Additionally, the right of persons to speak in a manner that is amplified electronically or mechanically is properly limited with regard to time, place and manner by balancing the correlative constitutional rights of the citizens of this community to privacy and freedom from the public nuisance of excessively loud and unnecessary sound. (Ord. 127 § 3.6, 1994)

 

12.04.100 Amplified sound—Facility reservation permit or special event permit required.
     It is unlawful for any person to install, use and operate within a park a loudspeaker or any sound amplifying equipment for the purposes of giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses or lectures, or of transmitting music or other sound to any persons or assemblages of persons in a park, or in the vicinity thereof, except when installed, used or operated in compliance with one of the following provisions:

     A.    By authorized law enforcement or city personnel; or

     B.     Under a facility reservation permit issued by the director, or with a special event permit issued by the city, when operated in accordance with terms and conditions of that reservation or special event permit. (Ord. 127 § 3.7, 1994)

 

12.04.110 Amplified sound—Grant or denial of facility reservation permit or special event permit.
     A.    In determining whether to grant or deny a request to use amplified sound, the community services director shall be guided by the following considerations:

     1.     The extent to which sound may carry into private or residential areas of the city;

     2.     Any conflict with other scheduled park uses or events;

     3.     The necessity for use of electricity, availability of electrical sources or outlets and the safety of individuals near such electrical sources or equipment;

     4.     Any other consideration relevant and necessary to the public health, safety and welfare.

     B.     The director shall not deny a request based on the content of any proposed talks, addresses, lectures, musical presentations or performances. (Ord. 127 § 3.8, 1994)

 

12.04.120 Amplified sound—Power source designated.
     Amplifiers requiring an external power source shall be operated only through a power source provided by or through special permission of the parks maintenance division. (Ord. 127 § 3.9, 1994)

 

12.04.130 Amplified sound— Regulation of volume.
     If, at any time, the police department determines that the sound produced by an amplified sound system in a park is unreasonably interfering with other persons using the park or with nearby residents in the comfortable and reasonable enjoyment of their premises, an officer shall request the person in charge of the assembly, or any other person appearing to be involved in the production of sound, to immediately reduce the level thereof. If the sound is not reduced within five minutes to a reasonable level, the officer shall immediately contact the parks maintenance division personnel to curtail the power source. (Ord. 127 § 3.10, 1994)

 

12.04.140 Additional alternate power sources—Approval, inspection and fees.
     Any additional or alternate power source required for lighting or other purposes must be approved, in advance, for such use by the building and safety department, and by the director for safety, noise and appropriateness. The building and safety department must inspect and approve all connections, wiring and components of sound, lighting and/or wiring systems prior to their use for rehearsal and/or performance. A fee may be imposed for such inspections. (Ord. 127 § 3.11, 1994)

 

12.04.150 Firearms, fireworks and weapons prohibited.
     No person shall carry or discharge firearms, firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes or other types of explosives or explosive devices, or carry or discharge an air gun, or pistol, any sling shot or similar devices, including bows and arrows, or use any object calculated to make a noise sufficient to disturb the peace or quiet of the park. If such objects, weapons or articles are brought into any park, the person or persons so bringing them in will be subject to having them confiscated and are subject to citation for violation of this chapter. Confiscated items which are legally permitted will be returned to the owner through the Yucaipa police department. (Ord. 127 § 3.12, 1994)

 

12.04.160 Damaging property and land prohibited.
     No person shall cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, cage, pen, monument, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus or property; pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove any shrub, bush, plant or flower; make or write upon, paint or deface in any manner any building, monument, fence, bench or other structure in a park. No person shall cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel or fertilizer in a park. (Ord. 127 § 3.13, 1994)

 

12.04.170 Fires and camping.
     No person shall set or kindle a fire except in a stove or fireplace provided for that purpose, or camp in a park, without an approved special event permit. (Ord. 127 § 3.14, 1994)

 

12.04.180 Disposal of waste liquids and refuse.
     No person shall wash dishes, or empty salt water or other waste liquids, or leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers or other refuse in a park except in designated trash or refuse receptacles. (Ord. 127 § 3.15, 1994)

 

12.04.190 Games.
     No person shall play or engage in any game, that may potentially endanger or harm other users of the park. (Ord. 127 § 3.16, 1994)

 

12.04.200 Use of playground equipment.
     No person over the age of eleven shall ride or use playground equipment designated for young children. (Ord. 127 § 3.17, 1994)

 

12.04.210 Advertising matter.
     No person shall post, place or erect any bills, notices, papers, advertising devices or matter of any kind on park facilities, structures or on park property without written permission of the director. (Ord. 127 § 3.18, 1994)

 

12.04.220 Permit required to sell merchandise.
     No person shall conduct any business in a city park without first having obtained a business license, paid the appropriate license fee, complied with any and all applicable provisions of Chapter 5.04, and obtain an approved special event permit.

     Bona fide charitable and non-profit organizations, city-sponsored events and city-cosponsored events may sell merchandise, goods, articles or things only if specially authorized by the director upon the approval of the person using the facility at the time such nonprofit group proposes to sell goods. This section shall not apply to the sale of merchandise, goods, articles or things, by veterans who are physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, or the lawful distribution or dissemination of literature or otherwise engaging in a legitimate exercise of freedom of speech or press. (Ord. 127 § 3.19, 1994)

 

12.04.230 Commercial activity prohibited.
     No person shall practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession except as permitted in writing by the director. (Ord. 127 § 3.20, 1994)

 

12.04.240 Meetings.
     No person shall hold any meeting, service, concert, exercise, parade or exhibition at which more than fifty (50) persons are expected to attend in any public park, without first obtaining an approved facility reservation permit or a special event permit. (Ord. 127 § 3.21, 1994)

 

12.04.250 Drinking of alcoholic beverages.
     The possession, sale or consumption of any alcoholic beverage in a park is prohibited, except as expressly allowed as a condition of a special event permit and pursuant to the laws and regulations enforced by the State Department of Alcohol and Beverage Control. (Ord. 127 § 3.22, 1994)

 

12.04.255 Smoking and disposal of tobacco prohibited in city parks, playgrounds and on city trails.
     A.    No person shall be in possession of a burning tobacco or tobacco-related product, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipes or similar devices in or upon any public park, playground or trail in the city.

     B.     No person shall dispose of lighted or unlighted cigarettes or cigars, or cigarette or cigar butts. Or similar devices, or any other tobacco-related waste (including, but not limited to.. chewing tobacco) in or upon any public park, playground or trail in the city, except in a receptacle designated for such disposal.

     C.     No person shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to obtain compliance with this section.

     D.    For the purposes of this section and any resolutions adopted to effect the purposes of this section, ..smoking” means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigarette. cigar, pipe. plant, weed or any other lighted smoking product or equipment used to burn any tobacco product, weed, plant or another combustible substance (a “similar device”). the lighting of a cigarette, cigar, pipe or similar device, and the exhaling of gaseous products and particles created by the use Of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or similar device.

     E.     Violations of this section shall constitute an infraction unless prosecuted pursuant to an administrative citation procedure established by the city. (Ord. 256 § 1, 2006)

 

12.04.260 Reservation—Responsibility.
     The director shall be responsible for scheduling and controlling the use of parks, or portions thereof, for the maximum benefit and participation by interested persons or groups, both public and private. The director shall determine which areas of parks may be reserved for use and under what terms reservations are made. Activities sponsored or co-sponsored by the city shall be given preference in the use of city parks. (Ord. 127 § 3.23, 1994)

 

12.04.270 Reservation—General.
     All reservable areas of city parks may be reserved on a first-come, first-served basis. A standard facility reservation permit must be submitted at least one week prior to, but not more than eight weeks in advance, to apply for reserved park use. (Note: In the case of athletic fields, local leagues will be notified prior to the season of a special meeting that will determine dates for all leagues.) (Ord. 127 § 3.24, 1994)

 

12.04.280 Reservation—Policies/fees.
     All individuals and groups must adhere to all city policies while using city parks. Appropriate fees, forms and deposits, etc., must be submitted at the time a reservation is requested. (Ord. 127 § 3.25, 1994)

 

12.04.281 Bounce houses.
     A.    A permit shall be required to place and use a bounce house on city property. The bounce house must be operated pursuant to the permit terms and conditions.

     B.     For the purposes of this section and any resolutions adopted to effect the purposes of this section, the term “bounce house” means inflatable recreational equipment containing landing surfaces on which users may jump or bounce, which equipment is intended for outdoor use. (Ord. 233 § 1, 2004)

 

12.04.290 Reservation—Special event permit.
     Activities such as carnivals, community celebrations, outdoor festivals, and temporary special events shall require a special event permit and are subject to all requirements of Chapter 5.16, regulating temporary special events. (Ord. 127 § 3.26, 1994)

 

 

 

 

12.04.300 Reservation—Additional facilities.
     As a condition of issuance of a facility use permit or a special event permit, the director may also require the applicant to provide additional water and sanitary facilities and refuse receptacles as he/she reasonably believes to be necessary for the protection of public health, safety and welfare in connection with the intended use. (Ord. 127 § 3.27, 1994)

 

12.04.310 Reservation—Security.
     As a condition of issuance of a facility use permit or a special event permit, the director may require the applicant to provide the number of approved security personnel as the director determines may be necessary, based on the nature of the proposed event. (Ord. 127 § 3.28, 1994)

 

12.04.320 Reservation— Reimbursement.
     As a condition of issuance of a facility use permit or a special event permit, the applicant may be required to submit a cleaning deposit and to reimburse the city for any unusual cleanup and facility repair expenses and for services provided by the parks maintenance division or the police department incurred as a result of the activity authorized by the permit. (Ord. 127 § 3.29, 1994)

 

12.04.330 Consent required for permit or reservation transfer.
     No permit or reservation for the use of a park, or any portion thereof, shall be transferable or assignable without the written consent of the director. (Ord. 127 § 3.30, 1994)

 

12.04.340 Insurance.
     Any person or group holding an event requiring a facility use permit or special event permit under this chapter shall provide evidence of insurance with the city named as an additional insured insuring the city from any and all liability for injury to persons or property resulting from the activity. The minimum amount, type and form of such insurance shall be determined by the city risk manager. (Ord. 127 § 3.31, 1994)

 

12.04.350 Enforcement responsibility.
     The city police department shall have the primary responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, including all violations of state law within city parks. (Ord. 127 § 3.32, 1994)

 

12.04.360 Violations—Misdemeanor.
     No person shall violate any provisions, or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Unless a different penalty is prescribed for a violation of a specific provision of this chapter, any act mandated or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter is punishable as a misdemeanor. Every person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord. 127 § 3.33, 1994)

 

12.04.370 General penalty.
     A.    Except in cases where a different punishment is specifically prescribed elsewhere in this chapter, each misdemeanor offense is punishable by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both; provided, that where the city attorney determines that such action would be in the interest of justice, the city attorney may specify in the accusatory pleading that the offense shall be an infraction.

     B.     Except as otherwise prescribed elsewhere in this chapter, every offense specifically declared to be an infraction is punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, or for not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same provision within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same provision within one year. Any person who has previously been convicted two more times during any twelve (12) month period for any crime made punishable as an infraction shall be guilty of a misdemeanor upon the third violation. (Ord. 127 § 3.34, 1994)

 

12.04.380 Integration and interpretation.
     If a conflict arises between this chapter and previous ordinances, resolutions or policies of the city, this chapter shall take precedence.

     In the event that a question arises as to the interpretation, construction or application of the city park rules and regulations, the community services director shall make the final determination of each interpretation, construction or application. (Ord. 127 § 4, 1994)

Chapter 12.06 UNLAWFUL CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY IN PUBLIC PLACES
12.06.010 Declaration of purpose.
     The city council finds that this chapter is reasonably necessary to preserve and protect the public peace, health, safety, and the general welfare of the city, its residents and businesses. This chapter establishes reasonable regulations related to the usage of space within the city and unlawful camping while preserving the rights of individuals to use public property to exercise their first amendment and other constitutional rights.

     The purpose of this chapter is to maintain public streets and property, and limited private property such as private streets and parking lots, in a clean, safe and accessible condition for residents and the public at large; to promote and protect human sanitation and health while preserving appropriate recreational opportunities within the community; and to discourage or prevent the secondary impacts of vagrancy such as crime, visual blight, poor sanitation, disease, and discouragement of desirable economic activity and economic development while accommodating circumstances of necessity.

     Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit or make unlawful, activities of an owner of private property or other lawful user of private property that are normally associated with and incidental to the lawful and authorized use of private property for residential or other purposes; and provided further, nothing is intended to prohibit or make unlawful, activities of a property owner or other lawful user if such activities are expressly authorized by other provisions of this code or other laws, ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 336 § 2, 2015)

 

12.06.020 Definitions.
     Unless the particular provisions or context requires otherwise, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases in this chapter.

     “Camp” means to pitch, sleep in, cook in or occupy camp facilities or to use camp paraphernalia for the purpose of temporary or permanent human habitation or domicile. “Camp” shall not mean the use of any facilities or equipment which are used solely in connection with a special event conducted in accordance with a permit issued by the city under other provisions of this code.

     “Camp facilities” include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, or temporary shelters, trailers, and any other vehicle.

     “Camp paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, collapsible shelters, cots, beds, sleeping bags, bed rolls, hammocks or barbeques, open fires, portable stoves or other cooking equipment not provided or approved by the city.

     “Parking lot” means a land area or facility for the temporary storage of motor vehicles.

 

     “Private property accessible to the public” means privately owned property in the city, improved or unimproved, that lacks a physical barrier to entry, including, but not limited to, any of the following: privately owned streets, privately owned parking lots, and property that is unenclosed and undeveloped.

     “Public property” means any publicly owned property in the city, improved or unimproved, including, but not limited to, any of the following: public alleyways; public parking lots; public passageways; public streets; public rights-of-way; publicly owned, maintained or operated parks; publicly owned, maintained or operated landscaped areas or greenbelts; publicly owned, maintained or operated open spaces, including, but not limited to, those adjacent to City Hall or other public facilities or buildings of any kind; publicly owned, maintained or operated golf courses and related facilities; public sidewalks, curbs and gutters; public educational institutions; or other government owned, maintained or operated properties located within the city.

     “Store” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, or to place or leave in a location. (Ord. 336 § 2, 2015)

 

12.06.030 Prohibited acts.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to camp or occupy camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia in any of the following areas within the city, except as otherwise provided herein or mandated by applicable law:

     1.     Any public property or public or private street or right-of-way, including sidewalks, bus stops and public landscaping;

     2.     Any public yard, building setback, vacant land, open space or any other area open or accessible to the public, improved or unimproved;

     3.     Any public or private parking lot;

     4.     In, on, under, or adjacent to any structure not intended for human occupancy, whether with or without bedding or camp paraphernalia, including, but not limited to, a tent, hammock or other similar protection or equipment; and

     5.     In, on, under, or adjacent to a parked vehicle on any public property or public or private parking lot, including, but not limited to, an automobile, bus, truck, camper, trailer or recreational vehicle.

     B.     It is unlawful for any person to urinate or evacuate their bowels on public or private property in an area exposed to public view or on any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or any other public place except in a public restroom.

     C.     It is unlawful for any person to make or kindle an open fire on public or private property accessible to the public except in an appropriate containment device provided or approved for that purpose by the city fire marshal and building official.

     D.    It is unlawful for any person on public property, or private property accessible to the public, to remain, stay or loiter between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. of the following day without the express permission of the city.

     It is not intended by this section to prohibit overnight camping on private residential property by friends or family of the property owner, so long as the owner consents. (Ord. 336 § 2, 2015)

 

12.06.040 Storage of personal property in public places.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas, except as otherwise designated by the city:

     1.     On any public property or public or private street or right-of-way within the city;

     2.     On any public yard, building setback, vacant land, open space or any other area open or accessible to the public, improved or unimproved;

     3.     On any public or private parking lot.

     B.     All stored personal property may be impounded by the city provided:

     1.     Immediate removal of the personal property without notice as required by subsection (B)(2) is necessary to protect public health, safety, or welfare, including, but not limited to, when the location of the personal property restricts for emergency response personnel or vehicles; or

     2.     A written notice is served on the person storing the personal property or is posted prominently and conspicuously on the stored personal property. The written notice shall contain the following:

     a.     A description of the personal property to be removed (such description may refer to an attached photograph).

     b.     The location of the personal property.

     c.     The date and time the notice was posted.

     d.     The section of the Yucaipa Municipal Code that is being violated.

     e.     A statement that the personal property will be impounded if not removed within twenty-four (24) hours.

     f.      The location where the removed property will be stored.

     g.     A statement that impounded property will be sold or otherwise disposed of if not claimed within thirty (30) days after impoundment.

     h.     A statement that the property owner shall be responsible for all costs of removal, storage and disposal.

     3.     Impounded personal property shall be moved to a place of storage, and the owner shall be assessed moving, storage, and other related fees and costs. Additionally, the owner of impounded personal property shall bear the responsibility for the risk of any loss or damage to the impounded property. Any impounded property of a perishable nature may be disposed of immediately in any manner without notice after impoundment by the city.

     4.     At least thirty (30) days prior to disposal of impounded personal property, the city shall serve notice in writing apprising the owner of the personal property of the description and location of the impounded personal property and of the intent of the city to sell, donate, or otherwise dispose of the impounded property. Service of written notice shall be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner of the impounded property if the owner is known or can be determined. Where the identity or the address of the owner is unknown or cannot be determined through the exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be posted for three consecutive days on the public property where the property was stored or seized. If notice cannot be posted as provided heretofore, then it shall be posted on the Internet website of the city for three consecutive days.

     5.     The owner or any other person entitled to the impounded personal property may repossess the property prior to its disposal upon submitting satisfactory proof of ownership or entitlement and payment of all unpaid rent, debts, and charges owing and all handling, storage, appraisal, advertising, and other expenses incurred by the city in connection with the proposed disposal of the impounded property.

     6.     All fees and unpaid rent, debts and charges owing and all expenses of handling, storage, appraisal, advertising, and other sale expenses incurred by the city shall be deducted from the proceeds of any sale of the impounded property. Any amount remaining shall be held in trust for the owner of the property for thirty (30) days after sale, after which time the proceeds shall be paid into the general fund.

     C.     The city shall maintain a record of the date and method of disposal of the impounded personal property, including the consideration received for the property, if any, and the name and address of the person taking possession of the property. Such record shall be kept as a public record for a period of not less than one year from the date of disposal of the property.

     D.    The city and its officers, employees, and agents shall not be liable to the owner of impounded personal property because of any disposal of the property made pursuant to this chapter. The remedies available to the owner of impounded property are limited to those provided in this chapter. (Ord. 336 § 2, 2015)

 

12.06.050 Exceptions.
     This chapter shall not apply to camping, occupying camp facilities or using camp paraphernalia, or to any person storing personal property, including camp paraphernalia within the city:

     A.    Where the area has been designated by the city for such purposes and the activity has been permitted as a temporary use or special event pursuant to Yucaipa Municipal Code Chapter 5.16, regulating temporary special events; or

     B.     Where a gathering, meeting or event is sponsored or conducted by the city. (Ord. 336 § 2, 2015)

 

12.06.060 Enforcement.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. In addition to other remedies provided by law, any person violating any provision of the chapter is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor in accordance with Section 1.12.010 of this code.

     B.     Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or any portion thereof, during which any violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and each instance shall be deemed punishable as provided in this chapter.

     C.     The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as permitting conduct not prescribed herein and shall not affect the enforceability of any other applicable provisions of law.

     D.    Any citation issued for a violation of this chapter may be dismissed upon review by the city manager if, in the interest of justice, at the time of citation issuance, all homeless shelters serving populations in the city were full to capacity, the person cited had no reasonable or adequate alternative course of action, and the person cited did not substantially contribute to the circumstances necessitating camping as his or her only reasonable course of action. (Ord. 336 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 12.08 MAINTENANCE AND LIABILITY ASSOCIATED WITH THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
12.08.010 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter the following terms are defined:

     “Abutter,” “abutting property owner,” “adjoining landowner” or “adjacent property owner” refer to an owner or possessor of land immediately abutting or adjoining the sidewalk or public right-of-way. Abutters include persons as defined in Section 1.04.010, commercial and industrial enterprises, public entities or municipalities such as the city.

     “Groundcover” includes any plant or vegetation which does not exceed eighteen (18) inches in height.

     “Maintain groundcover and trees” means to prune, trim, fertilize, irrigate, or treat for injury in a manner which will prolong the life span of a tree or groundcover, and in a manner which preserves and protects the condition and integrity of sidewalk improvements, and so as not to interfere with the public safety or convenience in the use of the sidewalk. “Maintain groundcover and trees” shall also include removal of weeds and/or debris, removal of dead or dying trees deemed to be a potential hazard by the city engineer, trimming of groundcover and/or trees within the area between the property line of the adjacent property and the street line, including parking strips and curbs, so that the sidewalk area will not endanger persons or property, and will be in a condition which will not interfere with the public convenience in the use of said sidewalk area except as to those conditions created or maintained in, upon, along, or in connection with such sidewalk area by any person other than the owner, under and by virtue of any permit or right granted to him, her or it by law and by the city, in which case such persons shall be under a like duty to repair and maintain.

     “Maintain sidewalk improvements” includes all removal, repair and replacement of sidewalk improvements which are necessary in order to protect the public convenience in the use of said sidewalk area.

     “Parkway” or “parking strip” refers to that portion of the sidewalk that is either unim-

proved and/or contains trees and/or groundcover. It shall also include driveway approaches and sidewalks existing between driveway approaches and driveways.

     “Public right-of-way” includes land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage or process of law is reserved for and dedicated to the use of the general public for street or highway purposes, including vehicular and pedestrian travel.

     “Sidewalk improvements” refers to those portions of the sidewalk which have been enhanced for pedestrian use by concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, or other hardscape material.

     “Tree” includes any plant or vegetation which exceeds eighteen (18) inches in height. (Ord. 277 § 1. 2008; Ord. 183 § 1, 1998)

 

l2.08.020 Duty to maintain sidewalks and the area adjacent to or near a sidewalk.
     A.    The city shall maintain sidewalk improvements within the public right-of-way which have been constructed and permitted in accordance with city standards and requirements, where the public right-of-way has been dedicated and accepted by the city or is a city street as defined in Section 1.04.010, where any dangerous condition of such sidewalk improvements, or the need for maintenance has not been caused, in whole or in part, as a result of trees and/or groundcover on abutting properties or by any other affirmative acts, obstruction or negligence of the abutting property owner.

     B.     The abutting property owner shall maintain and/or repair sidewalk improvements within the public right-of-way, which have been constructed by the property owner without a permit and not in accordance with city standards and requirements; which have been constructed on private property; or which, by the acts and/or omissions of the abutting property owner have been damaged, destroyed or rendered in a condition which the city has determined necessitates repair or replacement in order to protect the public health and safety.

     C.     The abutting property owner shall maintain groundcover and trees on him, her or its property adjacent to or near the public right-of-way, and in parkways and parking areas so as not to interfere with or endanger pedestrians using the sidewalk or public right-of-way, and in a condition which will not interfere with the public convenience in the use of the sidewalk area. This duty shall not extend to conditions created or maintained by any person other than the property owner in, upon, along, or in connection with such sidewalk area under or by virtue of any permit or right granted by law and by the city, in which case such persons shall be under a like duty to repair and maintain the sidewalk, parkways and parking strips.

     D.    In the interest of keeping street trees in the city and in consideration that many street trees were installed prior to the adoption of the city Standard Drawings that limit the type of trees within a certain distance of the sidewalk, curb and gutter or utilities, the city will replace the sidewalk damaged by tree roots once the abutting property owner replaces the street tree per the Standard Drawing Nos. 510 and 520, as amended from time to time, prior to the replacement of the sidewalk. (Ord. 322 § 1, 2012; Ord. 183 § 1, 1998)

 

12.08.030 Duty to maintain parkways and parking strips.
     The abutting property owner shall maintain groundcover and trees in and around parkways and parking strips. (Ord. 183 § 1, 1998)

 

12.08.040 Liability for costs associated with failure to maintain.
     The cost of maintenance or repair work performed by the city at the request of the abutting property owner or as a result of the property owner’s failure to perform the maintenance and/or repairs required in Sections 12.08.020(B) and (C), and 12.08.030, and for which notices are given, hearings held and assessment and collection procedures are con-ducted, as set forth in Section 12.08.050 herein, shall be borne by the property owner and/or may be assessed by the city as a lien on the property. (Ord. 183 § 1, 1998)

 

12.08.050 Notification of duty to maintain and/or repair—Allocation of costs—Hearing requirements and assessment.
     A.    Notice to maintain and/or repair pursuant to Sections 12.08.020(B), (C) and (D) and 12.08.030 may be given by delivering a written notice to the property owner of record of the abutting property, and/or by mailing a postal card, postage prepaid, to the property owner of record of the abutting property, at such property owner’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roles of the county. The postal card shall contain a notice to maintain and/or repair the sidewalk area. The street superintendent shall, immediately upon the mailing of the notice, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card of not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property.

     B.     The notice shall specify what work is required to be done, how it is to be done, and what materials shall be used in the maintenance and/or repair and shall further specify that if the maintenance or repair is not commenced within fourteen (14) days after notice is given and diligently and without interruption prosecuted to completion, the street superintendent shall make such repair, and the cost of the same shall be a lien on the property.

     C.     Upon completion of the maintenance and/or repair by the city, the street superintendent shall cause notice of the cost of the maintenance and/or repair to be given in the manner specified in this section for the giving of notice to repair and/or maintain. Such notice shall specify the day, hour and place when the city council will hear and pass upon, a report by the street superintendent of the cost of the maintenance and/or repair, together with any objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by any property owner liable to be assessed for the cost of such repair and any other interested persons.

     D.    Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing the city council shall hear and pass upon the report of the street superintendent, together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the cost of making such repair and/or maintenance, and any other interested persons. Thereupon the city council may make such revision, correction or modifications in the report as it may deem just, after which, by motion or resolution, the report as submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The city council may adjourn the hearing from time to time. The decisions of the city council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive.

     E.     The cost of the maintenance and/or repair may be assessed by the city council against the abutting property upon which such maintenance was performed and/or repair made. Such cost, so assessed, if not paid within five days after its confirmation by the city council, shall constitute a special assessment against that property, and shall be a lien on the property for the amount thereof which lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest thereon is paid, or until it is discharged of record.

     F.     The street superintendent may file in the office of the county recorder in which the property is located, a certificate substantially in the following form:

 

NOTICE OF LIEN

Pursuant to the authority vested in me by the Improvement Act of 1911, Streets & Highways Code Sections 5610 et seq., and otherwise as allowed by law, I did, on _____ day of _________ _____ cause the sidewalk improvements, parkway, parking strip, trees and/or groundcover or other works (as the case may be) in front of the real property hereinafter described, to be maintained, repaired and/or improved, and the City Council of the City of Yucaipa did, on the _____ day of _________ , _____ by Resolution No. __________ assess the cost of such maintenance, repair and/or improvement upon the real property hereinafter described, and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof, and the City of Yucaipa does hereby claim a lien on said real property in the sum of ___________ dollars ($ _________ ), and the same shall be a lien upon said real property until the said sum, with interest at the legal rate, from the said _____ day of __________ , _____ (date of confirmation of assessment), has been paid in full and discharged of record.

 

The real property hereinbefore mentioned and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain piece or parcel of land lying and being in the City of Yucaipa, San Bernardino County, State of California, and particularly described as follows:

 

[insert property description]

 

Dated this _____ day of_______ , _____

 

____________________

Superintendent of Streets

 

     G.    From and after the date of recording of the notice of lien, all persons shall be deemed to have had notice of the contents thereof. The notice of lien may include claims against one or more separate parcels of property, whether contiguous or not, together with the amount due, respectively, from each such parcel. The statute of limitation shall not run against the right of the city to enforce the payment of the lien. If any such lien is not paid the city may file and maintain an action to foreclose such lien in the same manner and under the same procedure, so far as applicable, as that under which delinquent bonds are foreclosed under the Improvement Act of 1911, Streets and Highways Code Section 5610 et seq.

     H.    As an alternative method of collection of the amount of the lien, the city coun-

cil, after confirmation of the report of the street superintendent, may order the notice of lien to be turned over to the county tax collector, whereupon the amount of the assessment, plus the costs of collection, shall be added to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the lot or parcel of land, and collected together with all other taxes thereon against the property. (Ord. 322 § 2, 2012; Ord. 183 § 1, 1998)

 

12.08.060 Liability for defective installation and maintenance of sidewalks, and for failure to maintain parkways and parking strips, groundcover and/or trees.
     A.    Every abutting property owner shall be directly liable to users of privately installed sidewalks for dangerous conditions due to defective installation or failure to maintain such sidewalks in a safe condition.

     B.     Every abutting property owner shall be directly liable to users of sidewalk improvements for dangerous conditions caused by failure to maintain parkways and parking strips; or by failure to maintain groundcover and/or trees; or by failure to maintain the sidewalk improvements in a safe condition. (Ord. 183 § 1, 1998)

 

12.08.070 Liability for creating conditions on or affecting sidewalks which cause injury to users.
     A.    Every abutting property owner shall be directly liable to users of sidewalks adjacent to his, her or its property for dangerous or other conditions which have been created on or along the sidewalk, such as encroachments and debris.

     B.     Any abutting property owner who has created a condition on or along the sidewalk adjacent to his, her or its property, which condition causes injury or damage to others, is liable and responsible, and shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, for any such injuries or damages which may be assessed against the city as a result of such condition. (Ord. 183 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 12.12 NEWSRACKS
12.12.010 Findings, purpose, and intent.
     A.    The uncontrolled placement of newsracks in public right-of-way presents an inconvenience and danger to the safety and welfare of persons using such right-of-way, including pedestrians, persons entering and leaving vehicles and buildings, and persons performing essential utility, traffic control, and emergency services.

     B.     Newsracks so located as to cause an inconvenience or danger to persons using the public right-of-way, and any unsightly newsracks located therein, constitute public nuisances.

     C.     The uncontrolled proliferation of newsracks detracts from the appearance of streets, sidewalks, and adjacent businesses.

     D.    The uncontrolled placement of newsracks may inhibit safe entry and departure of vehicles, both public and private.

     E.     The uncontrolled placement of newsracks impairs the vision and distracts the attention of motorists and pedestrians, particularly small children, and may cause injury to the person or property of such persons.

     F.     The placement of newsracks without a permit based on the detailed findings in public rights-of-way adjacent to residential areas detracts from and reduces neighborhood aesthetics, and it increases the exposure of residents to noise, traffic volume and hazards, and congestion.

     G.    The uncontrolled placement of newsracks increases the civil exposure of the city to personal injury and property damages claims.

     H.    City-controlled placement of newsracks provides for and maintains the freedom of speech and press for newspapers and news periodicals using dispensing devices for distribution purposes.

     I.      The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted in pursuance of, and for the purpose of, securing and promoting the public safety and general welfare of persons in the city in their use of public rights-of-way. (Ord. 169 § 1, 1997)

 

12.12.020 Definitions.
     Whenever the following words and phrases are used in this chapter they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

     “Distributor” means the person responsible for placing and maintaining a newsrack in a public right-of-way.

     “Newsrack” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit, or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display, sale or distribution of publications.

     “Parkway” means the area between the sidewalk and the curb of the roadway, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the traveled roadway and the edge of a public right-of-way. “Parkway” also includes any area within a roadway that is not open to vehicular travel.

     “Public right-of-way” means any place of any nature which is dedicated to use by the public for pedestrian and vehicular travel, and includes, but is not limited to, a street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, crossing, intersection, parkway, highway, alley, lane, mall, court, way, avenue, boulevard, road, roadway, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, thoroughfare, park square, and other similar public way.

     “Roadway” means that part of a public right-of-way that is designated and used primarily for vehicular travel.

     “Sidewalk” means that part of a public right-of-way that is designated and ordinarily used for pedestrian travel. (Ord. 169 § 2, 1997)

 

12.12.030 Prohibition.
     No person shall place, install, use or maintain any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon, in, or on any portion of a public right-of-way or what projects onto, into, or over any part of a public right-of-way except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 169 § 3, 1997)

 

12.12.040 Standards for newsracks placed on sidewalks.
     Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon, in, or on any portion of a public right-of-way or which projects onto, into or over any part of a public right-of-way shall comply with the standards set forth in this section.

     A.    No newsrack shall exceed fifty (50) inches in height, twenty-seven (27) inches in width, or twenty (20) inches in thickness.

     B.     The newsracks shall be painted black, brown, green, gray, blue or white.

     C.     No advertising signs or material, other than those dealing with the name of the publication contained within the newsrack, shall be displayed on the outside of the newsrack.

     D.    Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin return mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in the event he/she is unable to receive the publication paid for. The coin return mechanism shall be maintained in good working order. Newsracks dispensing free publications are exempt from this subsection.

     E.     Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to be seen by anyone using the newsrack a notice setting forth the name and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone service to call to report a malfunction, or to secure a refund in the event of a malfunction of the coin return mechanism, or to give the notices provided for in the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     F.     Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so that:

     1.     It is reasonably free of dirt and grease;

     2.     It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof;

     3.     It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereof;

     4.     The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration;

     5.     The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading; and

     6.     The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.

     G.    Newsracks lawfully in existence on July 14, 1997, shall be allowed to remain at the same location, provided they are not determined to be a public nuisance or dangerous to the public safety or general welfare, for a period of six months following adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. In order to benefit from this subsection, a distributor must report the number and location of all newsracks located within the public right-of-way existing within the city as of July 14, 1997, to the public works department within sixty (60) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Such inventory list shall be conclusive as to the location and existence of such newsracks. The distributor must submit an annual update report to the public works director, including all new locations of its newsracks. Thereafter, all such newsracks shall be required to comply with all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 169 § 4, 1997)

 

12.12.050 Location of newsracks.
     Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon, in, or on any portion of a public right-of-way or which projects onto, into or over any part of a public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this section:

     A.    No newsrack shall be located in whole or in part in any roadway.

     B.     Newsracks shall be located only near the curb (or, if there is no curb, the edge of the roadway) or the wall of a building. Newsracks located near the curb shall be located no less than eighteen (18) inches or more than twenty-four (24) inches from the roadway edge of the curb. Newsracks located adjacent to a building shall be located parallel to and not more than six inches from the wall thereof. No newsrack shall be located directly in front of any display window of any building abutting a sidewalk or parkway, except near the curb, without the written consent of the person or entity legally in occupancy or otherwise in control of the premises on which the display window is located. If such consent is withdrawn, any newsrack placed in front of a display window shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of the date of written notice from the city to the owner of such newsrack. No newsrack shall be located on the sidewalk or parkway directly opposite a newsstand or another newsrack.

     C.     Existing newsracks shall be bolted or safely secured to the sidewalk or concrete slab or other alternate technique approved by the public works director. After one year from the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all newsracks must be bolted to the sidewalk or concrete slab.

     D.    Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided that no cluster of newsracks shall exceed a distance of more than ten feet. A cluster shall include no more than six newsracks. There shall be a limit of two newsracks per publication at any given location per cluster.

     E.     No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:

     1.     Within one hundred (100) feet of any other cluster of newsracks whether or not containing the same issue or edition of the same publication;

     2.     Where placement unreasonably interferes with the use of utility poles, traffic signs or signals, mailboxes, mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery. (Ord. 169 § 5, 1997)

 

12.12.060 Display of certain matter prohibited.
     Publications offered for sale from newsracks placed or maintained on the public right-of-way shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner which exposes to public view from the public right-of-way any of the following:

     A.    Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs or excrement where such statements or words have their purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront;

     B.     Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anuses or anal regions of any person where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront; and

     C.     Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where such picture or illustration has as its purposes or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront.

     “Explicit sexual acts,” as used in this section, means depictions of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, sadism, masochism or lewd exhibition of genitals, whether any of the above conduct is depicted or described as being performed above or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, or other act of, sexual arousal, involving any physical contact with a person’s genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region. (Ord. 169 § 6, 1997)

 

12.12.070 Display in areas where minors are not excluded—Harmful matter restricted.
     No person shall knowingly display or cause to be displayed, in any public place where minors are not excluded, any harmful matter as defined in Section 313 of the Penal Code unless such matter is displayed in newsracks equipped with devices commonly known as blinder racks affixed in such a manner that the lower two-thirds of the matter is not exposed to view. (Ord. 169 § 7, 1997)

 

12.12.080 Encroachment permit required.
     A.    Any person who desires to install or place a newsrack within the public right-of-way must first obtain an encroachment permit. The submittal of the list by the distributor or publisher shall constitute the application for the encroachment permit. No fee will be charged for the permit and annual update reports.

     B.     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, newsracks shall be permitted in the public right-of-way of a public interest adjoining land zoned for residential use only if the street is a major arterial as shown in the transportation element of the general plan. The public works director or authorized representative shall keep a current registration of all encroachment permits, including name of permit holder, addressee, telephone number, date of issued permit and location of nuisance. (Ord. 169 § 8, 1997)

 

12.12.090 Impoundment of racks.
     A.    The public works director or designee:

     1.     May immediately correct any violation of this chapter and shall do so without impounding if such correction can be accomplished simply, easily, quickly and without expense;

     2.     May notify the person, if known, maintaining a newsrack found in violation of this chapter, either in person, by telephone or by mail, in their discretion, and/or of the date of the notice, the newsrack will be impounded; by affixing a notice to the newsrack, that unless the violation is corrected or a hearing requested, within ten working days if the notice is in person or by telephone, within ten working days if the notice is by mail, or within ten working days if the notice is by affixing a notice to the newsrack,

     3.     May impound any newsrack in accordance with the decision of any hearing requested pursuant to this chapter.

     B.     If a hearing on the impounding of the newsrack is not timely requested or if the newsrack is not returned in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the city manager or designee may sell or otherwise dispose of the newsrack, and its contents, and deposit the proceeds, if any, from any such sale or other disposition, or any moneys contained in said newsrack, in the city general fund. (Ord. 169 § 9, 1997)

 

12.12.100 Return of impounded racks.
     A.    Unless the newsrack and its contents are being held as evidence in a criminal prosecution, the person maintaining the newsrack, or if there is no such known person, a claimant who provides sufficient proof of ownership of an impounded newsrack may, at any time up to and including the thirtieth day after the impounding, and if a hearing pursuant to this chapter is held concerning the newsrack, may, at any time up to and including the thirtieth day after the decision at such hearing becomes final, obtain a return of the newsrack and its contents, upon paying an impound fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus the reasonable additional cost, if any, of impounding the newsrack in excess of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).

     B.     The city manager or designee may, after a hearing in accordance with this chapter order the newsrack returned without payment of any impound fee; or if an impound fee has previously been paid, may order return of any such impound fee.

     C.     A court before whom criminal charges concerning an impounded newsrack are pending, may, upon dismissal of the charges or a finding of acquittal, in its discretion order an impounded newsrack returned without payment of an impound fee or the return of the impound fee paid. (Ord. 169 § 10, 1997)

 

12.12.110 Appeal.
     Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, order or action taken under the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the city manager. An appeal must be perfected within ten working days after receipt of the notice of decision or action by filing with the city manager a notice of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal, identifying the location of the newsrack, name, address, and telephone number of the appellant. The city manager shall then appoint a hearing officer to hear the appeal. The hearing must be held on a date within sixty (60) days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing. The hearing officer shall give the appellant and any other interested party the reasonable opportunity to be heard, in order to show cause why the determination of the city manager or designee should not be upheld. Within five days of the hearing, the city officer shall make a written decision. The decision is final, with no appeal to the city council. Fees for filing an appeal shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 169 § 11, 1997)

 

12.12.120 Abandonment.
     In the event a newsrack remains empty for a period of thirty (30) continuous days, the same shall be deemed abandoned and may be treated in the manner provided in Section 12.12.090 for newsracks in violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 169 § 12, 1997)

 

12.12.130 Liability insurance and indemnification.
     A.    As a condition of approval of the permit, the permittee must file with the director of public works an insurance certificate establishing that the applicant has in force public liability and property damage insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) to indemnify the city for damage to city property arising out of the permittee’s activities.

     B.     Every permittee operating or maintaining a newsrack upon or within the public property, rights-of-way, or public easements adjacent to streets of this city shall agree, prior to the granting of a newsrack permit, to indemnify and hold harmless the city of Yucaipa, its officials, officers, employees, agents and representatives from any loss, liability, damage or cost sustained by any person or property, arising from the installation, operation or use of such newsrack and that such obligation shall extend to permittees and their officers, agents, contractors, employees, and representatives; provided, however, that such obligation to indemnify and hold harmless the city of Yucaipa, its officials, officers, employees, agents and representatives shall not extend to any loss, liability damage, or cost resulting from the acts or property of another. (Ord. 169 § 13, 1997)

 

12.12.140 Violations.
     Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is subject to criminal prosecution as permitted in Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 169 § 14, 1997)

Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapter 13.04 STORM DRAIN SYSTEM
Chapter 13.08 UNDERGROUND UTILITY FACILITIES

Chapter 13.04 STORM DRAIN SYSTEM
Article I. Authority, Purpose and Policy, Definitions
13.04.010 Authority.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to authority conferred to the city under state law and the areawide urban stormwater runoff permit [NPDES Permit No. CAS618036, Order No. R8-2002-0012] issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board Santa Ana Region pursuant to Section 402(p) of the Clean Water Act. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.020 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to promote and ensure the future health, safety and general welfare of inhabitants of the city by controlling discharges into the city storm drain system. This will be accomplished by federal, state and local laws and regulations prescribing regulations to effectively prohibit non-stormwater discharges into the city’s stormwater drainage system and to specifically achieve the following objectives:

     A.    Control discharges from spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater;

     B.     Reduce the discharge of pollutants in all stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable;

     C.     Protect and enhance the water quality of local, state and federal watercourses, water bodies, ground water and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with federal, state and local laws and regulations;

     D.    Establish penalties for violations of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.030 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Act or the Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.

     “Adjustment” means a determination that the volumetric amount of stormwater, which enters the stormwater drainage system from a premises is deemed to be a defined amount substantially different from the average stormwater drainage.

     “Area-wide urban stormwater runoff permit” means the current, regional NPDES permit issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, to the San Bernardino County Flood Control District, San Bernardino County and sixteen (16) incorporated cities discharging stormwater into the Upper Santa Ana River Basin for the regulation of stormwater discharges from municipal separate storm sewer systems.

     “Average stormwater drainage” means the average amount of stormwater drainage that enters the stormwater drainage system from a premises, based on runoff factors established by the San Bernardino County Flood Control District.

     “BMP” means any best management practice, best management guideline, or best management requirement as adopted by any federal, state, regional, or local agency and applicable to storm drain system.

     “City or the city” means the City of Yucaipa, California.

     “City engineer” means the city engineer for the city, or the engineer’s designee.

     “City permit” means any permit issued by the city.

     “City construction activity” means any activity used in the process of developing, redeveloping, enhancing, or maintaining land, including but not limited to: land disturbance, building construction, paving and surfacing, storage and disposal of construction related materials, or as defined by the State Water Resources Board or the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, whichever is more restrictive, that necessitates securing an NPDES Permit or NOI.

     “Contamination” means, as defined in the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, “an impairment of the quality of waters of the state by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. ‘Contamination’ includes any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of waste whether or not waters of the state are affected.”

     “Compliance schedule” means the time period allowed by the city for a discharger to achieve compliance with the city’s stormwater regulations. The compliance schedule shall contain specific dates by which adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related equipment and/or procedures must be installed or implemented.

     “Developed parcel” means any lot or parcel of land altered from its natural state by the construction, creation, and addition of impervious area, except public streets or highways.

     “Developer” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who proposes to develop, develops, or causes to be developed real property for himself or for others except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not developers.

     “Dewatering” means the removal and disposal of surface water or groundwater for purposes of preparing a site for construction.

     “Discharge” means any release, spill, leak, flow or escape of any liquid including sewage, wastewater or stormwater, semi-solid or solid substance onto the land or into the city’s stormwater drainage system.

     “Discharger” means any person, property owner or occupant of a unit, building, premises or lot in the city who discharges or causes to be discharged any of the substances listed in the item (above) directly or indirectly into the city’s stormwater drainage system.

     “EPA” means the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States of America.

     “General permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity” means a statewide general NPDES permit that regulates all stormwater discharges associated with construction projects that disturb five acres or more of land or which result in the disturbance of less than five acres, but which are part of a larger common plan of development or sale.

     “General permit for stormwater discharges from industrial activities” means a statewide general NPDES permit that regulates stormwater discharges associated with industrial activities that are listed in 40 CFR Section 122.26 (b) (14).

     “Hearing officer” means the city’s engineer or designee, who presides, at the administrative hearings authorized by this chapter and issues final decisions on matters raised therein.

     “Illegal discharge” means any discharge to the stormwater drainage system that is not composed entirely of stormwater or contains constituents not provided for under Prohibited discharges, Section 13.04.090.

     “Illicit connection” means any connection to the stormwater drainage system that is directly or indirectly associated with an illegal discharge except for connections permitted pursuant to a valid NPDES permit authorized by written approval of the city.

     “Maximum extent practicable (MEP)” means to the maximum level of pollutant reductions or stormwater runoff reductions that must be achieved by treatment, infiltration or a combination of treatment, infiltration and best management practices, taking into account equitable considerations of synergistic, additive, and competing factors, including but not limited to, gravity of the problem, fiscal and technical feasibility, public health risks, societal concern, and social benefits, to effectively limit the discharge of pollutants or stormwater runoff into the city’s stormwater drainage system.

     “New development” means land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision.

     “NPDES” means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.

     “NPDES Permit” means any permit issued pursuant to the NPDES program under the Federal Clean Water Act.

     “NOI” means a notice of intent to comply with NPDES general stormwater permit.

     “Non-stormwater” means any water not associated with storm runoff and that originates on or traverses any property.

     “Nonstructural BMPS” means any schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, managerial practices or operational practices that aim to prevent stormwater pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the source of pollution.

     “Nuisance” means any condition described by all of the following:

     1.     Is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.

     2.     Affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.

     3.     Occurs during, or as a result of, the treatment or disposal of wastes.

     “Permittee” means the San Bernardino County Flood Control District; San Bernardino County; and each of the sixteen (16) cities in San Bernardino County discharging stormwater drainage into the Upper Santa Ana River Basin and regulated by the areawide urban stormwater runoff permit.

     “Person” means any individual, partnership, committee, entity, association, corporation, public agency, and any other organization, or group of persons public or private; the masculine genders shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.

     “pH” means the measure of the hydrogen ion concentration of water and the standard by which the acidity or alkalinity of a water sample is determined.

     “Pollutant” means, but is not limited to, any liquid, solid or semi-solid substances or combination thereof, which causes a nuisance or contributes to a condition of contamination or pollution of the city’s stormwater runoff, stormwater drainage system or the impairment or degradation of waters of the state, including but not limited to the following:

     1.     Floatable materials (such as floatable plastics or wood products, and metal shavings, or materials forming films, foam or scum);

     2.     Household waste (such as trash, cleaners, toxic or hazardous chemicals, yard wastes, animal fecal materials, used oil, coolant, gasoline and other vehicle fluids);

     3.     Metals and non-metals, including compounds of metals and non-metals;

     4.     Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease);

     5.     Domestic sewage from sewer line overflows, septic tanks, porta-potties, boats and recreational vehicles;

     6.     Animal wastes (such as wastes from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, stables, and show facilities);

     7.     Substances having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.5, or unusual coloration, turbidity or odor;

     8.     Materials causing an increase in biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand or total organic carbon;

     9.     Materials containing base/neutral or acid extractable organic compounds;

     10.   Waste materials and wastewater generated on construction sites from construction activities (such as painting and staining; use of sealants and glues; use of lime; use of wood preservatives and solvents; disturbance of asbestos fibers, paint flakes or stucco fragments; application of oils;

     11.   Lubricants, vehicle maintenance, construction equipment washing, concrete pouring and cleanup; use of concrete detergents; steam cleaning or sand blasting; use of chemical degreasing or diluting agents; and chlorinated water from potable line flushing;

     12.   Those pollutants defined in Section 1362 (6) of the Federal Clean Water Act; and

     Any other constituent or material, including but not limited to pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials, in quantities that have been determined by the state or EPA to adversely affect the beneficial uses of waters of the state.

     “Receiving water” means all waters of the United States and tributaries of waters of the United States that are used for recreational or other purposes; from which fish or shell fish are taken; or which are used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate commerce.

     “Redevelopment” means the creation or addition of impervious surfaces or the making of improvements to an existing structure on an already developed site; replacement of impervious surfaces that are not part of a routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities related with structural or impervious surfaces.

     “Sewage” means the wastewater of the community derived from residential, agricultural, commercial, or industrial sources, including domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater.

     “SIC (Standard Industrial Classification)” means the statistical classification standard underlying all establishment-based federal economic statistics classified by industry. The Standard is published in the SIC Manual, 1987, Office of Management and Budget.

     “Stormwater drainage system” means all of the property owned or leased by the city and used directly or indirectly in the collection, conveyance, storage or disposal of stormwater and including but not limited to conduits, natural or artificial drains, channels, basins and watercourses, together with appurtenances, pumping stations and equipment which is tributary to the regional stormwater runoff system.

     “Stormwater” means rain water, snow melt runoff, and associated surface runoff and drainage.

     “Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)” means the plan as described in the general construction activity stormwater permit as issued by the State Water Resources Control Board on August 19, 1999 and as may be amended, or the general industrial activities stormwater permit as issued on April 17, 1997 and as may be amended, which specifies BMPs that will prevent pollutants from contacting stormwater and all products of erosion from moving off site into receiving waters.

     “Stormwater quality management plan (SWQMP)” means a plan required of new development/redevelopment projects, outlining appropriate non-structural and structural BMPs, including stormwater infiltration and treatment devices that will be implemented and installed to prevent pollutants from being discharged into the city’s stormwater drainage system, during and after construction.

     “Structural BMPs” means any structural facility designed and constructed to remove pollutants from stormwater runoff or prevent pollutants from contacting stormwater. Examples are canopies, structural enclosures, sediment basins, catch basin inlet filters, grassy swales, and sand and oil interceptors.

     “Swimming pool” means any body of water created by artificial means designed or used for swimming, immersion or therapeutic purposes.

     “Violation” means a breach of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

Article II. General Conditions and Prohibitions
13.04.040 City’s right of revision.
     The city council may establish by ordinance and/or resolution more stringent limitations and requirements related to discharges into the city’s storm drain system if deemed necessary. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.050 Administration.
     Except as otherwise provided herein, the city engineer for the city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city engineer may be delegated in writing by the city engineer to persons acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.055 Applicability.
     This chapter shall apply to all dischargers, including all residents as well as commercial, industrial and construction enterprises, to the city’s stormwater drainage system, and to dischargers outside the city who, by agreement with the city, utilize the city’s stormwater drainage system. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.060 Notice procedures.
     Unless otherwise provided herein, any notice required to be given by the city engineer under this chapter shall be in writing and served in person or by first class or registered or certified mail. Notice shall be deemed to have been given at the time of deposit, postage prepaid, in a facility regularly serviced by the United States Postal Service. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.070 Connections.
     A.    The discharge or diversion of non-stormwater is permissible only when connection to the storm drain system is made in accordance with a valid city permit approved construction plan, or, an NPDES permit and/or an NOI, and the discharge conforms to the standards of Section 13.04.100.

     B.     It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain and/or continue any illicit connections. This prohibition is retroactive and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under a permit or other authorization or whether permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection.

     C.     Permits are required for the construction or modification of any storm drain or conveyor of drainage waters and appurtenant items within:

     1.     Dedicated easements, rights-of-way, or public place and/or facility;

     2.     Private property so as it may directly or indirectly discharge into the storm drain system. Indirect discharges include, but are not necessarily limited to, under sidewalk drains, driveway approaches, and unrestricted sheet flow. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.080 Protection of the stormwater drainage system.
     Without prior written approval of the city engineer, no person shall construct or modify or cause to be constructed or modified any structure, facility, or appurtenant items which may alter the normal functioning of the storm drain system, including actions which may alter the capacity, fall, or structural integrity of a storm drain, channel, or related structures. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.090 Prohibited discharges.
     It is prohibited to:

     A.    Discharge directly or indirectly into the storm drain system any stormwater or other solid, liquid or gaseous matter in violation of any law, rule, regulation, permit, order or other requirement of any federal, state, county, municipal or other governmental entity or agency;

     B.     Discharge non-stormwater directly or indirectly to the storm drain system or any street, lined or unlined drainage ditch which leads to a public storm drain, unless such discharge is permitted by an NPDES permit or a city permit. If such discharge is permitted by an NPDES permit, but causes the city to violate any portion of its NPDES permit for stormwater discharges, such discharge is also prohibited;

     C.     Throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business place, or upon any public or private lot of land in the city, so that the same might be or become a pollutant;

     D.    Throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city;

     E.     Discharge any of the following types of waste into the city’s stormwater drainage system:

     1.     Sewage,

     2.     Surface cleaning wash water resulting from mopping, rinsing, pressure washing or steam cleaning of gas stations, and vehicle service businesses or any other business,

     3.     Discharges resulting from the cleaning, repair, or maintenance of any type of equipment, machinery, or facility including motor vehicles, concrete mixing equipment, portable toilet servicing, etc.,

     4.     Wash water from mobile auto detailing and washing, steam and pressure cleaning, carpet cleaning, drapery and furniture cleaning, etc.,

     5.     Waste water from cleaning municipal, industrial, commercial, residential areas (including parking lots), streets, sidewalks, driveways, patios, plazas, work yards and outdoor eating or drinking areas, containing chemicals or detergents and without prior sweeping, etc.,

     6.     Stormwater runoff from material or waste storage areas containing chemicals, fuels, grease, oil or other hazardous materials or contaminated equipment,

     7.     Discharges from pool or fountain water containing chlorine, biocides, acids or other chemicals; pool filter backwash containing debris and chlorine,

     8.     Pet waste, yard waste, debris, sediment, etc.,

     9.     Restaurant wastes such as grease, mop water, and wash water from cleaning dishes, utensils, laundry, floors, floor mats, trash bins, grease containers, food waste, etc.,

     10.   Chemicals or chemical waste,

     11.   Medical wastes,

     12.   Blow down or bleed water from cooling towers and boilers, regenerative brine waste from water softeners or reverse osmosis treatment systems,

     13.   Materials or chemical substances that cause damage to the city’s stormwater drainage system,

     14.   Any other material that causes or contributes to a condition of contamination, nuisance or pollution in the city’s storm drainage system or causes a violation of any waste disposal regulations, waste discharge requirements, water quality standards or objectives adopted by the State Water Resources Control Board, Regional Water Quality Control Board, EPA, San Bernardino County Fire Hazmat, San Bernardino County Flood Control District or any other public agency with jurisdiction. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.100 Exceptions to the prohibited discharges.
     The following discharges are exempt from the prohibited discharges listed in Section 13.04.090:

     A.    Waterline flushing and other discharges using approved BMPs and as approved by the Regional Water Quality Control Board from potable water sources; provided, that the chlorine residual in any heavily chlorinated water used to disinfect water storage facilities or water mains is thoroughly dechlorinated prior to contacting receiving waters;

     B.     Landscape irrigation, lawn watering and irrigation water;

     C.     Diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, infiltration of separate storm drains, springs, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

     D.    Uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation and footing drains, water from crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation;

     E.     Individual residential carwashings, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and

     F.     Water flows generated from emergency response and/or fire fighting activities, however, appropriate BMPs shall be implemented to the extent practible; BMPs must be implemented to reduce pollutants from non-emergency fire fighting flow;

     G.    Waters not otherwise containing wastes as defined in California Water Code Section 13050 (d).

     The Regional Board may issue waste discharge requirements for discharges exempted from NPDES requirements, if identified to be a significant source of pollutants. The executive officer of the board may also add categories of non-stormwater discharges that are not significant sources of pollutants or remove categories of non-stormwater discharges listed above based upon a finding that the discharges are a significant source of pollutants. In this case, the list of exempted discharges, above, would be adjusted accordingly. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.110 Notification of intent and compliance with general permits.
     A.    Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger, described in any general stormwater permit addressing such discharges, as may be adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, shall provide NOI, comply with, and undertake all other activities required by any general NPDES stormwater permit applicable to such discharges.

     B.     Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit or discharge order relating to stormwater discharges shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit or order. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.120 Compliance with best management practices (BMP).
     Any person undertaking any activity or operation in the city that could potentially causes or contributes to stormwater pollution or a discharge of non-stormwater shall comply with all applicable best management practices (BMPs) as listed in the California Stormwater Best Management Practice Handbooks or the current, San Bernardino County Stormwater Program’s “Report of Waste Discharge,” to reduce pollutants in stormwater runoff and reduce non-stormwater discharges to the city’s stormwater drainage system to the maximum extent practicable or to the extent required by law. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.125 Treatment of storm water runoff.
     If a discharger has the potential to introduce pollutants into the city’s stormwater drainage system or is exceeding EPA parameter benchmark values, the city may require the installation of appropriate stormwater treatment equipment or devices. These devices shall reduce pollutant constituents to the degree of reduction attainable through the application of the best management practices to the maximum extent practicable. Any required treatment equipment or device shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the expense of the discharger.

     Detailed plans showing the treatment device and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction or installation of the equipment. The review and approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the discharger from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to treat stormwater runoff or prevent the introduction of stormwater pollutants to comply with this chapter. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.130 Affirmative defense.
     A discharger shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of Section 13.04.090 where the discharger can demonstrate it did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources would cause violation of the municipal NPDES stormwater permit. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.140 Spill containment.
     A.    Persons storing chemicals or chemical waste outdoors shall be required to install spill containment subject to requirements established by the city engineer and federal, state and county standards. Persons storing any other materials or equipment that are potential sources of stormwater pollution are also required to install spill containment.

     B.     No person shall operate a spill containment system that could allow incompatible materials and/or wastes to mix, thereby creating hazardous or toxic substances in the event of failure of one or more containers.

     C.     Spill containment systems shall consist of a system of dikes, walls, barriers, berms and/or other devices designed to contain the spillage of the liquid contents of the containers stored in them and to minimize the buildup of stormwater from precipitation, and run-on from roof drainage and outside areas. If the spill containment system does not have a roof which covers the entire contained area, the spill containment system shall have the capacity to contain precipitation from at least a twenty-four (24) hour, twenty-five (25) year rainfall event plus ten percent of the total volume of the material stored there or the volume of the largest container, whichever is greater. Spill containment systems shall also be constructed of impermeable and non-reactive materials to the liquids materials and/or wastes being contained.

     D.    Spilled and/or leaked materials and/or wastes and any accumulated precipitation shall be removed from the spill containment system in as timely a manner as is necessary to prevent the overflow of the spill containment system. Unless otherwise approved in writing by the city engineer, all chemicals or wastes discharged within the spill containment system shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local rules, regulations, and laws, and shall not be discharged into the public sanitary sewer system, stormwater drainage system or onto the ground. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.150 Prevention of accidental discharge.
     Protection of the storm drain system from accidental discharge of prohibited material is the responsibility of the person or persons in charge of such material. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall he approved by the city engineer prior to any construction. All existing dischargers shall complete such a plan. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the discharger from the responsibility to modify the dischargers facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.160 Immediate notification of accidental discharge.
     A.    A notice shall be permanently posted in a prominent place advising employees whom to contact in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees are advised of the emergency notification procedure.

     B.     In the event of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the users discharger to immediately telephone and notify the proper authorities.

     C.     In the event of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the discharger to immediately telephone and notify the city and applicable federal and state offices.

     D.    All discharges released into the city’s stormwater drainage system, including a street or gutter, shall be immediately reported to the city’s engineering department and fire department. All discharges that pose a threat to human health or the environment shall be reported to the executive officer of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board within twenty-four (24) hours by telephone or e-mail and followed with a written report of the spill event within five days. At minimum, all sewage spills over one thousand (1,000) gallons and all reportable quantities of hazardous materials or hazardous waste shall be reported within twenty-four (24) hours.

     E.     Within five working days following an accidental discharge to the storm drain system, the person or persons in charge of the material accidentally discharged shall submit a written report to the city engineer. The report shall describe in detail the type, volume and cause of the discharge, corrective actions taken, and measures to be taken to prevent future occurrences.

     F.     Such notification shall not relieve the discharger of any fines or civil penalties incurred as a result of such event, or any other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable laws. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.170 Authority to inspect.
     A.    The city engineer, or designated representative, shall be authorized at any reasonable time to enter the premises of any discharger to the city’s stormwater drainage system to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and to:

     1.     Conduct inspection, sampling, monitoring, and/or other authorized duties to enforce the provisions of this chapter;

     2.     Review any records, reports, test results or other information required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such review may include the necessity to photograph, videotape, or copy any applicable information; and

     3.     Inspect any wastes, chemicals, storage areas, storage containers, waste generating processes, treatment facilities, and discharge locations. Such inspection may include the necessity to photograph or videotape any applicable wastes, chemicals, storage areas, storage containers, waste generating processes, treatment facilities, and discharge locations.

     B.     Adequate identification shall be provided by the city engineer, or designated representative, when entering the premises of any discharger. If such entry is refused or cannot be obtained, the city engineer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspection of the premises.

     C.     If the city engineer has reasonable cause to believe that non-stormwater discharge conditions on or emanating from the premises are so hazardous, unsafe, or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the public health or safety, the city engineer shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect the property, and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection, whether the property is occupied or unoccupied and whether or not formal permission to inspect has been obtained.

     D.    Where a discharger has instituted security measures requiring proper identification and clearance before entry onto the premises, the discharger shall make all necessary arrangements with its security agents in order that, upon presentation of such identification, duly designated city personnel shall be permitted to enter the premises without delay for the purpose of performing their authorized duties. For facilities, which require special clearances to conduct inspections, it shall be the responsibility of the discharger to obtain all necessary clearances on behalf of the city so that city inspections are not impaired. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

Article III. Residential Requirements
13.04.171 Prohibited discharges.
     In addition to the general prohibitions in Section 13.04.090 of this chapter, it is prohibited to discharge any of the following to any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk, storm drain inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business place, or upon any public or private lot of land in the city, so that the same may be and/or may become a pollutant:

     A.    Animal waste, soil, leaves, plant and tree cuttings, grass clippings, weeds, dead trees, fertilizer, soil amendments or mulch, and pesticides;

     B.     Concrete or cement waste, brick and tile work wastes, plaster and drywall tool cleanup water, waste paint or painting cleanup water, asphalt or asphalt cleanup solvents or slurry from saw cutting concrete or asphalt and other construction waste;

     C.     Domestic sewage including wastewater from sinks, washing machines, dishwashers, toilets, campers, motorhomes or trailers;

     D.    Chemicals, degreasers, bleach, steam cleaning or pressure washing wastewater;

     E.     Motor oil, antifreeze, gasoline, diesel, kerosene, solvents, battery acid, brake fluid, transmission fluid, power steering fluid, engine cleaning compounds, engine or parts cleaning washwater or rinsewater and any other vehicular fluids;

     F.     Water softener brine waste, or any other waste water from other household water treatment systems;

     G.    Wastewater from draining swimming pools, ponds or fountains which contain chlorine biocides, acids or other chemicals, pool filter backwash containing debris and chlorine;

     H.    Discharges from acid cleaning of swimming pools, ponds or fountains or filter cleaning from the same;

     I.      Any other material that causes or contributes to a condition of contamination, nuisance or pollution in the city’s storm drainage system or causes a violation of any waste disposal regulations, waste discharge requirements, water quality standards or objectives adopted by the State Water Resources Control Board, Regional Water Quality Control Board. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.172 Responsibility for illegal discharge of prohibited substances.
     The property owner(s) of a lot or parcel from which an illegal discharge originates shall be ultimately responsible for all abatement and cleanup costs associated with the discharge, at owner’s own expense, if the responsible party cannot be located. Likewise, if the tenant of a multifamily residential unit has discharged a prohibited material or waste into the city’s storm drainage system or has caused the contamination of stormwater runoff from the property by tenant’s activities and the city engineer cannot determine the responsible party or residential unit responsible, the owner of the property from which the discharge originated, shall be responsible for the cleanup and abatement costs to mitigate the condition. Additionally, a property owner will be responsible for all cleanup costs and damages to the city’s storm drainage system from a contractor’s activities, if the contractor was hired by the owner and cannot be located. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.173 Maintenance of private residential storm drainage system.
     A.    All private residential stone drainage inlets, underdrains and gutters shall be inspected annually and cleaned prior to the beginning of the rainy season if there is evidence of one or more of the following conditions:

     1.     The sediment/debris storage volume is twenty-five (25) percent or more full;

     2.     There is evidence of illegal discharge;

     3.     Accumulated sediment or debris impairs the hydraulic function of the facility.

     B.     Private streets shall also be swept and maintained as needed to prevent sediment, gardening waste, trash, litter and other contaminants from entering the city’s storm drainage system. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

Article IV. Industrial and Commercial Requirements
13.04.180 Non-stormwater discharges.
     All non-stormwater discharges associated with industrial and commercial activities that discharge into the city’s stormwater drainage system are prohibited except as permitted by an individual user’s NPDES Stormwater Permit or Section 13.04.100 of this chapter. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.181 General permit for stormwater discharges from industrial activities.
     A.    All businesses which own or operate facilities described in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14) (i)-(xi) are required to obtain coverage under the state’s general permit for discharges of stormwater associated with industrial activities, at least fourteen (14) days prior to the startup of business activities. All listed businesses are required to submit a completed notice of intent (NOI) form, site map and application fee to the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB). The SWRCB also requires the listed businesses to prepare a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), retain a copy of the SWPPP on site and comply with all the requirements of the general permit. Copies of the NOI form are available from the city’s engineering department.

     B.     The city requires that all businesses that have filed an NOI for coverage under the state’s general permit and have received a waste discharge identification number (WDID) from the State Water Resources Control Board, either mail, FAX or hand deliver a copy of the WDID letter from the state to the engineering department, as proof of filing. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.182 Conditional category—Notice of nonapplicability.
     A.    Businesses which own or operate facilities described in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14)(xi) may prepare a notice of non-applicability in lieu of an NOI if they can certify on this form provided by the State Water Resources Control Board that there is no manufacturing process, material, equipment or product storage outside in an area that is exposed to stormwater runoff. The notice of non-applicability must document all of the following:

     1.     All prohibited non-stormwater discharges have been eliminated or otherwise permitted;

     2.     All significant materials related to industrial activity (including waste materials) are not exposed to stormwater or authorized non-stormwater discharges;

     3.     All industrial activities and industrial equipment are not exposed to stormwater or authorized non-stormwater discharges;

     4.     There is no exposure of stormwater to significant materials associated with industrial activity through other direct or indirect pathways such as from industrial activities that generate dust and particulates.

     B.     Businesses in this category are required to submit the notice of non-applicability to the local office of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, and are required to maintain the above documentation on-site at all times. They are also required to re-evaluate and re-certify once a year that the conditions above are continuously met. Copies of the notice of non-applicability form are available from the city’s engineering department. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.183 Best management practices (BMPS).
     A.    All businesses, regardless of permit status, shall implement all applicable BMPs, as listed in the California Stormwater Best Management Practice Handbooks or the current, San Bernardino County Stormwater Program’s Report of Waste Discharge, to reduce pollutants in stormwater runoff and reduce non-stormwater discharges to the city’s stormwater drainage system to the maximum extent practicable. All structural controls shall also be maintained to effectively prevent pollutants from contacting stormwater or remove pollutants from stormwater runoff to the maximum extent practicable. Maintenance records for structural and treatment devices, including waste hauling receipts shall be kept for a period of five years and made available to the city’s inspector, upon request.

     B.     If structural or treatment controls are not functioning as designed or are not effective in reducing stormwater pollutants or non-stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable, the city will require that the control device be repaired, rebuilt or replaced. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

Article V. Construction Requirements
13.04.190 Stormwater quality management plan (SWQMP).
     Prior to the issuance of any grading or building permit, all qualifying land development/redevelopment projects, shall submit and have approved a stormwater quality management plan (SWQMP) to the city engineer on a form provided by the city. The SWQMP shall identify all BMPs that will be incorporated into the project to control stormwater and non-stormwater pollutants during and after construction and shall be revised as necessary during the life of the project. The SWQMP submittal applies to construction projects covered by the NPDES general construction permit as well as construction projects less than five acres. Qualifying development/redevelopment projects include:

     A.    Home subdivisions of ten units or more. This includes single family residences, multifamily residences, condominiums, apartments, etc.;

     B.     Commercial developments of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or more. This includes nonresidential developments such as hospitals, educational institutions, recreational facilities, mini-malls, hotels, office buildings, warehouses, and light industrial facilities;

     C.     Vehicle maintenance shops;

     D.    Food service businesses developing five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of land area;

     E.     All hillside developments on ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, which are located on areas with known erosive soil conditions or where the natural slope is twenty-five (25) percent or more;

     F.     Developments of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of impervious surface or more adjacent to (within two hundred (200) feet) or discharging directly into environmentally sensitive areas such as areas designated in the ocean plan as areas of special biological significance or water bodies listed on the CWA Section 303(d) list of impaired waters;

     G.    Parking lots of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more exposed to stormwater. “Parking lot” is defined as land area or facility for the temporary storage of motor vehicles;

     H.    All re-development projects adding five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface on an already developed site. This includes additional buildings and/or structures, extension of an already existing building footprint and construction of parking lots, etc. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.191 General permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity.
     A.    Any developer/owner engaging in construction activities which disturb five acres or more of land shall apply for coverage under the general stormwater permit for construction activity with the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB). Any developer/owner engaging in construction activities which disturb less than five acres but are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is greater than five acres must also apply for coverage under the general stormwater permit for construction activity with the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB). “Construction activity” includes, but is not limited to: clearing, grading, demolition, excavation, construction of new structures, and reconstruction of existing facilities involving removal and replacement that results in soil disturbance. The owner of the land where the construction activity is occurring is responsible for obtaining coverage under the permit. Owners may obtain coverage under the general permit by completing a notice of intent form (NOI) and mailing the form along with a vicinity map and the appropriate fee to the office of the California State Water Resources Control Board. The NOI form and checklist of items to submit to the state is available from the State Water Resources Control Board in Sacramento, California or from the city’s engineering department. In addition, the owner shall also prepare a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) in accordance with state requirements.

     B.     Prior to obtaining any city-issued grading and/or construction permits the developer/owner shall provide evidence of compliance with the general construction permit by providing a copy of the waste discharger’s identification number (WDID) to the city’s engineering department. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.192 Non-stormwater discharges.
     A.    Discharges of non-stormwater from construction activities are generally prohibited except for those discharges listed in Section 13.04.100 of this chapter or any discharges authorized by the city engineer or the Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB). The city and the RWQCB will allow the discharge of certain non-stormwater discharges from construction sites provided that they are in compliance with the discharge limitations specified in the current general waste discharge requirements for de minimus discharges issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region.

     B.     The following discharges are authorized provided they are in compliance with the permit:

     1.     Construction dewatering wastes;

     2.     Wastes associated with well installation, development, test pumping and purging;

     3.     Aquifer testing wastes;

     4.     Dewatering wastes from subterranean seepage, except for discharges from utility company vaults;

     5.     Discharges resulting from hydrostatic testing of vessels, pipelines, tanks, etc.;

     6.     Discharges resulting from the maintenance of potable water supply pipelines, tanks, reservoirs, etc.;

     7.     Discharges resulting from the disinfection of potable water supply pipelines, tanks, reservoirs, etc.;

     8.     Discharges from potable water supply systems resulting from system failures, pressure releases, etc.;

     9.     Discharges from fire hydrant testing or flushing. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.193 Non-stormwater discharge reporting requirements.
     A.    Authorized non-stormwater discharges under Section 13.04.192 shall be reported to the city engineer at least five days prior to a planned discharge. Unplanned discharges of non-stormwater into the city’s storm drainage system shall be reported as soon as possible and before any discharge is initiated. The city’s engineering department, will provide a non-stormwater discharge notification form for any developer that is proposing to discharge any non-stormwater from a construction site. The non-stormwater discharge notification form must be submitted to the engineering department, for these discharges, at least five days prior to any planned discharge or as soon as possible for any unplanned discharge. Monitoring may also be required for these discharges. If the city provided form is not utilized, a report shall be submitted prior to discharge, which includes the following information:

     1.     Type of proposed discharge;

     2.     Estimated average and maximum daily flow rate;

     3.     Frequency and duration of discharge;

     4.     A description of the proposed treatment system (if appropriate);

     5.     A description of the path from the point of discharge to the nearest storm drain inlet.

     B.     All discharges shall be monitored daily for flow volume and shall be recorded in a daily log by the person responsible for the discharge. Discharges shall also be sampled during the first thirty (30) minutes of each discharge and weekly thereafter for continuous discharges for chlorine and total suspended solids. Monitoring data for flow, chlorine and suspended solids and any other required constituents shall be reported to the city’s engineering department, on a weekly basis. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.194 Best management practices.
     All construction projects which could potentially have an adverse impact on the city’s stormwater drainage system or waters of the state shall install and/or implement appropriate construction and post-construction BMPs, as listed in their SWQMP or the California Stormwater Best Management Practice Handbook, to reduce pollutants to the maximum extent practicable or to the extent required by law. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.200 Permits required.
     Any individual or entity wishing to engage in construction activity shall comply with Section 13.04.110, and provide evidence of compliance prior obtaining any city issued grading or construction permits. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

Article VI. Enforcement
13.04.205 Notice of correction.
     Whenever the city engineer or designee finds that any discharger has the potential to violate or has already violated any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in this chapter, any NPDES stormwater permit or the basin plan, the city may serve upon such person a written notice of correction stating the nature of the violation and the necessary actions that must be implemented to correct the situation. The NOC shall stipulate a time period by which the problem must be corrected and the penalties for non-compliance. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.210 Notice of violation.
     A.    When the city engineer or authorized representative finds that any discharger has failed to comply with a notice of correction or has violated or continues to violate any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in this chapter, any NPDES stormwater permit or the basin plan, the city may serve upon such person a written notice of violation stating the nature of the violation and the penalties for noncompliance. At a minimum, the notice of violation shall require that the discharger submit to the city engineer, within a time period specified in the notice, a plan indicating the cause of the violation and corrective actions which will be taken to prevent recurrence. A discharger shall be guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted by the discharger.

     B.     Pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.4 and 36900.(b) the following violation assessments will apply to the issuance of a notice of violation by the city engineer or authorized representative:

     1.     A first notice of violation shall be issued for a first violation of this chapter and shall be punishable by a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00);

     2.     A second notice of violation shall be issued for a second violation of this same chapter within one year and shall be punishable by a minimum fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00);

     C.     A third notice of violation shall be issued for a third violation of this same chapter within one year and shall be punishable by a minimum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year shall also be punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.220 Violations deemed a public nuisance.
     A.    In addition to the penalties established by this chapter any threat to public health, safety and welfare shall be declared and deemed a public nuisance. Such public nuisance may be summarily abated and/or restored by the city engineer, and/or civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the city attorney.

     B.     The cost of such abatement, remediation and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property causing the violation. The cost thereof shall be a lien upon and against the property and such lien shall continue in existence until the same shall be paid. If the lien is not satisfied by the owner of the property within a prescribed amount of time after the completion by the city of the removal of the public nuisance and restoration and remediation of the property to its original condition, the property may be sold in satisfaction thereof in a like manner as other real property is sold under execution. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.230 Falsifying information.
     Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, record, report, plan, or other document filed with the city, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate monitoring devices or methods required under this chapter, shall have violated this chapter. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.240 Administrative hearing.
     A.    Any discharger may request in writing or the city engineer may order an administrative hearing, at which a discharger who causes or allows or who has caused or allowed a violation of this chapter to occur shall show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. An administrative hearing officer who is a city officer not directly involved in enforcement of this chapter shall preside over the administrative hearing, at which each party, including the discharger and the city engineer, shall have the right to present evidence.

     B.     A notice shall be served on the discharger specifying the time and place of the hearing regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken and proposed enforcement action, directing the discharger to show cause before the hearing officer why proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten working days before the hearing. Service maybe made on any agent or officer of the discharger. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.245 Administrative civil penalties.
     A.    Pursuant to California Government Code Section 54739 and Section 54740.5, the city engineer may issue an administrative complaint to any person who violates this chapter, any prohibition or limitation thereof or any compliance order, cease and desist order, stop work order or injunction. The administrative complaint shall allege the act or failure to act that constitutes the violation, the proposed civil penalty, and the authority under which it is imposed. The administrative complaint, served on the alleged violator by personal delivery or by certified mail, shall inform the person served that a hearing before the city engineer shall be conducted within sixty (60) days of the service of the complaint. The right to a hearing may be waived by the person who has been issued the administrative complaint, in which case the city shall not conduct a hearing. A person dissatisfied with the decision of the city engineer may appeal to the city council of the city within thirty (30) days of notice of the engineer’s decision.

     B.     If after the hearing, or appeal, if any, it is found that the person has violated reporting or discharge requirements, the city engineer or city council may assess a civil penalty against that person. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the city engineer or city council may take into consideration all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the economic benefit derived through any noncompliance, the nature and persistence of the violation, the length of time over which the violation occurs and corrective action, if any, attempted or taken by the discharger.

     Civil penalties may be assessed as follows:

     1.     In a minimum amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each day for failing or refusing to timely comply with any compliance order established by the city;

     2.     In a minimum amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation for each day of discharge in violation of any discharge limitation, areawide urban runoff permit condition, or requirement issued, reissued or adopted by the city;

     3.     In an minimum amount of ten dollars ($10.00) per gallon for discharges in violation of any stop work order, cease and desist order or other orders, or prohibition issued, reissued, or adopted by the city.

     4.     The amount of any civil penalties imposed under this section which have remained delinquent for a period of sixty (60) days shall constitute a lien against the real property of the discharger from which the discharge originated resulting in the imposition of the civil penalty. The lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded with the county recorder and when recorded shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien and continue for ten years from the time of recording unless sooner released, and shall be renewable in accordance with the provisions of Sections 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive, of the California Code of Civil Procedure.

     C.     All moneys collected under this section shall be deposited in a special account of the city and shall be made available for the monitoring, treatment, and control of discharges into the city’s storm drainage system or for other mitigation measures.

     D.    Unless appealed, an order imposing administrative civil penalties shall become effective and final upon issuance thereof, and payment shall become due within thirty (30) days of issuance of an invoice by the city. Copies of these orders shall be served by personal service or by registered mail upon the party served with the administrative complaint and upon other persons who appeared at the hearing and requested a copy.

     E.     The city may, at its option, elect to petition the superior court to confirm any order establishing civil penalties and enter judgment in conformity therewith in accordance with the provisions of Sections 1285 to 1287.6, inclusive, of the California Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.250 Administrative orders.
     A.    The city engineer may require compliance with this chapter, NPDES stormwater permit, city permit, or the Basin Plan, by issuing written administrative orders that are enforceable in a court of law or by directly seeking court action. Administrative orders may include stop work orders, cease and desist orders, termination of service orders and immediate termination of service orders.

     1.     Compliance Orders.

     a.     The city engineer or designee may issue a compliance order to any discharger who fails to correct a violation of this chapter, any NPDES stormwater permit or the basin plan. The order shall be in writing, specify the violation(s) and require appropriate compliance measures within a specified time period. The compliance order may include the following terms and requirements:

     i.      Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to eliminate an existing prohibited discharge or illegal connection or to prevent the imminent threat of a prohibited discharge;

     ii.     Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal, storage, installation of overhead covering or proper disposal of any pollutant having the potential to contact stormwater runoff;

     iii.    Installation of stormwater treatment devices, containment structures, wash racks and addition and removal of stormwater drains;

     iv.    Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to prevent imminent threat of or continuing violations of this ordinance, including, but not limited to requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents promulgated by any federal, state or regional agency.

     b.     The city engineer or designee may adopt a proposed compliance schedule submitted by the user or may adopt a revised compliance schedule if in his judgment, the proposed compliance schedule would allow the user to cause harm to the receiving waters and/or the city’s storm drainage system.

     C.     A compliance order shall require the discharger to pay a one thousand dollar ($1000.00) penalty fee to the city for the issuance thereof

     2.     Stop Work Order.

     a.     The city engineer may serve a written stop work order on any person engaged in doing or causing to be done new construction, tenant improvements, alterations or additions, if:

     i..     A city permit is required and no permit has been granted by the city;

     ii.     Work has begun without necessary prior written stormwater quality management plan (SWQMP) and subsequent approval by the city engineer or his designee; or

     iii.    Violations of this chapter are found at the site of the new construction, tenant improvements, alterations or additions.

     b.     Any person served a stop work order shall stop such work forthwith until written authorization to continue is received from the city engineer. A stop work order shall require the discharger to pay a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) penalty fee to the city for the issuance thereof.

     3.     Cease and Desist Order.

     a.     When the city engineer or designee finds that any industrial/commercial discharger has violated or threatens to violate any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in this chapter, NPDES stormwater permit, city permit or the basin plan, the city may issue a cease and desist order directing the discharger to:

     i.      Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or prohibited discharge to the city’s stormwater drainage system;

     ii.     Immediately contain or divert any flow of water off the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this chapter;

     iii.    Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter.

     b.     A cease and desist order shall require the discharger to pay a one thousand dollar ($1000.00) penalty fee to the city for the issuance thereof.

     4.     a. Termination of Service. When the city engineer finds any industrial/commercial discharger who has a direct connection into the city’s stormwater drainage system or has violated an administrative order, the city engineer may terminate storm drain service to the discharger. The discharger shall be liable for all costs for termination of storm drain service incurred by the discharger and the city. This provision is in addition to other statutes, rules or regulations authorizing termination of service for delinquency payment, or for any other reasons. Stone drain service shall be re-instituted by the city engineer after the discharger has complied with all the provisions of the administrative order. The discharger shall also be liable for all costs for re-instituting storm drain service.

     b.     Immediate Termination of Service. The city engineer may immediately suspend storm drain service for any non-stormwater discharge and any city permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city engineer, to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, or which significantly or could significantly causes pollution to the receiving waters, ground water, water courses and/or storm drainage system of the city. Any industrial commercial discharger notified that their storm drain service NPDES permit has been suspended shall immediately cease and eliminate the discharge into the stormwater drainage system.

     c.     In the event of failure to comply voluntarily with the termination of service order, the city engineer shall take steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of storm drain connections. The industrial/ commercial discharger shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city in terminating storm drain service. Storm drain service may be re-instituted by the city engineer after the actual or threatened discharge has been eliminated. A detailed written statement, submitted by the industrial commercial discharger, describing the cause of the harmful contribution and the measures to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city engineer within ten working days of the date of storm drain service termination.

     B.     The city engineer may adopt a proposed compliance schedule submitted by the discharger, or may adopt a revised compliance schedule if, in the judgment of the city engineer the compliance schedule would allow the discharger to cause harm to the receiving waters and/or city storm drain facilities.

     C.     The city engineer will notify the discharger of the adopted compliance schedule in a timely manner. The city engineer shall not adopt a compliance schedule, which extends beyond applicable federal guidelines. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.260 Legal action.
     A.    If any person violates the provisions of this chapter, federal or state NPDES permit, city permit requirements or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal, equitable or injunctive relief in the municipal or superior court of the county.

     B.     In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, the city engineer may recover all reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporters fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit of law against the person(s) found to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter, NPDES permit, city permit or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued there-under and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.270 Civil penalties.
     A.    The business license of any industrial/commercial discharger who is found to have violated an administrative order to comply with any provision of this chapter, NPDES permit or city permit and the orders, rules, regulations and permits under this chapter may be revoked.

     B.     The industrial/commercial user may also be fined a sum for each offense.

     C.     Each violation shall be considered a separate and distance offense, and each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distance offense. In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, the city may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs, court reporters’ fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this chapter, NPDES permit, city permit or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this chapter.

     D.    Persons who continue to violate any provision of this chapter shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) but not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.

     E.     In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the discharger’s violation, corrective actions by the discharger, the compliance history of the discharger, and any factor as justice requires.

     F.     Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for taking any other action against a discharger. The city may institute further legal action to collect such penalties in the event that the violator of this chapter fails or refuses to pay the penalty within thirty (30) days from the date that it has been assessed. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.280 Criminal penalties.
     A.    Any person who wilfully violates any provision of this chapter or any permit condition; who knowingly violates any administrative order, stop work order, cease and desist order, termination or immediate termination order, prohibition or effluent limitation; who knowingly makes false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or NPDES permit; or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly causes inaccuracy in any monitoring device or method required or authorized under this article or any other provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, which, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine of not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) and/or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such discharger, and shall be punishable therefor as provided by this section. Any person who knowingly makes false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, stormwater permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per day of violation or by imprisonment or by both.

     B.     Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable for that violation as provided by this section. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.290 Compensation for damages.
     Any person who damages monitoring equipment, detrimentally affects the water quality of the United States, significantly increases maintenance of, requires non-routine inspection or sampling, causes blockages of, damage to, interference with storm drain facilities, or causes any other damages, including the imposition of fines or penalties on the city by federal, state or local regulatory agencies, shall be liable to the city for all damages and additional costs, including fines and penalties, occasion thereby. An administrative fee, which shall be fixed by the city manager based on the city’s current overhead cost allocation percentage, shall be added to these charges and shall be payable to the city within thirty (30) calendar days of invoicing. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.300 Appeals.
     Any decision of the city engineer or the administrative hearing officer may be appealed pursuant to the city’s standard appeal process. The imposition of fines or penalties shall be stayed during the appeal period unless the city engineer or administrative hearing officer, as applicable, determines that such a stay would threaten the public safety, health or welfare. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.310 Notice to remediate.
     Whenever the city engineer finds any non-permitted, prohibited substance discharge or any other material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds, which may result in an increase in pollutants entering the city storm drain system, the city engineer may give notice to remove any non-permitted, non-prohibited substance discharge that the city may provide. The industrial/ commercial discharger who receives such a notice shall undertake the remediation activities as described in the notice. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.311 Severability.
     A.    The city council declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsection, clause, phrase or portions thereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. If for any reason any portion of this chapter is declared invalid or unconstitutional, then all other provisions hereof shall remain valid and enforceable.

     B.     If any provision, paragraph, word, section, or article of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, and sections shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

 

13.04.312 Conflict.
     All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this chapter are repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. (Ord. 229 § 3, 2005)

Chapter 13.08 UNDERGROUND UTILITY FACILITIES
13.08.010 Definitions.
     Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

     “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California.

     “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees.

     “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric communication or similar or associated service.

     “Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.08.030.

     “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 86 § 1, 1991)

 

13.08.020 Public hearing by council.
     The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least fifteen (15) days prior the date thereof. Each hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 157 § 8, 1996: Ord. 86 § 2, 1991)

 

13.08.025 Report by city engineer.
     Prior to holding such public hearing, the city engineer shall consult all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities’ participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected property owners, including the potential use of an assessment district to finance the costs to place utilities underground that otherwise would be incurred by the city. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. (Ord. 324 § 1, 2013)

 

13.08.030 Underground utility districts designated by resolution.
     If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation.

     The council shall also make one or more of the following findings:

     A.    That such undergrounding will avoid or eliminate an unusually heavy concentration of overhead electric facilities;

     B.     The street or road right-of-way is extensively used by the general public and carries a heavy volume of pedestrian or vehicular traffic;

     C.     The street or road right-of-way passes through a civic area or public recreation area or an area of unusual scenic interest to the general public.

     Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of funds, labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 86 § 3, 1991)

 

13.08.040 Unlawful acts.
     Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.08.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 324 § 2, 2013; Ord. 86 § 4, 1991)

 

13.08.050 Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten days, without authority of the council in order to provide emergency service. The council may grant special permission, on such terms as the council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 86 § 5, 1991)

 

13.08.060 Other exceptions.
     In any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.08.030, the following are exempted unless specifically included in the resolution:

     A.    Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

     B.     Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

     C.     Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts;

     D.    Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

     E.     Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

     F.     Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, switches, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

     G.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 86 § 6, 1991)

 

13.08.070 Notice to property owners and utility companies.
     Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.08.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location.

     Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.08.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 86 § 7, 1991)

 

13.08.080 Responsibility of utility companies.
     If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.08.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Ord. 86 § 8, 1991)

 

13.08.090 Responsibility of property owners.
     A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.08.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.08.030, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice.

     B.     The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to such owner’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, city of         . If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.

     C.     The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon such property.

     D.    If upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer may in lieu of providing the required facilities, authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he or she shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.

     E.     The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

     F.     Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.

     G.    If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. (Ord. 86 § 9, 1991)

 

13.08.100 Responsibility of city.
     The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.08.030. (Ord. 86 § 10, 1991)

 

13.08.110 Extension of time.
     In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.08.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstance beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 86 § 11, 1991)

 

13.08.120 Violation—Penalty.
     It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 86 § 12, 1991)

Title 14 RESERVED

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 397. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 15.04 CONSTRUCTION CODES ADOPTED
Chapter 15.08 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
Chapter 15.12 GRADING AND EXCAVATION CODE
Chapter 15.16 MOBILEHOME PARK RENTAL AGREEMENTS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 15.20 MOBILEHOME PARK RENT STABILIZATION PROGRAM
Chapter 15.24 MOBILEHOME PARK SPACE NUMBERING

Chapter 15.04 CONSTRUCTION CODES ADOPTED
15.04.010 California Building Code adopted.
     A.    Except as hereinafter provided, the California Building Code Volumes 1 and 2, 2019 Edition (Part 2, Title 24, California Code of Regulations), which incorporates and amends the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, including California Building Code Chapter 1 Division II, and Appendices F, G, H, I, J, and N published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as the building code of the city of Yucaipa for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings or structures in the city of Yucaipa, and providing for issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the California Building Code, 2019 Edition, Volumes 1 and 2, and the secondary publications referenced above, not adopted or amended in the California Building Code, or amended herein, not including building standards, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter.

     B.     A copy of the building code of the city of Yucaipa, including each and all of the codes referenced in subsection A, shall be maintained in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, and shall be made available for public inspection while this code is in force. (Ord. 381 § 1, 2019)

 

15.04.020 California Building Code amendments.
     A.    Except as hereinafter provided, the California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II, 2019 Edition (“CBC” sometimes herein), is hereby made a part hereof as though set forth in full and the same shall be established and adopted as the rules, regulations, provisions and conditions for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use and maintenance of buildings or structures in the city, and is hereby adopted by reference as the scope and administration provisions of the city of Yucaipa.

     B.     California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II (“Scope and Administration”), as adopted herein, is amended as follows:

 

104.8 Liability. The Building Official or his or her authorized representative as employees or acting under contract as agents of this jurisdiction, charged with the enforcement of this code and the technical codes, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby be rendered personally liable for damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of an act or omission in the discharge of the assigned duties. A suit brought against the Building Official, employee or his/her authorized agent acting under contract of this jurisdiction, because of such act or omission performed by the Building Official, employee or his/her authorized agent acting under contract of this jurisdiction in the enforcement of the provisions of such codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this Code or enforced by the code enforcement agency shall be defended by this jurisdiction until final termination of such proceedings, and any judgment resulting there from shall be assumed by this jurisdiction.

 

This Code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any such person owning, operating or controlling a building, structure or building service equipment therein for damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the code enforcement agency or its parent jurisdiction be held as assuming such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this Code or permits or certificates issued under this Code.

 

     Section 105.2 of the California Building Code is hereby amended by amending items 2 and 9 under Building to read as follows:

 

     2.        Fences not over 6 feet (2134 mm) high.

     9.        Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 18 inches deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons and are installed entirely above ground.

 

     Section 105.5 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:

 

105.5 Expiration. Every residential permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 365 days after its issuance, or if work has been suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days between each required inspection. Every commercial permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if work has been suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days between each required inspection. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, only one extension of time for a period of 180 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

 

     Section 109.2 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:

 

109.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, grading or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as set forth in the most recent resolution of the City Council regarding fees for building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, solar, fire and grading permits. When a plan or other data is required to be submitted by Section 106.1, the plan review fee, established by city council resolution, must be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review.

 

     Section 109.6.1 is added to the CBC to read as follows:

 

109.6.1 Fee refunds. The Building Official may authorize a refund of any fee that was erroneously paid or collected.

 

The Building Official may authorize a refund of not more than 80 percent of the applicable permit fee paid when no work has been done under the permit.

 

The Building Official may authorize a refund of not more than eighty percent (80%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

 

The Building Official may not authorize a refund of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee no later than 180 days after date of fee payment.

 

     Section 109.7 is added to the CBC to read as follows:

 

109.7. Investigation Fees: Work without a Permit.

 

109.7.1 Investigation. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation will be made before a permit may be issued.

 

109.7.2 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, may be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee must be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code and will be established by City Council resolution. The payment of such investigation fee will not exempt an applicant from compliance with all other provisions of either this code or the technical codes, nor from the penalty prescribed by law.

 

     Section 109.8 is added to the CBC to read as follows:

 

109.8 Reinspection fees. A reinspection fee may be imposed for each inspection or reinspection, when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when required corrections are not made. This section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of the technical codes, but as a method of controlling the practice of calling inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection.

 

Reinspection fees may be imposed when the inspection record card is not posted, or otherwise not available on the work site; the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector; for failure to provide access on the date for which the inspection is requested; or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official.

 

To obtain a reinspection, the applicant must file an application in writing upon a city-approved form and pay the applicable reinspection fee.

 

In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, additional inspection of the work will not be performed until the required fees have been paid.

 

     Section 111.3 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:

 

111.3 Temporary occupancy. The Building Official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit and approvals; provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely and approvals granted from associated departments. The building official shall set a time period during which the temporary occupancy is valid and the applicant shall provide a bond or cash deposit for the cost of completion of the work.

 

     Section 113.3 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:

 

113.3 Board of appeals qualifications. The City Council shall be designated as the board of appeals.

 

     Section 202 of the CBC is amended by adding the following definitions: Barrier, Spa, Non-self-Contained; Spa, Self-Contained; and amending the definition of Swimming Pool to read as follows:

 

BARRIER. Barrier is a fence, wall, building wall, or any combination of these that completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.

 

SPA, NON-SELF-CONTAINED means a hydro-massage pool or tub for recreational or therapeutic use, not located in health-care facilities, designed for immersion of users and usually having a filter, heater and motor driven blower. It may be installed indoors or outdoors, on the ground or on a supporting structure, or in the ground or in a supporting structure. A non-self-contained spa is intended for recreational bathing and contains water over 18 inches deep.

 

SPA, SELF-CONTAINED means a continuous-duty appliance in which all control, water-heating and water-circulating equipment is an integral part of the product, located entirely under the spa skirt. A self-contained spa is intended for recreational bathing and contains water over 18 inches deep.

 

SWIMMING POOL. Any body of water created by artificial means which is designed, intended for use, or used for swimming or immersion purposes, which has a water depth exceeding 18 inches. The term, “pool,” includes swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, above-and below- ground, and vinyl-lined pools; pool does not include plumbing fixtures such as bathtubs nor does it apply to man-made lakes, reservoirs, farm ponds, or ponds used primarily for public park purposes, water conservation purposes, irrigation purposes or for the watering of livestock.

 

     C.     The following provisions are hereby added to the California Building Code (“Structural Design”) as follows:

 

1604.4.1 Rotation in Wood Frame Buildings. Principal of rotation to distribute shear forces shall not be permitted.

 

1604.4.2 Plan Requirements. Lateral-force resisting system of the structure shall be clearly shown on the plans/calculations.

 

Sufficient elevations and detail references for all shear-walls, frames, etc. shall be provided on the plans to clearly show all applicable conditions.

 

     Section 3109.1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:

 

3109.1 General. The design and construction of swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall comply with this code.

 

     Section 3109.3 is added to the CBC to read as follows:

 

3109.3 Residential swimming pools. Residential swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a barrier complying with Sections 3109.3.1 through 3109.3.3.

 

     Sections 3109.3.1 through 3109.3.3 are added to the CBC to read as follows:

 

3109.3.1. Barrier Height and Clearances. The top of the barrier must be at least 60 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier must be two inches measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, the barrier is authorized to be at ground level or mounted on top of the pool structure, and the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier must be four inches.

 

3109.3.1.1 Openings. Openings in the barrier must not allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter sphere.

 

3109.3.1.2 Solid barrier surfaces. Solid barrier surfaces which do not have openings shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.

 

3109.3.1.3 Closely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches, the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not be greater than 1 ¾ inches in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing with the cutouts shall not be greater than 1 ¾ inches in width.

 

3109.3.1.4 Widely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches or more, spacing between vertical members must not be greater than 4 inches. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing must not be greater than 1 ¾ inches in width.

 

3109.3.1.5 Chain link dimensions. Mesh size for chain link fences must not be greater than 1 ¾ inches in width, unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or bottom that reduce the openings to not more than 1 ¾ in width. 3109.3.1.6 Diagonal members. Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members shall not be greater than 1 ¾ inches.

 

3109.3.1.6 [reserved].

 

3109.3.1.7 Gates. Access gates must comply with the requirements of Sections 3109.3.1 through 3109.3.1.6 and must be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates must open outward away from the pool and must be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Doors or gates other than pedestrian access gates must have a self-latching device and must be equipped with lockable hardware or padlocks and must remain locked at all times when not in use. Release mechanisms must comply with Sections 1010.1.9 and 1109.13. Where release mechanisms of the self-latching device are located less than 60 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool, the release mechanism must be located on the pool side of the gate at least three inches below the top of the gate and the gate barrier may have no opening greater than one-half inch within 18 inches of the release mechanism.

 

3109.3.1.8 Dwelling wall as a barrier. Where a wall of a dwelling serves as part of the barrier, two safety devices must be provided in accordance with Section 115922 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

3109.3.1.9 Pool structure as barrier. Where an above-ground pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then the ladder or steps either shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access, or the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier that meets the requirements of Sections 3109.3.1.1 through 3109.3.1.8. Where the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening shall not allow the passage of a 4-inch-diameter sphere.

 

3109.3.2 Indoor swimming pools. Wall surrounding indoor swimming pools shall not be required to comply with Sections 3109.3.1.8. through 3109.3.3.

 

3109.3.3 Prohibited locations. Barriers shall be located as to prohibit permanent structures, equipment or similar objects from being used to climb the barriers. There shall be a clear zone of not less than 36” between the exterior of the enclosure and any permanent structures or equipment such as pumps, filters and heaters that can be used to climb the enclosure.

 

     Section 3109.4 is added to the CBC to read as follows:

 

3109.4 Withholding approval. Plaster inspection or approval to fill a pool or spa with water shall be withheld by the Building Official, until there has been compliance with all fencing and other requirements of this Section.

 

     Appendices A, B, C, D, E, K, L, M, N, and O are deleted.

     Appendix J, Section J103.2 of the California Building Code is hereby revised to read as follows:

 

J103.2 Exemptions. A grading permit shall not be required for the following:

     When approved by the building official, grading, which consist of a fill less than 1 foot in depth and placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than 1 unit vertical in 5 units horizontal (20% slope), or less than 2 foot in depth, not intended to support structures, that does not exceed 50 cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course. Such grading shall be in an isolated, self-contained area, provided there is no danger to the public, and such grading will not adversely affect adjoining properties.

     Excavation for construction of a structure permitted under this code.

     Cemetery graves.

     Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.

     Excavations for wells, or trenches for utilities.

     Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support of or significantly increase stresses in, soil on adjoining properties. Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a registered design professional.

     Exemption from the permit requirements of this appendix shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.

 

     Section J104.2.1 is added to the CBC to read as follows:

 

J104.2.1 Submittal requirements. All grading exceeding 1,000 cubic yards must be performed in accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a civil engineer, and will be designated as engineered grading. Grading involving less than 1,000 cubic yards will be designated regular grading, unless Building Official’s determines that special conditions or unusual hazards exist, in which case the grading must conform to the requirements for engineered grading.

 

     Section J104.2.2 is added to the CBC to read as follows:

 

J104.2.2 Engineered grading requirements. Application for a grading permit must, at a minimum, be accompanied by, but not be limited to, two sets of plans and specifications, and supporting data consisting of a soils engineering report and engineering geology report. The plans and specifications must be prepared and signed by an individual licensed by the State to prepare such plans or specifications when required by the Building Official.

 

Specifications must contain information covering construction and material requirements.

 

Plans must be drawn to scale upon substantial mylar; must be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed; and show in detail that they will conform to the provisions of this code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans must give the location of the work, the name and address of the owner, and the person who prepared the plans.

 

The plans must include, but not be limited to, the following information:

     1.        General vicinity of the proposed site.

     2.        Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details of terrain and area drainage.

     3.        Limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours to be achieved by the grading, and proposed drainage channels and related construction.

     4.        Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams, and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as a part of, the proposed work together with a map showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drains.

     5.        Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed, and the location of any buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners that are within 15 feet (4572 mm) of the property, or that may be affected by the proposed grading operations.

 

     6.        Recommendations included in the soils engineering report and the engineering geology report must be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications. When approved by the Building Official, specific recommendations contained in the soils engineering report and the engineering geology report, which are applicable to grading, may be included by reference.

     7.        The dates of the soils engineering and engineering geology reports together with the names, addresses and phone numbers of the firms, or individuals, who prepared the reports.

 

     Section J105.1 of the CBC is amended by adding the following sentence after the first sentence of Section J105.1 to read:

 

All grading equaling or greater than 5000 cubic yards shall be reviewed, permitted and inspected by the City Engineer or the Building Official per Resolution No. 90-100.

(Ord. 381 § 2, 2019)

 

15.04.025 California Residential Code adopted.
     A.    Except as hereinafter provided, the California Residential Code, 2019 Edition (Part 2.5, Title 24, California Code of Regulations), which incorporates and amends the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as the residential code of the city of Yucaipa for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erections, installation, alteration, repair, location, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of residential buildings in the city of Yucaipa, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such “International Residential Code,” 2018 Edition published by the International Code Council, not adopted or amended in the California Residential Code, which are on file in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, not including building standards, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter.

     B.     A copy of the residential code of the city of Yucaipa shall be maintained in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, and it shall be made available for public inspection while this code is in force.

     C.     The California Residential Code is amended as follows:

 

     Sections R403.1.2, R403.1.3 through R403.1.3.4, R403.1.3.6, and R403.1.6.1 of the CRC are amended to read as follows:

 

R403.1.2 Continuous Footings in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E. Exterior walls of buildings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E, must be supported by continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete footings. Other footing materials or systems must be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice. The braced wall panels at exterior walls of buildings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2 and E must be supported by continuous footings. All required interior braced wall panels in buildings must be supported by continuous footings.

 

The exception is deleted in its entirety.

 

R403.1.3 Footing and Stem wall reinforcing in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2 and E. Concrete footings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E, as established in Table R301.2(1), must have minimum reinforcement in accordance with this section and Figure R403.1.3. Reinforcement must be installed with support and cover in accordance with Section R403.1.3.5.

 

R403.1.3.1 Concrete stem walls with concrete footings. In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E, where a construction joint is created between a concrete footing and a concrete stem wall, a minimum of one No. 4 vertical bar must be installed at not more than four feet (4′) on center. The vertical bar must have a standard hook and extend to the bottom of the footing and must support and cover as specified in Section R608.5.4.5. A minimum of one No. 4 horizontal bar must be installed within 12 inches of the top of the stem wall and one No. 4 horizontal bar must be located 3 to 4 inches from the bottom of the footing.

 

R403.1.3.2 Masonry stem walls with concrete footings. In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E, where a masonry stem wall is supported on a concrete footing, a minimum of one No. 4 vertical bar must be installed at not more than four feet (4′) on center. The vertical bar must have a standard hook and extend to the bottom of the footing and must have support and cover as specified in Section R403.1.3.5.3 and extend a minimum of 14 inches into the stem wall. Standard hooks must comply with Section R608.5.4.5. A minimum of one No. 4 horizontal bar must be installed within 12 inches of the top of the wall and one No. 4 horizontal bar must located 3 to 4 inches from the bottom of the footing. Masonry stem walls must be solid grouted.

 

R403.1.3.3 Slabs-on-ground with turned-down footings. In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E, slabs on ground cast monolithically with turned-down footings must have a minimum of one No. 4 bar at the top and the bottom of the footing or one No. 5 bar or two No. 4 bars in the middle third of the footing depth. Where the slab is cast monolithically with the footing, No. 3 or larger vertical dowels with standard hooks on each end must be installed at not more than 4 feet on center in accordance with Figure R403.1.3, Detail 2. Standard hooks must comply with Section R608.5.4.5.

 

R403.1.3.4 Interior bearing and braced wall footings in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E. In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E, interior footings supporting bearing walls or braced wall panels, and cast monolithically with a slab on grade, must extend to a depth of not less than 12 inches below grade.

 

R403.1.3.6 is deleted in its entirety.

 

R403.1.6.1 Foundation anchorage in Seismic Design Categories C, D0, D1, D2, and E. In addition to the requirements of Section R403.1.6, the following requirements apply to wood light-frame structures in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E and wood light- framed townhouses in Seismic Design Category C.

(Ord. 381 § 3, 2019)

 

15.04.030 California Electrical Code adopted.
     A.    Except as hereinafter provided, the California Electrical Code, 2019 Edition (Part 3, Title 24, California Code of Regulations), including all annexes, which incorporates and amends the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted by reference as the electrical code of the city of Yucaipa for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical systems in the city of Yucaipa, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of such National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, not adopted or amended in the California Electrical Code, which are on file in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, excluding building standards, are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter.

     B.     A copy of the electrical code of the city of Yucaipa shall be maintained in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, and it shall be made available for public inspections while this code is in force. (Ord. 381 § 4, 2019)

 

15.04.040 California Plumbing Code adopted.
     A.    Except as hereinafter provided, the California Plumbing Code, 2019 Edition (Part 5, Title 24, California Code of Regulations), including all appendices, which incorporates and amends the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, including Uniform Plumbing Code Appendices thereto, not in conflict with the California Plumbing Code, is hereby adopted by reference as the plumbing code of the city of Yucaipa for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erections, installation, alteration, repair, location, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the city of Yucaipa, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the “Uniform Plumbing Code,” 2018 Edition, not adopted or amended in the California Plumbing Code, and “IAMPO Installations Standards,” 2018 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, which are on file in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, excluding building standards, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter.

     B.     A copy of the plumbing code of the city of Yucaipa shall be maintained in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, and it shall be made available for public inspection while this code is in force.

     C.     The California Plumbing Code, as adopted herein, is amended as follows:

 

     Section 710.1 of the California Plumbing Code is amended to read:

 

710.1 Drainage piping serving fixtures which have flood level rims located less than 12″ above the elevation of the next upstream manhole cover of the public sewer serving such drainage piping shall be protected from back flow of sewage by installing an approved type backwater valve. Fixtures being served by a private sewage disposal may have their flood level rims located at the elevation of the next upstream manhole cover, fixtures above such elevations shall not discharge through the backwater valve.

(Ord. 381 § 5, 2019)

 

15.04.060 Uniform Code for Solar Energy Installations adopted.
     Except as hereinafter provided, the Uniform Code for Solar Energy Installations, 2018 Edition, published by the International Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO), is hereby adopted by reference as the solar energy installations code of the city of Yucaipa for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erections, installation, alteration, repair, location, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of solar energy systems, in the city of Yucaipa, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the “Uniform Code for Solar Energy Installation,” 2018 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, which are on file in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter.

     A.    A copy of the Uniform Code for Solar Energy Installations of the city of Yucaipa shall be maintained in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, and it shall be made available for public inspection while this code is in force.(Ord. 381 § 6, 2019)

 

15.04.070 California Mechanical Code adopted.
     A.    Except as herein after provided, the California Mechanical Code, 2019 Edition (Part 4, Title 24, California Code of Regulations), including all appendices, which incorporates and amends the Uniform Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is hereby adopted by reference as the mechanical code of the city of Yucaipa for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators, or other miscellaneous heat-reducing appliances in the city of Yucaipa, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the Uniform Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, that are not adopted or amended in the California Mechanical Code, excluding building standards, are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter.

     B.     A copy of the mechanical code of the city of Yucaipa shall be maintained in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, and it shall be made available for public inspection while this code is in force. (Ord. 381 § 7, 2019)

 

15.04.080 California Administrative Code adopted.
     A.    Except as hereinafter provided, the California Administrative Code, 2019 Edition (Part 1, Title 24, California Code of Regulations), including all appendices thereto, is hereby made a part hereof as though set forth in full and the same shall be established and adopted by reference as the rules, regulations, provisions and conditions for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use and maintenance of buildings or structures in the city; and is hereby adopted by reference as the administrative code of the city of Yucaipa.

     B.     A copy of the administrative code of the city of Yucaipa shall be maintained in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, and it shall be made available for public inspection while this code is in force. (Ord. 381 § 8, 2019)

 

15.04.085 California Historical Building Code adopted.
     A.    Except as hereinafter provided, the California Historical Building Code, 2019 Edition (Part 8, Title 24, California Code of Regulations), published by the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby made a part hereof as though set forth at length and the same shall be established and adopted as the rules, regulations, provisions and conditions for the construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use and maintenance of buildings or structures in the city; and the California Historical Building Code, 2019 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference as the historical building code of the city of Yucaipa.

     B.     A copy of the historical building code of the city of Yucaipa shall be maintained in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, and it shall be made available for public inspection while this code is in force. (Ord. 381 § 11, 2019)

 

15.04.090 International Property Maintenance Code adopted.
     A.    Except as hereinafter provided, the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby made a part hereof as though set forth in full and the same shall be established and adopted as the rules, regulations, provisions and conditions for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use and maintenance of buildings or structures in the city; and is hereby adopted by reference as the property maintenance code of the city of Yucaipa

     B.     A copy of the international property maintenance code of the city of Yucaipa shall be maintained in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, and it shall be made available for public inspection while this code is in force. (Ord. 381 § 9, 2019)

 

15.04.095 California Existing Building Code adopted.
     A.    Except as hereinafter provided, the California Existing Building Code, 2019 Edition (Part 10, Title 24, California Code of Regulations), published by the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby made a part hereof as though set forth at length and the same shall be established and adopted as the rules, regulations, provisions and conditions for the construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use and maintenance of buildings or structures in the city; and the California Existing Building Code, 2019 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference as the existing building code of the city of Yucaipa.

     B.     A copy of the existing building code of the city of Yucaipa shall be maintained in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, and it shall be made available for public inspection while this code is in force. (Ord. 381 § 12, 2019)

 

15.04.110 California Fire Code adopted.
     A.    Except as herein after provided, the California Fire Code, 2019 Edition (Part 9, Title 24, California Code of Regulations), including Appendices B, BB, C, CC, D, E, F, G, H, I, N and O, which incorporates and amends the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as the fire code of the city of Yucaipa for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, provisions of the fire code systems, or other provisions in the city of Yucaipa, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Fire Code 2018 Edition, not adopted or amended in the California Fire Code, and excepting Section 103, published by the International Code Council, which are on file in the office of the city clerk, city of Yucaipa, and excluding building standards, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter.

     B.     A copy of the fire code of the city of Yucaipa shall be maintained in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, and it shall be made available for public inspection while this code is in force. (Ord. 381 § 10, 2019)

 

15.04.115 California Fire Code amendments.
     The California Fire Code, as adopted herein, is amended as follows:

     A.    Definitions.

     1.     Wherever the word “jurisdiction” is used in said California Fire Code, it shall mean the city of Yucaipa.

     2.     Wherever the term “corporation counsel” is used in said California Fire Code, it shall mean the city attorney for the city of Yucaipa.

     3.     Wherever the term “chief’ is used in said California Fire Code, it shall mean the fire chief of the city of Yucaipa, or authorized representative.

     4.     Wherever the term “fire department” is used in said California Fire Code, it shall mean the fire department of the city of Yucaipa.

     5.     An employee or agent of the city of Yucaipa, when enforcing the California Fire Code, the Yucaipa Municipal Code and other laws, rules and regulations relating to fire and life safety, fire prevention and fire investigation, shall be deemed a “peace officer” as those words are used in Section 830.31 of the California Penal Code.

     B.     Amendments.

     1.     A new Section 103.5 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

103.5 Cost Recovery. Fire suppression, investigation and rescue or emergency medical costs are recoverable in accordance with Health and Safety Code Sections 13009 and 13009.1. Any person who negligently, intentionally, or in violation of law, causes an emergency response, including but not limited to, a traffic accident or spill of toxic or flammable fluids or chemicals, is liable for the costs of securing such emergency, including those costs set out in Health and Safety Code Section 13009, et seq. and Government Code Section 53150, et seq. Any expense incurred by the fire department for securing such an emergency may constitute a debt of such person and may be collectible by the City in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under contract, expressed or implied.

    

     2.     Section 104.1.1 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

104.1.1 Responsibilities. The Chief is authorized to administer and enforce this Code. Under the Chief’s direction, the fire department is authorized to enforce all ordinances of the jurisdiction and the laws of the State pertaining to the prevention of fires, the suppression or extinguishment of dangerous or hazardous fires, the storage, use and handling of hazardous materials, the installation and maintenance of automatic, manual and other private fire alarm systems and fire-extinguishing equipment, the maintenance and regulation of fire escapes, the maintenance of fire protection and the elimination of fire hazards on land and in buildings, structures and other property, including those under construction, the maintenance of means of egress, and the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fire and unauthorized releases of hazardous materials. Employees and agents of the City of Yucaipa are hereby authorized to interpret and enforce the provisions of this Code (except as provided in Section 108.1) and to make arrests and issue citations as authorized by law.

 

     3.     Section 105.1.1.2 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

105.1.1.2 Permit Fees. Permit fees as established by City Council resolution shall be collected by the Finance Department. Proof of receipt shall accompany all permit applications prior to inspection and approval by the fire department.

 

     4.     Section 109.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

109.1 Board of Appeals Established. To determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and to provide for reasonable and lawful interpretations of the provisions of this Code, there shall be and hereby is created a board of appeals, which shall be the City Manager of the city of Yucaipa, the Fire Chief, and the Planning Director. The board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render decisions and findings in writing with a duplicate copy to the appellant.

 

     5.     Section 202 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding the following definitions:

 

ALL-WEATHER DRIVING SURFACE. Is an approved concrete, asphalt, or engineered surface approved by the Code Official of sufficient thickness to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus.

 

BED AND BREAKFAST. See Lodging House

 

EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS. Explosive materials are explosives, blasting agents and detonators including, but not limited to, dynamite and other high explosives; slurries, emulsions and water gels; black powder and pellet powder; initiating explosives; detonators or blasting caps; safety fuses; squibs; detonating cord; igniter cord; igniters and fireworks, 1.3G (Class B special fireworks) and any explosives as defined in Section 841 of Title 18 of the United States Code and published pursuant to Section 55.23 of Title 27 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

 

FIREWORKS. Fireworks means any device containing chemical elements and chemical compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and producing audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effects which are useful as pyrotechnic devices or for entertainment. The term fireworks includes, but is not limited to, devices designated by the manufacturer as fireworks, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, rockets, Daygo bombs, sparklers, party poppers, paper caps, chasers, fountains, smoke sparks, aerial bombs, and fireworks kits. (H&SC Section 12511). Including, but not limited to, all fireworks defined in the California Health and Safety Code starting with Section 12500.

 

FIRE SAFETY OVERLAY DISTRICT shall mean the Fire Safety Overlay Districts (FR1 and FR2) designated in high fire hazard areas and identified on the City’s General Plan hazards maps. Said areas (FR1 and FR2) may overlap or border areas identified by the State of California/Cal-Fire as “High Fire Severity Zone” or “Very High Fire Severity Zone.”

 

Finding: The State of California Fire Marshal has designated area in the north, northeastern and eastern portions of the City of Yucaipa as “High Fire Hazard Severity Zone” or “Very High Fire Severity Zone” areas, in which all new construction must comply with requirements of the California Building Code Chapter 7A. Changes to the Fire Code Chapter 2, Definitions. Section 202 has been amended by adding to the definition of Fire Safety Overlay Districts to coordinate the City’s existing labeled FR1 and FR2 zones into this new designation with State requirements. This change is also consistent with the city of Yucaipa General plan.

 

HIGH EXPLOSIVE. An explosive material, such as dynamite, which can be caused to detonate by means of a No. 8 test blasting cap when unconfined and any explosive defined in Section 12000 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

HAZARDOUS FIRE AREA. Land which is covered with grass, grain, brush or forest, whether privately, or publicly owned, which is so situated or is of such inaccessible location that a fire originating upon such land would present an abnormally difficult job of suppression or would result in great and unusual damage through fire or resulting erosion. Such areas are designated on maps entitled “Hazardous Fire Areas of San Bernardino County” on file in the office of the Chief.

 

MODEL ROCKET. Any toy or educational device, which weighs not more than 500 grams, including the engine and any payload, that is propelled by model rocket engines (H&SC Section 12519).

 

MODEL ROCKET ENGINE. A commercially manufactured, non-reusable rocket propulsion device which is constructed of a nonmetallic casing and solid propellant, wherein all of the ingredients are self-contained so as not to require mixing or handling by the user and which have design and construction characteristics determined by the State Fire Marshal to provide a reasonable degree of safety to the user (H&SC Section 12520).

 

     6.     Section 305.5.1 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

305.5.1 Spark arresters required. All chimneys attached to any appliance or fireplace that burns solid fuel shall be equipped with an approved spark arrester, and the spark arrester shall meet all of the following requirements:

     1.        The net area of the spark arrester shall not be less than four times the net area of the outlet of the chimney.

     2.        The spark arrester screen shall have heat or corrosion resistance equivalent to 12 gage wire, 19 gage galvanized wire, or 24 gage stainless steel.

     3.        Openings shall not permit the passage of spheres having a diameter larger than 1/2-inch and shall not block the passage of spheres having a diameter of less than 3/8-inch.

     4.        The spark arrester shall be accessible for cleaning and the screen or chimney cap shall be removable to allow for cleaning of the chimney flue.

 

     7.     Section 307.1.2 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

307.1.2 Burning operations. The burning of salvage vehicles and salvage or waste materials shall be prohibited:

 

     8.     Section 307.4.4 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

307.4.4 Material restrictions. Open burning of rubbish containing paper products, trash and debris containing non-organic material is prohibited.

 

     9.     Section 315.8 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

315.8 Removal. Combustible rubbish stored in containers outside of noncombustible vaults or rooms shall be removed from buildings at least once each working day or when determined by the Chief to be a fire hazard.

 

     10.   Section 315.8.1 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

315.8.1 Abatement. In the event that abatement is not performed as required in Sections 110.4.1 of this section, the Chief may give notice to the owner of the property upon which such condition exists to correct such prohibited condition, and if the owner fails to correct such condition the Chief may cause the same to be done and make the expense of such correction a lien upon the property upon which such condition exists.

 

     11.   Section 326 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

 

SECTION 326 USE OF EQUIPMENT

 

326.1 General. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall use, operate, or cause to be operated, in, upon or adjoining any hazardous fire area any internal combustion engine which uses hydrocarbon fuels, unless the engine is equipped with a spark arrester maintained in effective working order, or the engine is constructed, equipped, and maintained for the prevention of fire.

 

326.2 Spark Arrester. Spark arresters affixed to the exhaust system of engines or vehicles subject to this section shall not be placed or mounted in such a manner as to allow flames or heat from the exhaust system to ignite any flammable material.

 

326.3 Specifications. A spark arrester is a device constructed of nonflammable material specifically for the purpose of removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles over 0.0232 of an inch (0.58 mm) in size from the exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine that uses hydrocarbon fuels or which is qualified and rated by the U.S. Forest Service.

 

EXCEPTIONS: Engines used to provide motor power for trucks, truck tractors, buses, and passenger vehicles, except motorcycles, are not subject to this section if the exhaust system is equipped with a muffler as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California. Turbocharged engines are not subject to this section if all exhaust gasses pass through the rotating turbine wheel, there is no exhaust bypass to the atmosphere, and the turbocharger is in effective mechanical condition.

 

     12.   Section 327 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

SECTION 327 RESTRICTED ENTRY

 

327.1 General. The Chief shall determine and publicly announce when hazardous fire areas shall be closed to entry and when such areas shall again be opened to entry. Entry on, and occupation of, hazardous fire areas, except public roadways, inhabited areas, or established trails and camp sites which have not been closed during such time when the hazardous fire area is closed to entry, is prohibited.

 

EXCEPTIONS: (1) Residents and owners of private property within hazardous fire areas, and their invitees and guests going to, or being upon, their lands; (2) Entry, in the course of duty, by peace or police officers, and other duly authorized public officers, members of a fire department, and members of the U.S. Forest service

 

     13.   Section 328 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

SECTION 328 TRESPASSING ON POSTED PROPERTY

 

328.1 General. When the fire code official determines that a specific area within a hazardous fire area presents an exceptional and continuing fire danger because of the density of natural growth, difficulty of terrain, proximity to structures or accessibility to the public, such areas shall be closed until changed conditions warrant termination of closure. Such areas shall be posted as hereinafter provided.

 

328.2 Signs. Approved signs prohibiting entry by unauthorized persons and referring to applicable fire code chapters shall be placed on every closed area.

 

328.3 Trespassing. Entering and remaining within areas closed and posted is prohibited.

 

EXCEPTION: Owners and occupiers of private or public property within closed and posed areas, their guests or invitees, and local, state or federal public officers and their authorized agents acting in the course of duty.

 

     14.   Section 329 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

SECTION 329 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING

 

329.1 General. Explosives shall not be possessed, kept, stored, sold, offered for sale, given away, used, discharged, transported, or disposed of within hazardous fire areas except by permit from the fire code official.

 

     15.   Section 330 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

SECTION 330 OUTDOOR FIRES

 

330.1 General. Outdoor fires shall not be built, ignited or maintained in or upon hazardous fire areas except by permit from the fire code official.

 

EXCEPTION: Outdoor fires within habited premises or designated camp sites where such fires are built in a permanent barbeque, portable barbeque, outdoor fireplace, incinerator or grill and are a minimum of 30 feet (9,144 mm) from a grass-, grain-, brush-, or forest­covered area.

 

330.2 Permits. Permits shall incorporate such terms and conditions that will reasonably safeguard public safety and property. Outdoor fires shall not be built, ignited or maintained in or upon hazardous fire areas under the following conditions:

     1.        When high winds are blowing.

     2.        When a person age 17 or over is not present at all times to watch and tend such fire.

     3.        When public announcement is made that open burning is prohibited.

 

330.3 Prohibited burning. Permanent barbeques, portable barbeques, outdoor fireplaces or grills shall not be used for the disposal of rubbish, trash, or combustible waste material.

 

     16.   Sections 503.1.4 and 503.1.5 are hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

503.1.4 Where required. Fire apparatus access roads shall be provided and maintained in accordance with Sections 503.1.1 through 503.1.6.

 

503.1.5 Fire apparatus access. Plans for fire apparatus access roads or modification of fire apparatus access roads shall be submitted to the fire department for review and approval prior to construction.

 

     17.   Section 503.1.6 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

503.1.6 Fire lane designation. The Chief may designate fire apparatus access roads as “Fire Lane,” pursuant to the provisions of Vehicle Code Section 22500.1.

 

     18.   Section 503.2.3 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

503.2.3 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus, minimum of 75,000 lbs., and shall be provided with a surface so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities. Gravel, Turf block, Ritter Rings, Turf Paver and other similar products shall not be used for fire department access surfacing.

 

     19.   Section 503.2.7 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

503.2.7 Grade. The gradient for a fire apparatus access road grades shall not exceed the maximum 12% unless approved by the Chief.

 

     20.   Section 505.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

505.1 Premises identification. Approved numbers or addresses shall be placed on all new and existing buildings in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property. Said numbers shall contrast with their background.

 

New Group R, Division 3 Occupancy addresses shall be posted with a minimum of 4-inch (102 mm) numbers, visible from the street, and during the hours of darkness the numbers shall be low voltage, internally electrically illuminated. Posted numbers shall contrast with their background and be legible from the street. Where building setbacks exceed 100 feet (30,480 mm) from the roadway or where the addresses are not visible from the roadway, additional non-illuminated contrasting 4-inch (102 mm) numbers shall be displayed at the property entrance.

 

New Group A, B, E, F, H, I, L, M, R Division I and S occupancy addresses shall be posted with a minimum of 8-inch (203 mm) numbers, visible from the street, and during the hours of darkness shall be electrically illuminated. Where the building setback exceeds 200 feet (60,960 mm) from the roadway or where the addresses are not visible from the roadway, additional non-illuminated contrasting 6-inch (152 mm) numbers shall be displayed at the property entrance. Commercial occupancies with multiple tenants shall be posted with a minimum of 3-inch contrasting numbers displayed on the rear doors of the tenant spaces.

    

     21.   Section 505.1.1 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

505.1.1 Map directory. A lighted directory map shall be installed and maintained at each driveway entrance to multiple unit residential projects and mobile home parks, where the total number of units in the project exceeds fifteen (15).

 

     22.   Section 603.6.6 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

603.6.6 Sparks from chimneys. Chimneys used in conjunction with fireplaces or heating appliances in which solid or liquid fuel is used shall be equipped and maintained with an approved / listed spark arrester. An approved spark arrester shall mean a device constructed of stainless steel, copper, brass or woven galvanized wire mesh. The spark arrester screen shall have heat and corrosion resistance equivalent to 12-gauge wire, 19-gauge galvanized wire or 24-gauge stainless steel. Openings shall not permit the passage of spheres having a diameter larger than 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) and shall not block the passage of spheres having a diameter of less than 3/8-inch (9.5 mm). The screen shall be mounted per the manufacturers listing in or over all outside flue openings in a vertical or near vertical position, adequately supported to prevent movement and visible from the ground.

 

     23.   Section 603.8 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

603.8 Incinerators. Free-standing noncommercial incinerators are prohibited. Commercial and industrial incinerators shall be in accordance with other governing agencies regulating emissions. For other requirements and for other types of incinerators, see the Building and Mechanical Codes.

 

     24.   Section 603.8.1—603.8.7 are hereby deleted in their entirety.

     25.   Section 905.4 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding the following:

 

     7.        The centerline of the 2.5″ outlet shall be no less than 18″ above, and no more than 24″ above, the finished floor.

     8.        Outlets shall be provided on every floor of the building.

     9.        Every new building with any horizontal dimensions greater than 300 feet (91,440 mm) shall be provided with either access doors or a 2.5″ outlet so that all portions of the building can be reached with 150 feet (45,720 mm) of hose from an access door or hose outlet. Required access doors shall be located in the exterior of the building and shall be accessible without the use of a ladder. The door dimensions shall be not less than 3 feet (914 mm) in width, and not less than 6 feet 8 inches (2,032 mm) in height.

    

     26.   Section 2809.1.1 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

2809.1.1 Pallet yards. Pallet storage, handling, repair or manufacturing shall comply with the requirements of this Article. Pallets must be stored in an orderly manner not to exceed 16 feet in height, 20 feet in width, and 70 feet in length. Pile separation shall be a minimum of 20 feet and no closer than 26 feet to property lines or exposures. Fire department access roadways shall be no less than 26 feet in width with a vertical clearance of 14 feet 6 inches. All fire department roadways shall be maintained within 150 feet of all pallet storage and structures.

 

     27.   Section 3703.4.1 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

3703.4.1 Storage of agricultural products. Hay, straw and other similar agricultural products shall not be stored adjacent to buildings (except shade structures), property lines, or other combustible material unless a cleared horizontal distance equal to the height of pile or 20 feet, whichever is greater, is maintained between such storage and combustible material, property lines and buildings.

 

     28.   Section 4901.3 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

4901.3 General. A Fuel Modification Plan, approved by the Chief, may be required for new development within the fire overlay districts. The Fuel Modification Plan shall include mitigation measures consistent with the unique problems resulting from the location, topography, flammable vegetation and climate of the proposed site within the FR1 and FR2 Zones. The Fuel Modification Plan shall address water supply, access, building ignition and the fire resistance, fire protection systems and equipment, defensible space and vegetation management. The Fuel Modification Plan shall be consistent with the Interface Code, Appendix TIA and the city of Yucaipa Development Code, or at the option of the Chief, with other nationally recognized standards and good practice.

 

     29.   Section 4905.4 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

Section 4905.4 Construction within FR-1 AND FR-2 Overlay Zones.

     1.        General Provisions.

     a.        The provisions of this section shall apply to all phases of a development project.

     b.        A notice of all land use applications and/or development permits that would lead to the construction of structures or the subdivision of land shall be filed with the responsible fire authority by the Community Development Department.

     c.        All proposed land use applications that would lead to the construction or expansion of a structure or the subdivision of land shall be submitted to the responsible fire authority and the appropriate Resource Conservation District Office for review and recommendation. Any recommendations received shall be indicated in any staff report and/or presentation for the proposed development and shall be incorporated into the conditions of approval where possible.

     d.        All proposed development must meet all other applicable standards set forth by the responsible fire authority.

     e.        When the requirements of the underlying land use district or an applicable specific plan are more restrictive than the provisions of this section, such requirements shall prevail.

     f.        When an addition, alteration, enlargement or reconstruction of a structure equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the existing structure, or twenty-five percent (25%) of the roof for the roofing requirements only, the provisions of the city of Yucaipa Development Code, regarding construction requirements shall apply to the entire structure and/or the whole roof as applicable. Such structures and/or roofs shall be entirely retrofitted to comply with the provisions of this section.

     2.        Division of Review Areas. The Fire Safety Review Areas, as established by CAL FIRE and adopted by the city of Yucaipa. Each represents a different level of wildland hazard. A different set of requirements is applied in each review area. The provisions for these requirements, are cumulative in that all of the requirements that are specified for Fire Safety.

     Review Area 2 shall also apply to Fire Safety Review Area 1, in addition to those specified for only Fire Safety Review Area 1.

     a.        Fire Safety Review Area 1 (FR1). Fire Safety Review Area 1 includes wildland areas that are marginally developable, areas which are not likely to be developed, and the area of transition between wildlands and areas that are partially developed or are likely to be developed in the future. The area of transition is often characterized by an abrupt slope change. Natural hazards are prevalent throughout Area 1, especially in areas with natural ungraded slopes greater than thirty percent (30%). Area 1 includes areas of very high to extreme fire hazard.

     b.        Fire Safety Review Area 2 (FR2). Land within Area 2 is relatively flat, and is either partially or completely developed, or, if it is not developed, is usually suitable for development. Present and future development within Area 2 is exposed to the impacts of wild land fires and other natural hazards primarily due to its proximity to Area 1.

     3.        Area FR1 and FR2 Requirements.

     a.        Construction Requirements.

        (1)    Roof coverings shall be either non-combustible or fire retardant with a minimum Class A rating, as defined in the California Building Code. Wood shake or shingle roof coverings are not permitted.

        (2)    Every chimney used in conjunction with any fireplace or any heating appliance in which solid or liquid fuel is used, shall be maintained with a spark arrester. An approved spark arrester shall mean a device constructed of stainless steel, copper or brass, woven galvanized wire mesh, twelve (12) gauge minimum of three-eights (3/8) inch minimum to one-half (1/2) inch maximum openings, mounted in or overall outside flue openings in a vertical and near vertical position, adequately supported to prevent movement and visible from the ground.

        (3)    Louvers, ventilators, or openings in walls, roofs, attics, and under floor areas having headroom less than four (4) feet in height which are not fitted with sash or doors, shall be covered with wire screen. The screen covering such openings shall be of galvanized metal or copper and shall have a maximum mesh of one-quarter (1/4) inch.

        (4)    Eave-type attic ventilators are prohibited.

        (5)    The space between rafters at exterior walls shall be solidly filled with tight-fitting wood blocks at least one and one-half (1-1/2) inches thick.

        (6)    Fuel tanks (e.g., liquefied petroleum tanks) shall be located at least ten (10) feet away from any structure and in accordance with the California Fire Code.

        (7)    All non-accessory buildings shall have reflective and noncombustible building address numbers with at least three inch (3″) high lettering visible from the road on which the structure fronts.

        (8)    All buildings on lots created after the effective date of this section shall be set back at least thirty feet (30′) from the boundary of the San Bernardino National Forest.

        (9)    Structures in areas with slopes exceeding thirty percent (30%) and thirty feet (30′) in height shall comply with the following:

(a)    Where structures are proposed or within two hundred (200) feet of slopes that are greater than thirty percent (30%) prior to grading and where such slopes are at least thirty (30) feet in height, the vegetation on such slopes shall be treated in such a manner that it becomes a fuel modified area. Such fuel modified area shall be maintained for either the entire slope, or one hundred (100) feet, or to the property line, whichever distance is less.

(b)    Where grading is utilized which does not conform to the natural slope and the graded area is adjacent to natural ungraded slopes which are greater than thirty percent (30%) and which are greater than thirty (30) feet in height, structures shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the edge(s) of the graded area adjacent to such natural ungraded slopes.

        (10)  All areas used for the storage of firewood, or other flammable materials shall either be at least thirty (30) feet away from all structures, or wholly enclosed within a structure.

        (11)  Fire hydrants shall be identified by a method specified by the Fire Authority.   

        (12)  There shall be vehicular access, at least twelve (12) fourteen (14) feet in width, to within at least ten (10) feet of any static water source including ponds, lakes, swimming pools, reservoirs and water storage tanks. Access shall be either to a plumbed outlet with two and one-half (2-1/2) inch National Hose Thread Fitting or directly to the source. This requirement shall be waived if the fire authority determines that the water source is sufficiently below the elevation of existing or proposed roads or driveways to make drafting of water from the source through a plumbed outlet infeasible, and that direct vehicular access to the water source would require an impractical extension of a road or driveway.

     b.        Building Separations.

        (1)    Building Separation Standards.

(a)    All buildings on parcels created after the effective date of this section and all other parcels with lot widths sixty (60) feet of greater shall have exterior wall separations of at least thirty (30) feet.

(b)    All buildings on parcels created prior to the effective date of this section with lot widths less than sixty (60) feet shall have interior side yards which shall not be less than five (5) feet and need not exceed fifteen (15) feet. In no case shall exterior wall separations be less than ten (10) feet for all buildings, including those on adjoining parcels.

(c)    When exterior walls of residential and accessory buildings or portions thereof are within fifteen (15) feet of interior side or rear lot lines, or the exterior wall separation is less than thirty (30) feet, the following shall apply:

(i)   The outside of all such exterior walls or portions thereof shall be covered with materials which are approved for exterior locations and are of fire resistive construction as defined in the California Building Code.

(ii)   All exterior doors made of wood or wood portions shall be solid core wood, and

(iii)  Windows, skylights, sliding glass doors or glass inserts in doors shall be constructed of approved tempered dual-pane glass.

        (2)    Intent of Standards. The intent of the exterior wall separation standards is to reduce the exposure and risk from adjacent structural fires and to reduce the potential spread of fire from structure to structure.

        (3)    Alternate Measures (Exterior Wall Separation). Pursuant to Subsection 5, of this section and dependent upon site specific conditions, the following measures or combinations thereof may be substituted for the exterior walls separation requirements specified for all buildings in Subsection b.(1)(a) above; provided, that in no case shall such exterior wall separations be less than ten (10) feet:

(a)    The expansion of fuel modified areas around the development perimeter of the development project beyond that required through the provisions of this section or other parts of this Title.

(b)    A substantial transfer of density from steeper slopes, including areas with slopes less than thirty percent (30%) if they exist on site, to less steep areas within the development project.

(c)    Clustering of structures away from the development perimeter and away from fire hazardous areas. When this alternative is utilized, multi-residential dwelling units shall be located as far as practical from fuel modified areas and fire hazardous areas.

(d)    The provision of more fire resistive construction standards than normally required through the provisions of the Fire Safety (FR) District and otherwise required through the California Building Code or California Fire Code.

(e)    Other alternate measures if approved by the Community Development Department pursuant to the provisions of Subsection 5 of this Section.

     c.        Project Design Requirement.

        (1)    All development projects and each phase thereof, except for a development project located exclusively on a cul-de-sac, shall have a minimum of two (2) points of vehicular ingress and egress, designed to City road standards, with a minimum width of twenty four 24 feet of all-weather surface as defined in the California Fire Code, from existing and surrounding streets. One such point of vehicular access may be an emergency access route with an all-weather surface if the Community Development Department makes and justifies all of the following findings:

(a)    Two points of non-emergency access are physically infeasible.

(b)    Provisions have been made to reasonably ensure that the emergency access will be maintained.

(c)    Based on the review and consideration of the Fire Authority’s recommendation, the emergency access route will provide adequate vehicular ingress and egress during emergencies.

        (2)    All development projects shall provide eight (8) inch or larger circulating (loop) water mains as required by the California Fire Code, proper hydrant location and spacing, and have sufficient water storage capacity to provide the minimum fire flow duration requirements (gallons per minute (GPM) for a minimum number of hours or portions thereof) as specified by the minimum system standards established by the Fire Authority. Circulating (loop) mains are not required for cul-de-sacs and are not required for subdivisions that exclusively take all access from cul-de-sacs. In areas not served by water purveyors, on-site fire flow and water storage requirements will be as specified by the California Fire Code.

        (3)    All public or private streets within or bordering a development project shall have noncombustible and reflective street name signs designed to City standards and visible at all street intersections.

        (4)    Fuel Modification Areas.

(a)    A permanent fuel modification area may be required around development projects of portions thereof that are adjacent or exposed to hazardous fire areas for the purpose of fire protection. The recommended width of the fuel modification area shall be determined by the responsible Fire Authority in conjunction with the Fire Department, but in no case shall it be less than the lot line one hundred (100) feet in width as measured from the development structure(s) perimeter. The width of the fuel modification area shall be determined based upon:

(i)   The natural ungraded slope of the land within the project and in the areas adjacent to the project;

(ii)  Fuel loading;

(iii) Access to the project and access directly to the fuel modified area;

(iv) The on-site availability of water that can be used for firefighting purposes;

(v)  Adequate provisions shall be made for the continual maintenance of such areas, and, where feasible, such areas shall be designated as common open space rather than private open space;

(vi) Fuel modification areas shall also incorporate soil erosion and sediment control measures to alleviate permanent scarring and accelerated erosion.

(b)    When development projects are phased, individual phases may be required to provide temporary fuel modification areas, where the development perimeter of a phase is contiguous to a subsequent phase of a project, which in its undeveloped state is a hazardous fire area. The need for a temporary fuel modification area shall be determined by the responsible fire authority in conjunction with the Fire Department and shall be based upon the same consideration described in Subsection c.(4)(a) of this Section for permanent fuel modification areas.

(c)    Erosion and Sediment Control. All development projects, building permits, grading and any other significant land disturbing activity shall install erosion control measures in compliance with the provisions established by Title 16, Land Use and Development of the Highland Municipal Code for such erosion control measures.

     4.        Additional Area 1 (FR1) Requirements. The following requirements apply only to Area 1, in addition to those specified for both Areas 1 and 2.

     a.        Construction Requirements.

        (1)    The outside of all exterior walls shall be covered with materials which are approved for exterior locations and listed as one (1) hour fire resistive construction as defined in the California Building Code. All exterior doors made of wood or wood portions shall be solid core wood.

        (2)    All windows, skylights, sliding glass doors or glass inserts in doors shall be constructed of approved tempered dual-pane glass.

        (3)    Cantilevered or standard type decks shall be constructed with:

(a)    A minimum of at least one and one-half (1-1/2) inch wood decking; and/or

(b)    Protected on the underside with materials approved for one (1) hour fire-resistive construction; and/or

(c)    Be of noncombustible materials, as defined in the California Building Code.

        (4)    Patio covers attached or within ten (10) feet of a residential structure with plastic, bamboo, straw or fiberglass or wood lathe lattice made of materials which are one-half (1/2) inch or less in width shall be prohibited.

        (5)    Exposed piping, except for plumbing vents above the roof, shall be noncombustible as defined in the California Building Code.

        (6)    A fire hydrant capable of providing the minimum fire flow as required in California Fire Code Appendix B, with at least one-half (1/2) inch hose connection shall be available within 600 feet of any portion of the structure.

        (7)    All fences required adjacent to fuel modification areas or wildland areas as conditions of approval for a development project shall be constructed of noncombustible materials as defined in the California Building Code. All other fences, including those on the interior of such development project, are not subject to this requirement.

        (8)    Private driveways or access roadways for residential units shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet in length, unless approved by the fire authority pursuant to Section 503; and Appendix D of the California Fire Code.

        (9)    Roof coverings shall be either non-combustible or shall be fire retardant material not composed of organic fiber with minimum Class A rating, as defined in the California Building Code.

        (10)  Unenclosed or project roof-ceiling or roof-ceiling assemblies which contain concealed space shall have the ceiling protected on the exposed surface with materials approved for one hour construction.

     5.        Project Design Requirements.

     a.        Design requirements.

        (1)    Every development project application submitted to the Community Development Department shall be reviewed by Community Development Department staff through a pre application conference with the project proponent prior to the acceptance of the application for filing.

        (2)    A slope analysis shall be filed with all development project land use applications. The slope analysis shall include the following information:

(a)    A topographic map of the proposed project area and all adjoining properties within one hundred fifty (150) feet at a scale of not less than one (1) inch to two hundred (200) feet. The contour interval shall not be more than two (2) feet except that the contour interval may be five (5) feet if the general natural ungraded slope is more than ten percent (10%). Contour lines are to be obtained by aerial or field survey, done under the supervision of a licensed Land Surveyor, or Registered Engineer.

(b)    The natural, ungraded slope categories to be computed are zero percent (0%) to less than fifteen percent (15%), fifteen percent (15%) to less than thirty percent (30%), thirty percent (30%) to less than forty percent (40%), and forty percent (40%) or greater.

(c)    The area, in acres, shall be tabulated for each category.

        (3)    A preliminary grading plan shall be filled with all development project land use applications, except that preliminary grading plan requirements may be waived by the Community Development Director if it is determined through the required pre-application conference that such requirements are unnecessary due to site specific soils, topographic or other physical conditions, or due to the specific design of the project. The preliminary grading plan shall include the following:

(a)    A topographic map of the proposed project area and all adjoining properties within one hundred fifty (150) feet at a scale of not less than one (1) inch to two hundred (200) feet. The contour interval shall not be more than two (2) feet except that the contour interval may be five (5) feet if the natural ungraded slope is more than ten percent (10%). Contour lines to be obtained by aerial or field survey, done under the supervision of a licensed Land Surveyor, or Registered Engineer.

(b)    Contours of the finished graded slope shall be shown at intervals similar to that on the topographic base map.

(c)    Street grades, slope ratios, flow lines, pad elevations, maximum elevation of top and minimum elevation of toe of finished slopes over five (5) feet in vertical height, the maximum heights of those slopes approximate total cubic yards of cut and fill shall be shown on the preliminary grading plan.

(d)    Compliance with Appendix J of the current edition of the California Building Code, as adopted by the city of Yucaipa, is required.

(e)    In the event no such grading is proposed, a statement to that effect shall be placed on the required topographic map described in Subsection 2(a) above and this map shall delineate the boundary of an adequately sized building pad, driveway and septic system (if proposed) for each parcel proposed.

        (4)    Perimeter Access to Fuel Modified and Fire Hazard Areas.

(a)    Standards. Development projects shall provide for adequate vehicular access for fire fighting vehicles to the development perimeter of the project along the portion of the development perimeter that is adjacent to either an existing or proposed fuel modified area or a fire hazard area. Provisions shall be made and shall be required, where necessary, through conditions of, development project approval for the continual maintenance of the areas intended to provide such access. Perimeter access shall be provided, either through one of the following two measures or through the alternate measures cited in this Section:

(i)   The provision of an existing or proposed road along the development perimeter, or portion thereof that is exposed to a fire hazard or fuel modified area, and which is accessible to firefighting equipment. Such a road shall be capable of supporting firefighting equipment, shall be at least twenty (20) feet in width and shall not exceed a grade of sixteen percent (16%). The conditions of approval for the development project shall require provisions to ensure that the roadway will be maintained if it is not within the publicly maintained road system.

(ii)  Development projects shall provide access ways, at least fourteen 14 feet in width, with a grade not to exceed sixteen percent (16%) and capable of supporting fire fighting vehicles, between the development perimeter and proposed or existing streets. Access ways shall be spaced at intervals of no more than an average of three hundred fifty (350) feet along each street. The conditions of approval for the development project shall require specific provisions to ensure that access ways will remain unobstructed and will be maintained. Where feasible, access ways may not be paved and shall be designed so as not to detract from the visual quality of the project.

(b)    Intent of Standards. The intent of the standards described in Subsection 4.b.(6) is to permit fire fighting vehicles to have adequate access into areas between fire hazardous areas or fuel modified areas and the development perimeter, so that a wildland fire can be contained at the development perimeter and prevented from spreading to structures. An additional intent of these standards is to prevent structural development from becoming a barrier between firefighting equipment and personnel and the development perimeter.

(c)    Alternate Measures. Pursuant to Subsection 5 of this Section and dependent upon site specific conditions, alternate measures which meet the intent of the standard in Subsection 4.b(6)(a) above for providing perimeter access to fuel modified and fire hazard areas may be utilized.

     (5)      Length of Cul-de-Sacs.

(a)    Standard Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed three hundred fifty (350) feet in length, except that they may be extended as allowed by this subsection.

(b)    Exception for parcels of less than five (5) acres in area. Cul-de-sacs may exceed three hundred fifty (350) feet in length but shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length if:

(i)   Alternate measures are utilized pursuant to the provisions of Section 19.50 of this Article; or

(ii)  Based upon consideration of the recommendation of the Fire Authority, the Community Development Department determines that the cul-de sac is situated and designed such that the parcels taking access from it are not contiguous to or exposed to either undeveloped fuel modified areas along the development perimeter of the project or to fire hazard areas, and that the extension of the cul-de sac will not increase the exposure of buildings to wildland fires.

(c)    Exception for parcels greater than five (5) acres in area. Cul-de-sacs may exceed six hundred (600) feet in length if all parcels that take access from the cul-de-sac are five (5) acres or greater in area and:

(i)   The proposed cul-de-sac is not within or adjacent to areas that are zoned for or subdivided to parcels of five (5) acres or less.

(ii)  Alternate measures are utilized pursuant to the provisions of Subsection 5 of this Section.

(d)    Intent of Standard. The intent of limiting cul-de-sac lengths is to limit the exposure of development and human activity to hazardous fire areas where one rather than two points of access are provided, especially when such cul-de-sacs are directly exposed to fire hazard areas. The provision of only one point of access increases exposure to fire and inhibits the fighting of wild land fires due to the following factors:

(i)   If the single access point becomes blocked, structures exposed to fire cannot be protected by fire fighting vehicles.

(ii)  Fire fighting vehicles can be trapped on a cul-de-sac if the single access is blocked.

(iii) In order for fire fighting vehicles to turn around, they usually must travel to the end of the cul-de-sac where adequate room for turning is available.

(iv) All vehicles evacuating a cul-de-sac during a fire will be traveling in the opposite direction to fire fighting vehicles moving into a cul-de-sac, impeding the ingress of the fire fighting vehicles as well as the egress of the evacuees.

(v)  Development of individual cul-de-sacs which intrude into and are generally surrounded by rugged wild land terrain have greater exposure to wild land fire because the fire may come from several directions at once.

(e)    Alternate Measures. Pursuant to Subsection 5 of this Section and dependent upon site specific conditions, one of the following measures or combinations thereof may be used to mitigate the effect of creating cul-de-sacs up to six hundred (600) feet in length with parcels less than five (5) acres in area:

(i)   Limitation of the total number of dwelling units which have access to the cul-de-sac to no more than fifteen (15), and restriction of further subdivision of parcels and construction of additional independent residential units which have access to the cul-de-sac. Such restrictions shall be imposed through the conditions of approval of the development project.

(ii)  A continuous perimeter access road at least twenty (20) feet in width is provided along the portion of the cul-de-sac exposed to fire hazard or fuel modified areas such that it is drivable under normal conditions by fire fighting vehicles, provides adequate maneuvering space for such vehicles, and is designed such that at least one point of access to the perimeter access road is taken from roads other than the cul-de-sac in question.

(iii) The cul-de-sac road will have a paved width of at least forty (40) feet with posted no parking for its entire length and there is at least one area approximately at the midpoint of the cul-de-sac that serves the same function of a cul-de-sac bulb in allowing fire fighting vehicles adequate room to turn around. This measure may only be utilized if the expansion of the road width will not contribute to slope stability hazards either on or off-site.

(iv) Other alternate measures approved by the Community Development Department pursuant to Subsection 5 of this Section.

        (6)    Alternate Hazard Protection Measures.

(a)    Applicability. The following provisions shall apply only to the standards and requirements of Subsections 3.b., regarding building separations; 4.b.(6), regarding perimeter access; and 4.b.(7) regarding length of cul-de-sacs.

(b)    Intent. The intent of this subsection is to allow greater design flexibility than would otherwise be permitted in order to provide a more efficient and effective achievement of the purposes of the Fire Safety Regulations: Design flexibility is provided by allowing the substitution of alternate measures for the established standards or requirements if it is found that they provide the same or a greater level of protection from wildland fires and other natural hazards, and that they will fulfill the same purpose as the established standard or requirements.

(c)    Substitution of Alternative Measures for Standards and Requirements.

(i)   If alternative measures are proposed, the Fire Department shall determine, with specific consideration of the effect of the proposed alternative measures, whether the proposed development project has adequate provisions for fuel modification and management, including the ongoing maintenance of fuel modified areas.

(ii)  If the Fire Department makes a positive determination pursuant to Subsection 5.c.(1) of this Section, then alternate measures may be substituted for the established standards and requirements if the Community Development Department with consideration of the recommendation of the Fire Authority, finds and justifies all of the following:

        (a)    Alternative measure(s) have been substituted which meet the intent of and which serve the same purposed as the established standards or requirement.

        (b)    The alternative measure(s) that have been substituted provide the same or a greater level of protection or are as effective as the established standard or requirement.

        (c)    There are clear and substantial reasons for utilizing the alternative measure(s) because they provide for a more efficient and economic use of the site, or provide for a superior physical design, and are consistent with the intent of the Fire Safety (FR) District.

    

     30.   Sections 4906.2.1 and 4906.2.2 are hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

4906.1 Clearance of Brush or Vegetative Growth From Structures

 

4906.2.1 General. Persons owning, leasing, controlling, operating, or maintaining buildings or structures in, upon, or adjoining hazardous fire areas, and persons owning, leasing, or controlling land adjacent to such buildings or structures, shall at all times:

     1.        Maintain an effective firebreak: by removing and clearing away flammable vegetation and combustible growth from areas within 30 feet (9,144 mm) of such buildings or structures.

     EXCEPTION: Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or similar plants used as ground covers, provided that they do not form a means of rapidly transmitting fire from the native growth to any structure.

     2.        Maintain additional fire protection or firebreak: by removing brush, flammable vegetation and combustible growth located from 30 to 100 feet (9,144 mm to 30,480 mm) from such buildings or structures when required by the fire code official because of extra hazardous conditions causing a firebreak: of only 30 feet (9,144 mm) to be insufficient to provide reasonable fire safety.

     EXCEPTION: Grass and other vegetation located more than 30 feet (9,144 mm) from buildings or structures and less than 18 inches (457 mm) in height above the ground need not be removed where necessary to stabilize the soil and prevent erosion.

     3.        Remove portions of trees which extend within 10 feet (3,048 mm) of the outlet of a chimney.

     4.        Maintain trees adjacent to or overhanging a building free of deadwood.

     5.        Maintain the roof of a structure free of leaves, needles, or other dead vegetative growth.

 

4906.2.2 Corrective actions. The fire code official will give notice to the owner of the property upon which conditions regulated by Section 317.1 exist to correct such conditions. If the owner fails to correct such conditions, the fire code official is authorized to cause the same to be done and make the expense of such correction a lien upon the property where such condition exists.

 

     31.   Section 4906.3.2 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

4906.3.2 Support clearance. Persons owning, controlling, operating or maintaining electrical transmission or distribution lines upon hazardous fire areas, including but not limited to, any mountainous land, forest-covered land, brush-covered land, or grass-covered land shall have an approved program in place that identifies poles or towers with equipment and hardware types that have a history of becoming an ignition source, and provides a combustion free space consisting of a clearing of not less than 10 feet in each direction from the outer circumference of such pole, tower or line.

 

EXCEPTION: Lines used exclusively as telephone, telegraph, messenger call, alarm transmission or other lines classed as communication circuits by the Public Utilities Commission. The Chief may permit other exceptions from the requirements of this section that are based upon the specific circumstances involved.

 

4906.3.2.1 Electrical distribution and transmission line clearance. Except as otherwise provided in Section 318.3 below, any Persons owning, controlling, operating, or maintaining electrical transmission or distribution lines upon hazardous fire areas, including but not limited to any mountainous land, forest-covered land, brush-covered land, or grass-covered land shall maintain the clearance specified in all directions between vegetation and conductors carrying electrical current: The Chief may permit exceptions from the requirements of this section which are based upon the specific circumstances involved.

 

4906.3.2.2 Exceptions to minimum clearance provisions.

     Low voltage lines. Section 318.2 above does not apply if the transmission or distribution line voltage is 750 volts or less.

     Poles and towers. The minimum clearance provisions of subsection 318.1 above are not required around poles and towers, including line junction, comer and dead end poles and towers:

     A.       Where all conductors are continuous over and through a pole or tower; or

     B.       Where all conductors are not continuous over or through a pole or tower, provided all conductors and subordinate equipment are of the types listed below and are properly installed and used for the purpose for which they were designed and manufactured.

     (1)      Compression connectors.

     (2)      Automatic connectors.

     (3)      Parallel groove connectors.

     (4)      Hot line tap or clamp connector that are designed to absorb any expansion or contraction by applying spring tension on the main line or running conductor and top connector.

     (5)      Fargo GA 300 series piercing connectors designed and manufactured for use with tree wire.

     (6)      Flat plate connectors installed with not less than two bolts.

     (7)      Tapered C-shaped member and wedge connectors.

     (8)      Solid blade single phase bypass switches and solid blade single phase disconnect switches associated with circuit reclosures, sectionalizers and line regulators.

     (9)      Equipment that is completely sealed and liquid filled.

     (10)     Current limiting, non-expulsion fuses.

 

4906.3.2.3 Abatement. In the event that the abatement is not performed as required in Section 4906.3.2.1 or 4906.3.2 of this section, the Chief may give notice to the owner of the property upon which such condition exists to correct such prohibited condition. If the owner fails to correct such condition, the Chief may cause the same to be done and make the expense of such correction a lien upon the property upon which such condition exists.

 

     32.   Section 4906.4 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

4906.4 Clearance of brush or vegetation growth from roadways. The fire code official is authorized to cause areas within 10 feet (3,048 mm) on each side of portions of highways and private streets which are improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic to be cleared of flammable vegetation and other combustible growth. The fire code official is authorized to enter upon private property to do so.

 

EXCEPTION: Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or cultivated ground covers, provided that they do not form a means of readily transmitting fire.

 

     33.   Section 4906.5is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

4906.5 Unusual circumstances. The fire code official may suspend enforcement and require reasonable alternative measures designed to advance the purposes of this chapter if he determines in any specific case that any of the following conditions exist:

     1.        Difficult terrain.

     2.        Danger of erosion.

     3.        Presence of plants included in any state or federal resources agencies, California Native Plant Society, and County approved list of wildlife, plants, rare, endangered and/or threatened species.

     4.        Stands or groves of trees or heritage trees.

     5.        Other unusual circumstances that make strict compliance with the clearance of vegetation provisions of this chapter undesirable or impractical.

 

     34.   Section 4906.6 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

4906.6 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction—General. All new buildings to be built or installed in areas containing combustible vegetation shall comply with the following requirements:

     1.        Preliminary fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official concurrent with the submittal for approval of any tentative map.

     2.        Final fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to the issuance of a grading permit.

     3.        The fuel modification plans shall meet the criteria set forth by the fire department.

     4.        The fuel modification plan may be altered if conditions change. Any alterations to the fuel modification plan shall be approved by the fire code official.

     5.        All elements of the fuel modification plan shall be maintained in accordance with the approved plan and are subject to the enforcement process outlined in the fire code.

 

     35.   Section 5601.2.1.1 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5601.2.1.1 Permits required. Permits shall be obtained from the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department for the following:

     To manufacture, possess, store, sell, display or otherwise dispose of explosives blasting agents or phosphoric compounds.

     To manufacture, possess, store, sell, display or otherwise dispose of explosives blasting agents or phosphoric compounds.

     To transport explosives or blasting agents. To use explosives or blasting agents.

     To operate a terminal for handling explosives or blasting agents.

     To transport blasting caps or electric blasting caps in the same vehicle with explosives.

 

     36.   Section 5601.2.3.1 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5601.2.3.1 Permit holder. The handling and firing of explosives or blasting agents shall be performed only by persons possessing a valid explosives permit issued by the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department.

 

     37.   Section 5601.2.2.1 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5601.2.2.1 Display. The maximum quantities, storage conditions, and fire protection requirements for gunpowder and ammunition displayed in a building shall be as follows:

     Smokeless powder - 20 pounds in original containers. Containers shall not exceed one pound.

 

     38.   Section 5601.2.2.2 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5601.2.2.2 Displays. Permits are required to conduct a fireworks display. See Section 105.6.14. Permit application shall be made not less than 14 days prior to the scheduled date of the display. The permit application shall include a diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged; the location of buildings, highways and other lines of communication; the lines behind which the audience will be restrained; and the location of nearby trees, telegraph or telephone lines and other overhead obstructions. At the time of permit application, the Chief shall be consulted regarding requirements for standby fire apparatus and personnel. All fireworks displays shall be electrically fired.

 

     39.   Section 5601.2.2.3 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5601.2.2.3 Additional requirements. In addition to the requirements set forth in this Article, the police department, the fire department or the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department may, for the safety and security of the public, set additional requirements for a permit application.

 

     40.   Section 5601.2.3.1 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5601.2.3.1 Seizure of fireworks. The storage, use, sale, possession, and handling of fireworks 1.30 is prohibited. The sales, use and/or display of fireworks 1.4G (commonly referred to as Safe & Sane) is prohibited. The Chief, the police department and the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department are authorized to seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks, offered or exposed for sale, stored, handled or held in violation of Title 19 CCR, Chapter 6.

 

EXCEPTION: Fireworks 1.4G and fireworks 1.3G may be part of an electrically fired public display when permitted and conducted by a licensed pyrotechnic operator.

 

     41.   Section 5604.1.1 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5604.1.1 Temporary storage. For the purpose of this part, temporary storage shall mean no longer than 4 hours or the end of the work day, whichever time is less.

 

     42.   Section 5604.1.2 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5604.1.2 Storage. The police department and the Chief may authorize the storage of smokeless powder not to exceed 100 pounds, sporting black powder not to exceed 25 pounds, and up to 75,000 small arms primers in approved portable magazines in approved establishments. Sporting black powder, when authorized, shall be stored in an approved portable magazine. Small arms primers or percussion caps shall be stored in a manner prescribed by the police department, the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department and the Chief.

 

     43.   Section 5604.2.1 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5604.2.1 Magazines required. Explosive materials shall be stored in magazines in accordance with Section 3301.5. Magazines shall at all times be in the custody of a person holding a valid explosives permit who shall be at least 21 years of age and who shall be held responsible for compliance with all safety precautions.

 

     44.   Section 5604.10.2.1 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5604.10.2.1 Deteriorated material handling. When an explosive has deteriorated to an extent that it is in an unstable or dangerous condition, or when a liquid has leaked from an explosive material, the person in possession of such explosive material shall immediately contact the police department, the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department and the Chief. The work of destroying explosive materials shall be directed by persons experienced in the destruction of explosive materials. Explosive materials recovered from blasting misfires shall be handled in a standard method for disposal. Only persons holding a valid explosives pem1it shall do the work of destroying explosives.

 

     45.   Section 5604.3.4 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5604.3.4 Magazine size. Indoor magazines shall not be of a size greater than the exit door or contain more than 50 pounds of explosive materials.

 

     46.   Section 5604.3.5 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5604.3.5 Powder. The amount of powder stored in an indoor magazine shall not exceed 50 pounds.

 

     47.   Section 5604.3.6 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5604.3.6 Classification and use of magazines. Magazines shall be classed as Type 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 and used in accordance with Title 27, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 55, Subpart K, and Title 19, California Code of Regulations, Subchapter 6, Section 989, as amended.

 

     48.   Section 5604.3.7 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5604.3.7 Use and handling. The police department, San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department, and the fire department shall be notified prior to detonation of any explosives.

 

     49.   Section 5604.3.8 is hereby added to the California Fire Code added to read as follows:

 

5604.3.8 Personnel qualifications. The handling and firing of explosives shall be performed only by person(s) possessing a valid explosives permit issued by the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department.

 

     50.   Section 5604.3.9 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5604.3.9 Utility notification. When blasting is being conducted in the vicinity of gas, electric, water, sewer, fire alarm, telephone, telegraph, cable television or stream utilities, the blasting person shall notify the appropriate representative of such utilities at least 24 hours in advance of blasting specifying the location and intended time of such blasting.

 

EXCEPTION: In an emergency, advance notification may be waived by the Chief, the police department and the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department. The fire department shall be notified prior to detonation of any explosives.

 

     51.   Section 5605.0 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5605.0 Manufacturing. The manufacturing of fireworks is prohibited.

 

     52.   Section 5605.1.1 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5605.1.1 Pyrotechnic special effects material. A permit is required to manufacture, compound, store or use pyrotechnic special effects material. A permit for use shall be granted only to a licensed pyrotechnic operator. See Section 105.6.36.

 

     53.   Section 5704.4.9 is hereby added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

5704.4.9 Lubricating oil. Lubricating oil that has been drained from motor vehicles shall be stored and handled as required for Class III-B liquids. Crankcase drainings and waste oil products may be stored in an above-ground tank as approved by the Chief. Drainings and used oils may also be stored outside a building in not more than 3 tight drums having an aggregate capacity not exceeding 180 gallons.

(Ord. 381 § 10, 2019)

 

15.04.116 California Green Building Standards Code adopted.
     A.    Except as hereinafter provided, the California Green Building Standards Code, 2019 Edition (Part 11, Title 24, California Code of Regulations), published by the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby made a part hereof as though set forth at length and the same shall be established and adopted as the rules, regulations, provisions and conditions for the construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use and maintenance of buildings or structures in the city; and the California Green Building Standards, 2019 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference as the green building standards code of the city of Yucaipa.

     B.     A copy of the green building standards code of the city of Yucaipa shall be maintained in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, and it shall be made available for public inspection while this code is in force. (Ord. 381 § 13, 2019)

 

15.04.118 California Referenced Standards Code adopted.
     A.    Except as hereinafter provided, the California Referenced Standards Code, 2019 Edition (Part 12, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), including all appendices, published by the International Code Council, is hereby made a part hereof as though set forth in full and the same shall be established and adopted as the rules, regulations, provisions and conditions for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use and maintenance of buildings or structures in the city; and the California Referenced Standards Code, 2019 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference as the referenced standards code of the city of Yucaipa.

     A copy of the referenced standards code of the city of Yucaipa shall be maintained in the office of the building division of the community development department in the city of Yucaipa, and it shall be made available for public inspection while this code is in force. (Ord. 381 § 14, 2019)

 

15.04.120 Violations—Penalties.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of the codes adopted in this chapter. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision of said codes or failing to comply with any of their provisions or requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment, not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of said codes is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, partnership or corporation and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided herein. (Ord. 149 § 10, 1995)

 

15.04.130 Civil remedies available.
     The violation of any of the provisions of the codes adopted shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. (Ord. 149 § 11, 1995)

 

15.04.140 Small residential rooftop solar energy system permits.
     A.    Definitions.

     1.     “Electronic submittal” shall have the same meaning as provided in the Solar Rights Act, Government Code Section 65850.5(j)(2), as the same may be amended from time to time, and shall include e-mail, Internet or facsimile.

     2.     “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” shall have the same meaning as provided in the Solar Rights Act, Government Code Section 65850.5(j)(3), as the same may be amended from time to time.

     B.     Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy System Standard Plan and Permit Application Checklist.

     1.     The city shall adopt standard plans and checklists of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The small residential rooftop solar system standard plans and checklists shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklists and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.

     2.     All documents required for the submission of a small residential rooftop solar energy system permit application, the standard plans, and checklists shall be made available on the publicly accessible city website.

     3.     The applicant may submit the permit application and associated documentation to the city’s building division in person, by mail or by electronic submittal together with any required permit processing and inspection fees. Electronic permit applications shall be submitted through the method of electronic submittal specified by the building official and shall be available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

     C.     Permit Application Review.

     1.     An application that satisfies the information requirements in the checklists and standard plans shall be deemed complete.

     2.     If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.

     3.     The building official shall issue a building permit for any complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklists and standard plans as follows: the same day for over-the-counter applications, within one to three business days for electronic applications, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable. Review of the application shall be limited to the building official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. The applicant is responsible for obtaining any approval or permission necessary to connect the small residential rooftop solar energy system to the local utility provider’s system.

     4.     Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

     D.    Inspection Requirements.

     1.     Inspection requests may be submitted by electronic submittal, as required by the building official.

     2.     Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building official for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review.

     3.     The inspection shall be done in a timely manner. The building official shall use his or her best efforts to schedule an inspection within two business days of a request and provide a two-hour inspection window.

     4.     If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this section.

     E.     Fees. Fees for permits and inspections associated with this chapter may be established by resolution of the city council.

     F.     Applicability. The provisions of this chapter supersede any inconsistent provisions of the Uniform Code for Solar Energy Installation. (Ord. 337 § 1, 2015)

 

15.04.150 Expedited electric vehicle charging station permitting.
     A.    Applicability. This section applies to applications for expedited building permits for electric vehicle charging stations consistent with California Government Code Section 65850.7.

     B.     Definitions. The following definitions shall apply for purposes of this section:

     1.     “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electric Code, as it read on January 1, 2016, and delivers electricity from a source outside of an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

     2.     “Electronic submission” means a submission of an application utilizing email, the Internet, and/or facsimile transmission.

     3.     “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date an application was deemed complete.

     C.     Process.

     1.     The building official shall adopt a checklist of all application requirements for expedited building permits for electric vehicle charging stations. The checklist shall substantially conform to the most current version of the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” found in the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook” published by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. The checklist, application form, and any other documents required by the building official shall be published on the city’s website.

     2.     Anyone seeking to install an electric vehicle charging station at any site within the city may apply to the building official for an expedited nondiscretionary building permit.

     3.     An application for an expedited building permit for an electric vehicle charging station, and all associated documentation, may be submitted to the building official in person, by mail, or by electronic submission. Electronic signatures may be used in lieu of wet signatures.

     4.     An application that, in the opinion of the building official, satisfies the information requirements of the checklist adopted by the city shall be deemed complete.

     5.     If an application for an expedited building permit is deemed incomplete, the building official shall provide a written correction notice of the deficiencies and the additional information required to complete the application.

     6.     If the building official determines that an application for an expedited building permit is complete, the building official shall process the application. If the building official determines that the proposed charging station meets all health and safety requirements of state and federal law, and would not have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, the application shall be approved and a building permit shall be issued.

     7.     If the building official finds, based on substantial evidence, that a proposed charging station could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, the city shall require the applicant to apply for an electric vehicle charging station use permit in order to install the proposed charging station.

     8.     An application for an electric vehicle charging station use permit shall be reviewed by the building official. The building official shall not deny such an application without making written findings, based upon substantial evidence in the record, that the proposed charging station would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety which could not feasibly be satisfactorily mitigated or avoided. The written findings required for rejection of an electric vehicle charging station use permit application shall include the building official’s basis for rejecting any potentially feasible alternatives that could mitigate or prevent the alleged adverse impact. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65850.7, the building official’s review shall be limited to health and safety issues. Aesthetic concerns, or other items not related to public health or safety shall not be considered.

     9.     A decision of the building official made pursuant to subsections (C)(6) through (C)(8) of this section may be appealed to the planning commission. The planning commission’s review shall also be limited to health and safety issues.

     10.   Any condition imposed on an application for an expedited building permit or electric vehicle charging station use permit shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

     D.    Fees. The city council may establish by resolution fees that shall be charged for permits issued under this section. (Ord. 362 § 2, 2017)

Chapter 15.08 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
15.08.010 Findings.
     The city council finds and declares as follows:

     A.    The cost of providing public facilities occasioned by development projects within the city far exceeds the revenue generated by fees exacted from the development projects.

     B.     The city hereby adopts the report from Kadie-Jensen, Johnson & Bodnar, dated October, 1990, entitled “Development Impact Fee Study for the City of Yucaipa,” which establishes the costs for providing public facilities occasioned by development projects within the city.

     C.     The development impact fees authorized by this chapter are based upon the costs which are generated through the need for new facilities and other capital acquisition costs required, incrementally, by new development within the city.

     D.    The fees authorized by this chapter do not exceed the reasonable cost of providing public facilities occasioned by development projects within the city.

     E.     The fees authorized by this chapter relate rationally to the reasonable cost of providing public facilities occasioned by development projects within the city, which capital facilities and development projects are expected to be consistent with the future general plan and the housing element of the general plan of the city.

     F.     There is little probability that the capital facilities and development projects to which the fees authorized by this chapter relate will be ultimately inconsistent with the future general plan of the city, and the facilities and anticipated development are based upon an analysis of existing land use and zoning.

     G.    The fees authorized by this chapter are consistent with what is anticipated to be the goals and objectives of the city’s general plan and are designed to mitigate the impacts caused by new development throughout the city. A development impact fee is necessary in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for the development’s fair share of the construction costs of these improvements.

     H.    Imposition of fees to finance public facilities and services improvements, including fire services and facilities for the city, is necessary in order to protect the public safety and welfare.

     I.      The city has pending before it subdivision maps and other applications for residential, commercial and industrial development approval which the city must act upon.

     It is necessary for the provisions of this chapter to apply to those developments in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare by the provision of adequate public facilities, to afford developers certainty with regard to their financial obligations, and to ensure that the new development will not create a burden on the interrelated public facilities and services networks of the city. (Ord. 50 § 1, 1990)

 

15.08.020 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivation shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

     “Development project” means any project undertaken for the purpose of development. Development project shall include a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction, remodeling, or any work requiring any permit under the ordinances of the city, including the provisions of Title 8 of the San Bernardino Development Code as it may have been adopted and amended from time to time by the city.

     The term “development project” shall also include permits for erection of manufactured housing or structures, and structures moved into the city.

     “Fee” means a monetary exaction, other than a tax or special assessment, which is charged by the city to the applicant in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost of public facilities related to the development project, but does not include fees specified in Section 66477 of the Government Code, nor fees for processing applications for regulatory actions of approvals, nor fees collected under development agreements.

     “Public facilities” includes public improvements, public services and community amenities.

     “Small dwelling unit” means any attached residential dwelling unit, Accessory Dwelling Unit pursuant to Section 84.0570, or multifamily dwelling unit with fewer than three bedrooms. Each loft, study, home office space, and similar bedroom-sized rooms shall be counted as bedrooms. (Ord. 369 § 1, 2017; Ord. 50 § 2, 1990)

 

15.08.030 Authorization of development impact fees.
     A development impact fee is authorized on the issuance of all building permits for development within the city to finance the cost of public facilities and improvements required by new development.

     The city council shall, by council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the development impact fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments and set forth the time for payment.

     On an annual basis, the city council shall review this fee to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the impacts of development and whether the described public facilities are still needed. (Ord. 50 § 3, 1990)

 

15.08.040 Automatic annual adjustment.
     Each fee authorized by this chapter shall be adjusted automatically on July 1st of each fiscal year, beginning on July 1, 1991, by a percentage equal to the McGraw-Hill Construction Index for Southern California for the preceding twelve (12) months. This automatic adjustment shall not apply to fees which are based on variable factors which result in automatic adjustments or those which specifically indicate otherwise. (Ord. 50 § 4, 1990)

 

15.08.050 Increase by resolution.
     The amount of each fee authorized pursuant to this chapter may be more specifically set and revised periodically by resolution of the city council, with this chapter being considered as enabling and directive. (Ord. 50 § 5, 1990)

 

15.08.060 Creation of special accounts.
     Each fee collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a special account created to hold the revenue generated by each such fee. Moneys within each such account may be expended only by appropriation by the city council for specific projects which are of the same category as that for which the money was collected. (Ord. 50 § 6, 1990)

 

15.08.070 Zoning to compute fee.
     The approved zoning for the property to be developed shall be used in the computation of the fees required to be paid by any property. If a parcel contains more than one zone, then the applicable fees shall be prorated by acreage attributable to each zone. Public properties shall be classified into the category of use as between residential, commercial or industrial, and shall pay the fee pursuant to that classification, as determined by the director of planning services. (Ord. 50 § 7, 1990)

 

15.08.075 Dwelling unit size to compute fee.
     The dwelling unit size for the development shall be used in the computation of the fees required to be paid by any property. Small dwelling units shall pay a fee to finance public facilities and services improvements based on a reasonable relationship between the impacts of that development pursuant to dwelling unit size, as determined by the city. (Ord. 369 § 2, 2017)

 

15.08.080 Payment of fee.
     The fees authorized pursuant to this chapter may be paid on the date of issuance of the building permit for the property on which the development project is proposed and shall become due and payable on the date of final inspection, or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first. If any fee authorized pursuant to this chapter is not fully paid on the date of issuance of the building permit, the developer subject to the fee, as a condition of issuance of the building permit, shall execute a deferral agreement to pay the fee, or applicable portion thereof, at the time the fee becomes due and payable. The fee secured by the deferral agreement shall be calculated on the basis of the fee in effect at the time the fee becomes due and payable. The deferral agreement shall contain the legal description of the property on which a development project is proposed, shall be recorded in the office of the county of San Bernardino auditor/controller recorder and, from the date of recordation, shall constitute a lien for payment of the fees. Furthermore, the fees created pursuant to this chapter shall be calculated on the basis of net acreage. For development projects containing less than one net acre, the fee shall be calculated on the fraction of an acre involved in the development project. (Ord. 279 § 2, 2008; Ord. 50 § 8, 1990)

 

15.08.090 Exemptions created by resolution.
     The city council shall, by council resolution, set forth any exemptions to the development impact fee. These exemptions may be reviewed from time to time and may be revised periodically by resolution of the city council, with this chapter being considered as enabling and directive. (Ord. 50 § 9, 1990)

 

15.08.100 Fee adjustments.
     A developer of any project subject to the fees described herein may apply to the city council for a reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk not later than ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate hearing held within sixty (60) days after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee.

     The city council may, from time to time, and as the need may arise, set forth, by council resolution, specific limitations which will apply to reductions, adjustments, waivers or deferrals of development impact fees which may be made pursuant to this section. (Ord. 50 § 10, 1990)

 

15.08.110 Developer construction of facilities.
     Whenever a developer is or has been required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct a public facility which is the subject of this chapter, and which facility is determined by the city to have supplemental size, length or capacity over that needed for the impact of that development, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the facilities network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer and a credit against the fee, which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this chapter on the development project, shall be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not include the portion of the improvement needed to provide services or mitigate the need for the facility or the burdens created by the development. The specific procedures for reimbursements and credits shall be adopted by resolution of the city council, with this chapter being considered as enabling and directive. (Ord. 50 § 11, 1990)

 

15.08.120 Relationship to existing fees.
     The fees authorized by this chapter shall supersede all previously established fees for the same development impact fee categories. (Ord. 50 § 13, 1990)

Chapter 15.12 GRADING AND EXCAVATION CODE
15.12.010 Title reference to code.
     This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the city grading and excavation code. “Code” as referred to in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise shall mean the city grading and excavation code. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

 

15.12.020 Grading manual.
     A.    The city engineer shall formulate such rules, procedures and interpretations as may be necessary or convenient to administer this chapter. Such rules, procedures and interpretations shall be referred to as the “grading manual” and any amendments to it shall be approved by resolution of the city council.

     B.     In the event of any conflict between the grading manual and this code, the provisions of this code shall govern. The provisions of the grading manual shall, to the extent that they are made conditions of any permit by the city engineer and/or building official, be binding on the permittee. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.030 Purpose and intent.
     It is the intent of this code to safeguard life, limb, property and the public welfare by regulating grading on private property in the incorporated areas of the city. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.040 Scope.
     This code sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments, and establishes administrative requirements for issuance of permits and approval of plans and inspection of grading construction in accordance with the requirements for grading and excavation as contained in the Uniform Building Code then in effect as adopted and modified by city ordinance. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.050 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Approval” means a written engineering or geological opinion by the responsible engineer or geologist of record or responsible principal of the engineering company concerning the progress and completion of the work unless it specifically refers to the city engineer and/or building official.

     “Approved plans” means the current grading plans which bear the stamp of approval of the city engineer and/or building official.

     “Approved testing agency” means a facility whose testing operations are controlled and monitored by a registered civil engineer and which is equipped to perform and certify the tests required by this code, the grading manual, or as determined by the city engineer and/or building official. This determination may be appealed to the city council.

     “Borrow” is earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site.

     “City engineer” means the city engineer for the city of Yucaipa.

     “Building official” means the building official for the city of Yucaipa.

     “City official” means either the city engineer or building official issuing the building permit.

     “Civil engineer” means a professional engineer registered in the state of California to practice in the field of engineering.

     “Civil engineering” means the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics and the properties of materials for the evaluation, design and construction of civil works for the beneficial uses of mankind.

     “Clearing, brushing and grubbing” means the removal of vegetation (grass, brush, trees and similar plan types) by mechanical means.

     “Commercial coach” is a vehicle with or without motive power, designed and equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional or commercial purposes, and shall include a trailer coach.

 

     “Compaction” is the densification of a fill by mechanical means.

     “Engineering geologist” means a geologist certified in the state of California to practice engineering geology.

     “Engineering geology” means the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works.

     “Erosion” is the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water and/or ice.

     “Erosion control system” is a combination of desilting facilities, and erosion protection, including effective planting, to protect adjacent private property, watercourses, public facilities and receiving waters from an abnormal deposition of sediment or dust.

     “Excavation” is the mechanical removal of earth material.

     “Fill” is a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.

     “Grade” means the vertical location of the ground surface.

     1.     “Natural grade” is the ground surface unaltered by artificial means.

     2.     “Existing grade” is the ground surface prior to grading.

     3.     “Rough grade” is the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan.

     4.     “Finish grade” is the final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan.

     “Grading” is any excavating or filling or combination thereof.

     “Grading contractor” is a contractor licensed and regulated by the state of California who specializes in grading work or is otherwise licensed to do grading work.

     “Grading permit” is an official document or certificate issued by the city authorizing grading activity as specified by approved plans and specifications.

     “Hillside site” is a site which entails cut and/or fill grading of three feet or more in vertical height below or above natural ground; or a combination fill-over-cut slope equal to or grater than five feet in vertical height; or where the existing grade is twenty percent or greater; and which may be adversely affected by drainage and/or stability conditions within or from outside the site, or which may cause an adverse affect on adjacent property.

     “Mobilehome” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped to contain not more than two dwelling units to be used with or without a foundation system. Mobilehome does not include recreational vehicle, commercial coach, or factory-built housing.

     “Owner” is any person, agency, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a given real property.

     “Precise grading permit” is a permit that is issued on the basis of approved plans which show the precise structure location, finish elevations, and all on-site improvements.

     “Preliminary grading permit” is a permit that is issued on the basis of approved plans which need not show a structure location but must show interim building pad drainage to the degree required by the city.

     “References,” unless indicated otherwise, or as reasonably appears from the context, in this code to the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the geologist, and the engineering geologist refer to the professional person(s) preparing, signing or approving the project plans and specifications which comprise the approved grading plan, and which professional person appears of record pursuant to Sections 15.12.140 through 15.12.190 or his successor appearing pursuant to said sections.

     “Site” is any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted.

     “Slope” is an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.

     “Soil” is naturally occurring surficial deposits overlying bedrock.

     “Soil engineer” is a civil engineer duly registered in the state of California whose field of expertise is soil mechanics.

     “Soil engineering” means the application of the principles of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof.

     “Special inspector” is an inspector duly licensed by the city to perform inspection of asphalt concrete placement and related construction work or other grading related work approved by the city official. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.060 Grading permits required— Exceptions.
     No person shall conduct any grading, clearing, brushing or grubbing on natural or existing grade that is preparatory to grading, without first having obtained a grading permit from the city. Exceptions to this requirement are as follows or as otherwise determined by the city:

     A.    An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, mobilehome, retaining wall, or other structure authorized by a valid building permit or construction permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation nor exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion of such structure. This shall not prohibit a minimum fee grading permit or soil or geologic report from being required for foundation design and inspection purposes when, in the opinion of the city, stability or flooding considerations warrant such inspection;

     B.     Cemetery graves;

     C.     Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations;

     D.    Earthwork construction regulated by the federal, state, county or city governments, or by any local agency as defined by Government Code Sections 53090 through 53095 (special districts), pipeline or conduit excavation and backfill conducted by local agencies or public utilities and earthwork construction performed by railway companies on their operating property. This exemption, however, shall apply only when the earthwork construction takes place on the property, or dedicated rights-of-way or easements of the above agencies;

     E.     Excavation and backfill for installation of underground utilities by public utilities or companies operating under the authority of a franchise or road;

     F.     Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay where established and provided for by law, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or pressures upon any adjacent or contiguous property;

     G.    Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers or engineering geologists, provided all excavations are properly backfilled. All such excavations and trenches are subject to the applicable sections of Title 8 of the State Orders, Division of Industrial Safety;

     H.    An excavation which does not exceed fifty (50) cubic yards on any one site and which: (1) is less than two feet in vertical depth, or (2) which does not create a cut slope greater then five feet in vertical height and steeper than one and one-half horizontal to one vertical (1 1/2:1);

     I.      A fill less than one foot in depth placed on natural grade with a slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical (5:1), which does not exceed fifty (50) cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.070 Grading permit—Paving.
     No person shall construct pavement surfacing in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet, on natural or existing grade for the purpose of a private road or commercial, industrial or multiresidential parking lot or travelway without a valid grading permit unless waived by the city official or a separate improvement plan for such paving is approved and signed by an authorized city official. Resurfacing or maintenance of paved surfaces shall be exempt from this requirement. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.080 Grading permit— Watercourse alternation.
     No person shall alter an existing watercourse, channel or revetment by excavating, or placing fill, rock protection or structural improvements without a valid grading permit unless waived by the city or performed as interim protection under emergency flood fighting conditions. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.090 Excavation blasting permit.
     No person shall possess, store, sell, transport or use explosives and blasting agents to do any excavation without a permit from county of San Bernardino, forestry and fire warden department. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.100 Types of grading permits.
     A.    Either a preliminary grading permit or a precise grading permit may be issued for grading work upon completion of an application in accordance with Subarticle 5 of the grading manual and approval by the city engineer and/or building official. The preliminary or precise grading permit is the option of the permittee provided that the plans satisfy the requirements of Subarticle 5 of the grading manual.

     B.     Building permits may be issued for a site graded under a valid precise grading permit upon completion and approval of rough grade inspection as specified in Section 15.12.410 E of this code.

     C.     Building permits shall not be issued for a site graded under a preliminary grading permit until a new precise grading permit has been issued and the provisions of subsection B of this section have been satisfied. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.110 Powers and duties of the city official.
     A.    The provisions of Section 202, Powers and Duties of the City Official and Building Official, of the Uniform Building Code shall apply to grading construction work.

     B.     Stop Orders. Whenever any building or grading work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or the grading permit, the city official and building official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the city engineer to proceed with the work. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.120 Hazardous conditions.
     A.    Hazardous conditions exist when the state of any natural ground, natural slope, excavation, fill or drainage device, which exist on private property, is a menace to life or limb, or a danger to public safety, or endangers or adversely affects the safety, usability or stability of adjacent property, structures or public facilities.

     B.     The city engineer may examine or cause to be examined every condition reported as hazardous as set forth in subsection (A) of this section.

     C.     Notice of Hazardous Condition. In any case where a hazardous condition is found by the city official, he shall give notice, setting forth the finding to all owners of the property affected by the hazardous condition, authorized representative of the owners or a permittee under any active permit which gives permittee control of the property issued pursuant to this code hereinafter referred to as “owner,” of such required corrective work. The notice may state the time and place of a hearing to be held if the owner fails to comply with any demand for corrective work or reports. The purpose of the hearing would be for the presentation of evidence concerning the hazardous conditions and demand for corrective work or submission of reports. The notice shall set forth the right of the owner to be present at the hearing, at his option, and introduce such relevant evidence on the issues as he desires. If the time and place of any hearing scheduled for the presentation of evidence is not included in the initial notice(s), it shall be included in a subsequent notice.

     D.    Evidence. At the time and place so specified for the hearing, evidence shall be submitted as to the facts of any condition as to reasonably establish its existence, and the city official or his designee, as hearing officer, shall determine whether the facts presented reasonably establish the existence of a hazardous condition to the satisfaction of the hearing officer. Evidence may further be submitted as to the work or reports considered necessary to correct or determine work to correct the hazard.

     Exception: Where city property or facilities are endangered by the hazardous condition found by the city official, at the request of the owner, the hearing may be held before a member of the grading board of appeals selected by the chairman of the board. The city official may appeal such hearing officer’s order as set forth in this section. Such hearing officer may not consider an appeal of the case as a member of the city council.

     E.     Order, Finality and Appeal. If the hearing officer determines the existence of a hazardous condition, he shall determine whether such hazards are subject to corrective work and/or the need for more analysis through the preparation of reports and shall order such work or reports and specify a completion time.

     1.     Finality of Order. The determination and order may be made orally at the hearing and shall be written and transmitted to the owner within a reasonable time. The determination and order shall become final within five days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, from the time it is first rendered in the event that the owner was not present at the hearing, within five days of the mailing of the order to the last known address of said owner.

     2.     Appeal. The owner may, at any time prior to the determination and order becoming final, appeal in writing the decision of the hearing officer to the grading board of appeals of the city. The board shall fix a time and place and hold a hearing, consider the evidence and make a determination as set forth in Section 15.12.130 of this code. The order of the grading board of appeals shall be immediately final.

     F.     Completion of Work. The owner shall, following the finality of the determination and order of the hearing officer, or if appealed, the determination and order of the grading board of appeals, commence the corrective action ordered or preparation of reports and such work or submissions shall be completed within the specified time.

     G.    Failure to Complete. If the owner neglects or fails to complete the corrective work or submit the reports ordered by the hearing officer or grading board of appeals within the specified time, the city engineer or building official may: (1) cause the work to be performed or reports to be prepared, or (2) advise the owner of the need for corrective work and warn him/her that in the absence of such corrective work subsequent future hazards may occur which could result in an order to vacate the premises or to withhold the permit to use or occupy such properties. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit the type of remedy or relief which the city engineer or building official may have under any other provisions of law.

     H.    Costs. Costs incurred by the city to perform any corrective work or prepare reports under subsection G of this section, shall be charged to the owner. The city engineer or building official may apply to the city council to cause the costs to be paid and levied as a special assessment against the property and collected in a manner provided for special assessments.

     I.      Vacation of Property. If necessary, the notice and order in subsection C or E of this section shall include the requirement that the property, or portion thereof or sites thereto adjacent to be vacated within a specified time, in the interest of public safety, pending the finality of any determination and order or completion of corrective work.

     The city engineer or building inspector shall cause the property to be posted at conspicuous locations with a notice containing at least the following:

 

UNSAFE TO OCCUPY

 

DO NOT ENTER

 

Building Official, City Engineer,

City of Yucaipa

 

Date Posted ____________

 

     The posted notice may also contain the date, time and place of the hearing and the name, address and telephone number of the office or city official where additional information may be obtained.

     Such posted notices shall remain posted until any necessary corrective work is completed. Such posted notices shall not be removed without written permission of the city official, and no person shall enter the property except for the purpose of making the required corrections or preparing reports.

     J.      Service of Notices. The notices and order required by subsections C and E of this section may be served either:

     1.     By mailing a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner’s address as designated on papers, applications, or permits on file with the city official; or

     2.     By personally delivering a copy to the owner’s address as designated on papers, applications or permits on file with the city official; or

     3.     If the owner is absent from his place of residence and from his usual or designated place of business, by leaving a copy with some person of suitable age and discretion at either place, and sending a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner or authorized representative at his place of residence; or

     4.     If such place of residence and business cannot be ascertained, or a person of suitable age or discretion there cannot be found, then by affixing a copy in a conspicuous place on the property, building or structure and also delivering a copy to a person there residing, if any, or to the person in charge if any; and also sending a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested addressed to the owner at the place where the property, building or structure is situated, or to the owner at his last known or designated address, or both. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.130 Grading board of appeals.
     A.    A board of appeals is created. The board shall consist of five regular members appointed by the city council and shall function in accordance with Subarticle 4 of the grading manual.

     B.     The board shall have the power, upon an appeal by the owner, agent in control or permittee under permit issued pursuant to this code, to reverse, modify or otherwise alter the determinations and order of the city official made pursuant to the procedures authorized in Section 15.12.120, of this code, under such rules and regulations as the board may, from time to time, adopt. The city official shall not participate in the decision of the board in such cases.

     C.     The board’s decision on an appeal shall be furnished in writing to the appellant and to the city official, and all such decisions shall be final immediately. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.140 Separate permits required for each site.
     Except as exempted in Section 15.12.060 of this code, no person shall conduct any grading or clearing, brushing or grubbing on natural grade or existing grade that is preparatory to grading, without first obtaining a grading permit from the city official. A separate permit shall be required for each site and may cover both excavations and fills. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.150 Permit application.
     A.    To obtain a grading permit, the applicant must first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the city official. The permit application shall be accompanied by information required by the city official and as specified in Subarticle 5 of the grading manual.

     B.     Applications for which no permit is issued within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of application shall expire by limitation and plans submitted for checking may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the city official. The city official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. In order to renew action for an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan check fee. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.160 Plans and specifications.
     A.    Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, and supporting data consisting of soil engineering and engineering geology reports when required by the city official, as specified in Section 15.12.180 of this code.

     B.     Plans and specifications for earthwork projects of five hundred (500) cubic yards or more, and/or subdivisions and hillside commercial, industrial and multiresidential projects shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer, unless otherwise approved by the city official. This requirement may be extended to any project when, in the opinion of the city official, critical drainage or geologic factors may be involved and there is need for civil engineering design and control. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.170 Information on plans and specifications.
     Grading plans and specifications shall be prepared in accordance with the grading requirements of Section 15.12.380(A), of this code and Subarticle 5 of the grading manual. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.180 Soil engineering and engineering geology reports.
     A soil engineering and engineering geology report shall be required for grading projects, unless otherwise waived by the city official. The reports shall include information appropriate for the site including any information required by the city official. Recommendations included in the reports and approved by the city official shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.190 Issuance, expiration and renewal.
     A.    Every permit issued shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of issuance.

     B.     Every permit issued shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of such permit or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days.

     C.     The time limitations and provisions of Section 303, Permits Issuance, of the Uniform Building Code as amended are applicable to grading permits, except as stated in subdivisions (1) and (2) below:

     1.     A permit issued hereunder shall expire upon a change of ownership if the grading work thereon, for which the permit was issued, has not been completed, and a new permit shall be required for the completion of the work. If the time limitations of subsections A and B of this section are not applicable and if no changes have been made to the plans and specifications last submitted to the city official, no charge shall be made for the issuance of the new permit under such circumstances. If, however, changes have been made to the plans and specifications last submitted to the city official, fees based on the valuation of the additional work, additional yardage and necessary plan checking as provided for in Subarticle 6 of the grading manual shall be charged to the permit applicant.

     2.     The city official may extend the one hundred eighty (180) day expiration time limit on permits not to exceed two successive periods of one hundred eighty (180) days each upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken.

     D.    The city official may require that grading operations and project designs be modified if delays occur which incur weather-related problems not considered at the time the permit was issued, and further subject to the provisions of Section 15.12.200 of this code.

     E.     If the permittee presents satisfactory reasons for failure to continue or begin the work within the period specified in subsection B of this section, the city official, upon receiving a written request, may grant an extension of time as specified in subsection (C)(2) of this section without additional fees, provided that:

     1.     No changes have been made in the original plans and specifications for such work;

     2.     Suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year;

     3.     A re-endorsement of the compliance of the plans with the applicable regulations by the engineering and building department for the city, shall be obtained.

     Such request for extensions must be submitted no later than the sixtieth day following the date on which the permit would otherwise expire. If the permittee fails to request an extension within the time provided, the city official may renew the grading permit for a fee of one-half the amount required for the original permit, provided no changes have been made in the original plans and specifications for such work.

     F.     If the permittee is unable to complete the work by the end of a two-year period, the city official may renew the grading permit on an annual basis for a fee of one-half the amount required for the original permit for such work, provided no changes have been made in the original plans and specifications for such work. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.200 Denial of permit.
     A.    The city official shall not issue a permit in any case where he finds that the work as proposed by the applicant is liable to constitute a hazard to property or result in the deposition of debris on any public way or interfere with any existing drainage course. If it can be shown to the satisfaction of the city official that the hazard can be essentially eliminated by the construction of retaining structures, buttress fills, drainage devices or by other means, the city official may issue the permit with the condition that such work be performed.

     B.     If, in the opinion of the city official, the land area for which grading is proposed is subject to geological or flood hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work can eliminate or sufficiently reduce the hazard to human life or property, the grading permit and the building permits for habitable structures shall be denied.

     C.     The city official may require plans and specifications to be modified in order to mitigate anticipated adverse environmental effects of proposed grading projects. He may, under circumstances where the significant adverse environmental effects of a proposed grading project cannot be mitigated, deny the issuance of a grading permit.

     D.    The city official may require plans and specifications to be modified in order to make them consistent with the city general plan, specific plans, zoning code or other rules, regulations or conditions applicable to the project. He may deny the grading permit if the proposed project cannot be designated in accordance with these rules, regulations or conditions. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.210 Time of grading operations.
     Grading and equipment operations within one-half mile of a structure for human occupancy shall not be conducted between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m. or on Sundays and federal holidays. The city official may, however, permit grading or equipment operations during specific hours after eight p.m. or before seven a.m. or on Sundays and federal holidays if he determines that such operations are not detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of such a structure. Permitted hours of operation may be shortened by the city or the building official’s finding of a previously unforeseen effect on the health, safety or welfare of the surrounding community. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.220 Responsibility of permittee.
     It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to be knowledgeable of the conditions and/or restrictions of the grading permit as outlined in the applicable sections of this code, the grading manual, and as contained on the approved grading plans and in the approved soil and geology reports. The permittee shall also be responsible to maintain in an obvious and accessible location on the site, a copy of the grading plans bearing the stamp of approval by the city engineer or official. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.230 Protection of adjoining property.
     Each adjacent owner is entitled to the lateral and subjacent support which his land receives from the adjoining land, subject to the right of the owner of the adjoining land to make proper and usual excavations on the same for purposes of construction or improvement as provided by law, Section 832 of the California Civil Code is contained in Appendix G of the grading manual. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.240 Import and export of earth material.
     Where an excess of one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of earth per project site is moved on public roadways from or to the site of an earth grading operation, all the following requirements shall apply:

     A.    Either water or dust palliative or both must be applied for the alleviation or prevention of excessive dust resulting from the loading or transportation of earth from or to the project site on public roadways. The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining public rights-of-way used for handling purposes in a condition free of dust, earth, or debris attributed to the grading operation.

     B.     Loading and transportation of earth from or to the site must be accomplished within the limitations established in Section 15.12.210 of this grading code.

     C.     Access roads to the premises shall be only at points designated on the approved grading plan.

     D.    The last fifty (50) feet of the access road, as it approaches the intersection with the public roadway, shall have a grade not to exceed three percent. There must be three hundred (300) feet clear, unobstructed sight distance to the intersection from both the public roadway and the access road. If the three hundred (300) feet sight distance cannot be obtained, flagmen shall be posted.

     E.     A stop sign conforming to the requirements of the California Vehicle Code shall be posted at the entrance of the access road to the public roadway.

     F.     An advance warning sign must be posted on the public roadway four hundred (400) feet on either side of the access intersection, carrying the words “truck crossing.” The sign shall be diamond shape, each side being thirty (30) inches in length, shall have a yellow background, and the letters thereon shall be five inches in height. The sign shall be placed six feet from the edge of the pavement and the base of the sign shall be five feet above the pavement level. The advance warning sign shall be covered or removed when the access intersection is not in use. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.250 Grading plan check fees.
     Before accepting a grading permit application and plans and specifications for checking, the city official shall collect a plan checking fee as approved by resolution of the city council and as provided in Subarticle 6 of the grading manual. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.260 Grading permit fees.
     A.    A fee for each grading permit shall be paid to the city official prior to issuance of a grading permit as approved by resolution of the city council and as provided in Subarticle 6 of the grading manual.

     B.     Failure to pay fees and obtain a permit before commencing work shall be deemed a violation of this code, except when it can be proven to the satisfaction of the city official that an emergency existed which made it impractical to first obtain the permit. A violation shall result in an assessment of double permit fees for work done prior to permit issuance. Payment of a double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this code nor from any other penalties prescribed herein.

     C.     Additional fees approved by resolution of the city council and contained in Subarticle 6 of the grading manual shall be paid as required to the city official. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.270 Cost recovery fee.
     If the city official performs emergency work on private property, he shall charge the property owner all direct and indirect costs which are necessary to complete the work to his satisfaction. In addition, the building official may charge a mobilization cost equal to ten percent of the cost for performing the work. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.280 Bonds.
     A.    Bonds Required. A grading permit shall not be issued unless the permittee shall first post with the city official a bond executed by the owner and a corporate surety authorized to do business in the state of California as a surety in an amount specified in Subarticle 7 of the grading manual. The bond is required to assure that the work, if not completed in accordance with approved plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate hazardous conditions. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the city official if he determines that:

     1.     No hazardous situation is likely to occur as a result of incomplete or improper grading; or

     2.     No adverse effect is likely to occur to subject property, adjacent property or an existing or proposed structure thereon as a result of incomplete or improper grading; or

     3.     No significant drainage, erosion, flooding or siltation problems will exist as a result of incomplete or improper grading; or

     4.     No adverse geological or environmental impacts will occur as a result of incomplete or improper grading; or

     5.     No conditions of the permit warrant a financial guarantee to assure their satisfactory completion.

     B.     Extended on Continuing Securities. On developments where progressive individual grading projects or several concurrent projects are being constructed by one owner, a continuing (blanket) bond or single letter of credit which will cover all such projects may be accepted and the amount determined by the city official.

     C.     Additional Bonding. An additional cash bond in an amount determined by the city official may be required to ensure the completion of finish grading under the permit as a condition of occupancy and energizing utilities. A bond in an amount determined by the city official may be required for permits involving temporary earthen stockpiles to ensure their timely removal.

     D.    Failure to Complete Work. In the event of failure to comply with all of the conditions and terms of the permit, the city official may order the work authorized by the permit to be completed or put in a safe condition to his satisfaction. The surety executing such bond or deposit shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended in causing any and all such work to be done. In the case of a cash deposit, said deposit or any unused portion thereof, shall be refunded to the permittee.

     E.     Default in Performance of Conditions. Whenever the city official finds or determines that a default has occurred in the performance of any requirement of a condition of a permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the principal and when applicable, to the surety on the bond. Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the period of time deemed by the city official to be reasonably necessary for the completion.

     After receipt of such notice, the surety shall, within the time specified, cause or require the work to be performed, or failing therein, shall pay over to the city official the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice. Upon receipt of such moneys the official may cause the required work to be performed and completed. The surety shall pay the city official actual costs in excess of the estimate amount plus a mobilization charge specified in Section 15.12.270 of this code. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.290 Cuts.
     Cut slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) unless otherwise recommended in the soil engineering or engineering geology report and approved by the city official. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.300 Fills.
     A.    Unless otherwise approved by the city official and recommended in the approved soil engineering report, fills shall conform to Subarticle 9 of the grading manual. The provisions therein may be waived, for minor fills not intended to support structures, upon written request by the applicant on a form prescribed by the city official.

     B.     The city official may require that the soil tests or testing be performed by an approved testing laboratory.

     C.     Fill slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) unless otherwise recommended in the soil engineering or engineering geology report and approved by the city official. The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.310 Setbacks.
     The setbacks and other restrictions specified by Subarticle 10 of the grading manual are minimum and may be increased by the city official or by the recommendation of a civil engineer, soil engineer or engineering geologist, if necessary for safety and stability or to prevent damage to structures or adjacent properties from sediment deposition, erosion, water runoff of the slopes or to provide access for slope and drainage structure maintenance. The minimum setback may be reduced only in special circumstances where stability is proven to the satisfaction of the city official by the soil engineer or engineering geologist and other factors are of primary importance. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.320 Drainage and terracing.
     Drainage facilities and terracing shall conform to the provisions of Subarticle 11 of the grading manual unless otherwise approved by the city official and delineated on the approved grading plan. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.330 Asphalt concrete pavement.
     A.    Asphalt concrete pavement for surfacing of parking lots, private streets or other similar use shall conform to the provisions of Subarticle 12 of the grading manual unless otherwise approved by the city official.

     B.     The site soil engineer or special inspector shall inspect the construction of asphalt paved areas and verify to the city official that the work has been performed in compliance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.340 Erosion control.
     A.    The faces of cut and fill slopes and the project site shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion in accordance with this section and Sections 15.12.350 and 15.12.360. Where cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of the materials, such protection may be omitted upon approval by the city official.

     B.     Where necessary, temporary and/or permanent erosion control devices such as desilting basins, check dams, riprap or other devices or methods, as approved by the city official, shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety during the rainy season from October 15th to April 15th.

     C.     No grading work in excess of two hundred (200) cubic yards will be allowed between October 15th and April 15th on any single grading site under permit unless an erosion control system has been approved or waived by the city official.

     D.    Paved streets, sidewalks and other improvements shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition free of loose soil, construction debris and trash. Street sweeping or other equally effective means shall be used on a regular basis to prevent storm flows from carrying sediment and debris outside the project boundaries. Watering shall not be used to clean streets except for fine material not otherwise removed by sweeping or other mechanical means.

     E.     The civil engineer or other qualified individual who prepared the grading plan and designed the erosion control devices shall be responsible for inspection and modification of the devices, as necessary, during the rainy season.

     F.     Desilting facilities shall be provided at drainage outlets from the graded site.

     G.    Desilting basins shall be designed to provide a minimum desilting capacity equal to the current city standards.

     H.    Desilting basins shall be constructed around the perimeter of projects whenever feasible when it provides improved maintenance access from paved roads during wet weather.

     I.      Desilting basins constructed of compacted earth shall be compacted to a relative compaction of ninety (90) percent of maximum density. A soil engineering report, prepared by the soil engineer, which includes the type of field testing performed, location and results of testing shall be submitted to the city official for approval upon completion of the desilting basins.

     J.      Equipment and workers for emergency work shall be made available at all times during the rainy season. Necessary materials shall be available on-site and stockpiled at convenient locations to facilitate rapid construction of temporary devices when rain is imminent.

     K.    Erosion protection shall consist of effective planting of all slopes in excess of five feet high unless otherwise approved by the city official. Slopes exceeding fifteen (15) feet high may require an adequate sprinkler system, as determined by the city official.

     Protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable which may be prior to rough grade approval. Effective planting shall be installed, fully germinated and effectively cover the required slopes prior to final approval unless otherwise approved by the city official.

     L.     The erosion control provisions shall take into account drainage patterns during the current and future phases of grading throughout the rainy season.

     M.    All removable protective devices shown shall be in place at the end of each working day when the five-day rain probability forecast exceeds forty (40) percent.

     N.    Graded areas around the tract perimeter must drain away from the face of slopes at the conclusion of each working day. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.350 Erosion control plans.
     Erosion control plans prepared in accordance with Subarticle 13 of the grading manual shall be submitted to the city official for approval by September 15th each year for projects under grading permit. The erosion control plan may be waived for grading projects on single residential lot projects providing that an erosion control system, meeting the approval of the city official, has been installed, placed, planted or constructed before October 15th. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.360 Erosion control maintenance.
     A.    After each rainstorm, silt and debris shall be removed from check berms and desilting basins and the basins pumped dry.

     B.     After each rainstorm, the performance of the erosion control system shall be evaluated and revised and repaired as necessary.

     C.     Devices shall not be moved or modified without the approval of the city official.

     D.    The contractor shall be responsible and shall take necessary precautions to prevent public trespass onto areas where impounded water creates a hazardous condition.

     E.     The contractor and permittee or project owner shall be responsible for continual maintenance of the devices during the rainy season. In the event of failure or refusal by the contractor, permittee or project owner to properly maintain the devices, the city official may cause emergency maintenance work to be done to protect adjacent private and public property. The cost shall be charged to the owner and shall include an initial mobilization cost plus the cost of doing the work as contained in Sections 15.12.250 through 15.12.270 of this code.

     F.     In the event of failure by the property owner to install an approved erosion control system, the city official may cause emergency work to be performed to protect adjacent private and public property. When the city official is caused to take such emergency maintenance workings to be performed, he is empowered to revoke any standing grading permits. Such action to revoke a grading permit shall be performed in writing. Such permit shall not be renewed until an erosion control system, approved by the city official, shall be put into place. The procedure of Section 15.12.120 of this code need not apply for emergency erosion control work between October 15th and April 15th. The cost shall be charged to the owner in accordance with subsection E of this section. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.370 Grading inspection.
     All grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the city official. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.380 Grading requirements.
     A.    It shall be the responsibility of the civil engineer, architect or other qualified individual who prepared the grading plan approved by the city official to incorporate all recommendations from the soil engineering and engineering geology reports into the grading plan. He shall also be responsible for the professional inspection and approval of the grading within his area of technical specialty. This responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, inspection and approval as to the establishment of line, grade and drainage of the development area. The project civil engineer and/or general contractor shall act as the coordinating agent in the event the need arises for liaison between the project professional grading contractor, and the city official, the civil engineer or other qualified person who prepares and signs the grading control plans, and the submission of as-graded grading plans when required by the city official upon completion of the work.

     B.     Soil engineering and engineering geology reports shall be required as specified in Section 15.12.180 of this code. During grading, all necessary reports, compaction data, soil engineering and engineering geology recommendations shall be submitted to the owner by the soil engineer and engineering geologist. The owner shall submit copies of the report to the civil engineer and two copies of all reports to the city official.

     C.     The soil engineer’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, the professional inspection and approval concerning the preparation of ground to receive fills, testing for required compaction, stability of all finish slopes, design of buttress fills, subdrain installation and incorporation of data supplied by the engineering geologist.

     D.    The engineering geologist’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, professional inspection and written approval of the adequacy of natural ground for receiving fills, the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters, and the need for subdrains or other groundwater drainage devices. He shall report his finding to the soil engineer and the civil engineer for engineering analysis.

     E.     The city official may expeditiously inspect the project at the various stages of work requiring approval and at any more frequent intervals necessary to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants.

     F.     When preliminary soil engineering reports are not required by the city official, he may require inspection and testing by an approved testing agency. The testing agency’s responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, approval of cleared areas and benches to receive fill, and compaction of fills. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.390 Notification of noncompliance.
     If, in the course of fulfilling their responsibility under this code, the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist, or the testing agency finds that the work is not being done in conformance with the provisions of the approved specifications and grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the person in charge of the grading work and to the city official. Recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary, shall be submitted to the owner. The owner shall submit two copies of all recommendations and reports to the city official. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.400 Transfer of responsibility for approval.
     If the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist, the testing agency, or the grading contractor of record are changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped unless: (1) the owner submits a letter of notification verifying the change of the responsible professional; and (2) the new responsible professional submits in writing that he has reviewed all prior reports and/or plans (specified by date and title) and work performed by the prior responsible professional and that he concurs with the findings, conclusions, and recommendations, and is satisfied with the work performed. He may modify or revise recommendations and/or specifications of work performed if accompanied by supporting data and approved by the city official. He must state that he assumes all responsibility within his purview as of a specified date. All exceptions must be justified to the satisfaction of the city official.

     Exception: Where clearly indicated that the firm, not the individual engineer and/or geologist, is the contracting party, the designated engineer or geologist may be reassigned and another engineer and/or geologist within the firm may assume responsibility. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.410 Site inspection by the city official.
     A.    Prior to the approval of any building or grading plans and specifications, the city official may inspect the site to determine that the plans and specifications are current and reflect existing conditions.

     B.     The permittee or his agent shall notify the city official when the grading operations specified in Subarticle 14 of the grading manual are ready for inspection.

     C.     If the inspector finds the soil or other conditions not as stated in the approved plans and soil or geology reports or as in additional information which was required for issuance of the grading permit, he may, using reasonable judgment, refuse to allow further work until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan which will conform to the conditions.

     D.    The provisions of Section 202(d), Stop Orders, of the Uniform Building Code shall apply to all grading work and whenever the city official determines that any work does not comply with the terms of a permit, or this code, or that the soil or other conditions are not stated on the permit, he may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing of such work to be done and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the city official to proceed with the work.

     E.     Prior to the issuance of building permits for a graded site, the rough grading shall be completed in accordance with Subarticle 14 of the grading manual and to the satisfaction of the responsible civil engineer, or architect, engineering geologist, soil engineer, and the city official.

     F.     Whenever any work on which inspections are required is covered or concealed by additional work without first having been inspected, the city official may require by written notice, that such work be exposed for examination. The work of exposing and recovering shall not entail or be subject to expense by the city. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.420 Special inspections.
     The city official may establish special inspection requirements in accordance with Section 306, Special Inspections, of the Uniform Building Code, as amended for special cases involving grading or paving related operations, Special cases may apply to work where in the opinion of the city official it is necessary to supplement the resources or expertise available for inspection. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.430 Final reports.
     Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work, the city official may require the written approvals, reports, drawings and supplements thereto specified in Subarticle 15 of the grading manual. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.440 Notification of completion.
     The permittee or his agent shall notify the city official when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. All work including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices and all erosion control measures must be completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan and the required reports approved by the city official before final approval of the grading permit is given by the city official. He may approve the grading work prior to completion of all work in special cases of extreme hardship and if no hazard exists and an adequate bond is posted to assure completion of all remaining work. (Ord. 48, 1990)

 

15.12.450 Violations—Penalties.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do grading in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.

     B.     The issuance of a building permit, performance of building permit inspections, or issuance, of a certificate of use and occupancy may be withheld for property on which a violation of the provisions of this code exist, including work performed not in accordance with approved plans, until such violation has been corrected to the satisfaction of the city official.

     C.     Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 48, 1990)

Chapter 15.16 MOBILEHOME PARK RENTAL AGREEMENTS
15.16.010 Mobilehome park agreement.
     Nothing in this chapter or in any existing ordinance of the city shall operate to restrict the right of a tenant and park owner to enter into an agreement in accordance with California Civil Code Section 798.17. Pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.17 (c), the tenant shall have the option to reject the offered rental agreement and accept a rental agreement instead for a term of twelve (12) months or less, including a month to month agreement. No park owner may require, directly or indirectly, that any tenant or prospective tenant sign a lease or rental agreement with a term in excess of twelve (12) months or that provides that it shall be exempt from local rent control as a condition of tenancy in the park, and no park owner may deny a tenancy to a prospective purchaser of a mobilehome in the park on the ground that the prospective purchaser of a mobilehome in the park on the ground that the prospective purchaser will not sign such a lease or rental agreement. (Ord. 87 § 1, 1991)

 

15.16.020 Violation—Penalty.
     A.    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each violation of this chapter and each day during which any such violation is committed or continued shall constitute a separate offense.

     B.     The city council may institute civil actions, including, but expressly not limited to, injunctive relief, to compel compliance with this chapter.

     C.     All civil and criminal remedies set forth in this Section are declared to be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 91 § 1, 1992: Ord. 87 § 3, 1991)

Chapter 15.20 MOBILEHOME PARK RENT STABILIZATION PROGRAM*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 397. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


15.20.010 Purpose and findings.
     A.    Findings. Complaints concerning excessive rents by tenants of mobilehome parks led the city council to conduct a study of the situation in the mobilehome parks in the city. As a result of that study, staff investigation and testimony at public hearings held by the city, the city found an extremely low vacancy rate and a pattern of excessive rent increases beginning as early as 1983, when rent control was first sought from the county board of supervisors for the Yucaipa area. Excessive rent was an issue in the 1986 incorporation campaign, which resulted in the filing of a petition with the Local Agency Formation Commission (“LAFCO”) on December 18, 1986 and again in the 1989 incorporation petition filed with LAFCO on March 2, 1989, which resulted in the incorporation of the city on November 27, 1989. The forty-three (43) mobilehome parks in the city contain approximately four thousand one hundred (4,100) spaces and provide approximately thirty (30) percent of the thirteen thousand eight hundred (13,800) dwelling units in the city. Mobilehome owners, unlike apartment tenants or residents of other rental stock, are in the unique position of having made a substantial investment to purchase a mobilehome for which they must rent a space in a mobilehome park. They have also made investments in maintaining and improving those homes as well as landscaping and exterior improvements to the mobilehomes and the rental spaces on which they are located. Alternative sites for the relocation of mobilehomes are difficult to find due to the shortage of vacant spaces, the restrictions on the age, size or style of mobilehomes permitted in many parks, and requirements related to the installa-

tion of mobilehomes, including permits, landscaping and site preparation. Additionally, the cost of moving a mobilehome is substantial and the risk of damage in moving is significant. Thus, moving a mobilehome is not a feasible option if rent becomes excessive. The result of these conditions is the creation of a captive market of mobilehome owners and tenants. Their immobility and the shortage of spaces, in turn, creates an imbalance in the bargaining relationship between park owners and mobilehome park tenants. Because mobilehomes are often owned by senior citizens, persons on fixed incomes, and persons of low and moderate income, excessive rent increases fall upon these individuals with particular harshness.

     On January 28, 1991, the city council enacted Ordinance No. 63 (amended). This ordinance established a comprehensive scheme for the regulation of space rents in mobilehome parks in the city, and limits the rent increases that may be charged by park owners.

     B.     On November 25, 1991, the city council enacted Ordinance No. 87, (as amended on February 13, 1992, by Ordinance No. 91), which prohibits park owners from requiring prospective residents from signing long-term leases as a condition of moving into a mobilehome park.

     C.     On September 18, 1992, the city council enacted Ordinance No. 113, which amended Ordinance No. 63 (amended) to allow the de-regulation, or de-control of space rents upon specified vacancies of a mobilehome park space, and provided for the re-imposition of rent control upon the imposition of the rent first charged after such vacancy. At the time of the adoption of Ordinance No. 63 (amended), the city council determined that the rent stabilization provisions of Ordinance No. 63 (amended), would provide sufficient protection for park residents against excessive rent increases without the need for control of rents upon vacancies.

     D.    Since the enactment of Ordinance No. 63 (amended), residents of mobilehome parks in the city have presented instances of park owners requiring prospective residents to sign long-term leases as a condition of moving into the park which such long-term leases exempt such persons from the protection of Ordinance No. 63 (amended). In addition, residents of mobilehome parks in the city have presented the city with instances of park owners raising rents several fold for new residents. As a result, these park residents have been unable to sell their coaches and move out of the park, and prospective residents have been forced to look for housing elsewhere. In some instances, park residents have been forced to sell their coaches to the park owner at minimal or no cost, such that the coach itself has little or no value, and the park owner has assumed the role of landlord on the specific coach as well.

     E.     As a result of these repeated problems, and the unnecessarily oppressive and harsh rent increases which have occurred, this city council finds and declares that it is necessary to facilitate and encourage fair bargaining between the prospective residents and park owners, as well as current residents and park owners, from excessive and unreasonable conditions imposed upon vacancies in mobilehome parks, and from unreasonable rent increases in an area of housing shortage. The city council finds that control of rents upon vacancy will not prevent park owners from realizing a fair and just return on their property when seen in the context of mobilehome rent control which has been established in the city.

     F.     In order to facilitate the above-stated policies, the city council, by Ordinance No. 104, adopted provisions limiting the rent that a park owner may charge upon a vacancy in a park. Ordinance No. 104, amended by Ordinance No. 113 provides for complete vacancy control, where it is believed that Ordinance No. 63 (amended) and other mobilehome rent control provisions adopted by the city council adequately protect the rights and interest of park owners. The ordinance codified in this chapter is intended to apply to any transfer of any mobilehome, as well as any change in occupancy of a mobilehome.

     G.    On March 28, 1994, the city council approved the annual report with respect to certain definitions and ministerial actions, and thereafter enacted Ordinance No. 126, which incorporated all previous amendments to Ordinance No. 63 (amended) and does not intend to make any substantive changes to Ordinance No. 63 as it was amended by Ordinance Nos. 104 and 113 other than those minor nonsubstantive amendments authorized by city council on March 28, 1994.

     H.    On December 11, 1995, the city council approved the annual report with respect to certain revisions and additions to Ordinance No. 126. The ordinance codified in this chapter incorporates all existing provisions of Ordinance No. 126, Ordinance No. 140 and Ordinance No. 152, except as modified in light of issues identified in the annual report.

     I.      On September 8, 1997, the city council approved the annual report with respect to certain revisions and additions to Ordinance No. 161. This ordinance incorporated all existing provisions of Ordinance No. 161, except as modified in light of issues identified in the annual report.

     J.      On November 8, 1999, the city council approved the biennial report with respect to certain revisions and additions to Ordinance Nos. 161/170. This ordinance incorporates all existing provisions of Ordinance No. 161 and Ordinance No. 170, except as modified in light of issues identified in the biennial report.

     K.    1. On August 2, 2001 and November 20, 2001, the mobilehome rent review commission conducted a noticed public hearing, received testimony and made recommendations to the city council on proposed language amendments to the rent stabilization ordinance and administrative rules.

     2.     On September 24, 2001, at a noticed public hearing the city council received testimony and considered the recommendations of staff and the mobilehome rent review commission with respect to certain revisions and additions to this chapter of the Yucaipa Municipal Code (the “municipal code”), and administrative rules.

     3.     Based on the record presented, which is incorporated herein, the city council found and determined that the following amendments to this chapter were necessary in order to provide sufficient protection for park residents against excessive rent increases and to preserve the comprehensive scheme for the regulation of space rents in mobilehome parks.

     4.     On January 28, 2002, the city council approved the biennial report with respect to certain revisions and additions to this chapter and enacted Ordinance No. 214.

     L.     1. On August 25, 2003, and October 7, 2003, the mobilehome rent review commission conducted a noticed public hearing, received testimony and made recommendations to the city council on proposed language amendments to the rent stabilization ordinance and administrative rules.

     2.     On November 24, 2003, at a noticed public hearing the city council received testimony and considered the recommendations of staff and the mobilehome rent review commission with respect to certain revisions and additions to this chapter of the Yucaipa Municipal Code (the “municipal code”), and administrative rules.

     3.     Based on the record presented, which is incorporated herein, the city council found and determined that the following amendments to this chapter of the municipal code were necessary in order to provide sufficient protection for park residents against excessive rent increases and to preserve the comprehensive scheme for the regulation of space rents in mobilehome parks.

     4.     On December 8, 2003, the city council approved the biennial report with respect to certain revisions and additions to this chapter and enacted Ordinance No. 226.

     M.    On September 27, 2004, the city council approved the addition of subsection E to Section 15.20.110 of this code and enacted Ordinance No. 234.

     N.    On August 8, 2005, the city council approved the repeal of Section 15.20.117 of this code and enacted Ordinance No. 245.

     O.    1. On February 22, 2006 the mobilehome rent review commission conducted a noticed public meeting, received testimony and made recommendations to the city council on proposed amendments to this chapter (also referred to as the “rent stabilization ordinance” or the “ordinance”) and administrative rules.

     2.     On April 24, 2006, at a noticed public meeting, the city council conducted the biennial review and received testimony and considered the recommendations of staff and the mobilehome rent review commission with respect to proposed amendments to this chapter, and administrative rules.

     3.     Based on the record presented, which is incorporated herein, the city council found and determined that the following amendments to this chapter were necessary in order to adequately protect the interests of park owners and park residents and to preserve the comprehensive scheme for the regulation of space rents in mobilehome parks.

     P.     1.  On July 15, 2010, July 26, 2010, December 14, 2010, and February 22, 2011, the mobilehome rent review commission (“commission”) conducted a noticed public hearing, received testimony and made recommendations to the city council on proposed amendments to Chapter 15.20 of Title 15 of the Yucaipa Municipal Code (“Chapter 15.20 of the YMC” also referred to sometimes as the “rent stabilization ordinance” or the “ordinance”) and administrative rules.

     2.     On April 25, 2011, at a noticed public hearing, the city council conducted the biennial review, received testimony and considered the recommendations of staff and the commission with respect to proposed amendments to Chapter 15.20 of the YMC and administrative rules.

     3.     Based on the record presented, which is incorporated herein, the city council found and determined that certain amendments to Chapter 15.20 of the Municipal Code were necessary in order to adequately protect the interests of park owners and park residents and to preserve the comprehensive scheme for the regulation of space rents in mobilehome parks.

     Q. 1. On January 13, 2016, March 22, 2016 and May 24, 2016, the mobilehome rent review commission (“commission”) conducted a noticed public hearing, received testimony and made recommendations to the city council on proposed amendments to Chapter 15.20 of Title 15 of the Yucaipa Municipal Code (“Chapter 15.20 of the YMC” also referred to sometimes as the “rent stabilization ordinance” or the “ordinance”) and administrative rules.

     2.     On August 29, 2016, at a noticed public hearing, the city council conducted the biennial review, received testimony and considered the recommendations of staff and the commission with respect to proposed amendments to Chapter 15.20 of the YMC and administrative rules.

     3.     Based on the record presented, which is incorporated herein, the city council found and determined that certain amendments to Chapter 15.20 of the Municipal Code were necessary in order to adequately protect the interests of park owners and park residents and to preserve the comprehensive scheme for the regulation of space rents in mobilehome parks.

     4.     This ordinance has been reviewed with respect to applicability of the California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”), the State CEQA Guidelines (California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section 15000 et seq., hereafter the “Guidelines”), and the city’s environmental guidelines. The city has determined that this ordinance is not a “project” for purposes of CEQA, as that term is defined by Guidelines Section 15378. Specifically, this ordinance constitutes organizational or administrative activities of city government that will not result in direct or indirect physical changes in the environment. (Guidelines Section 15378(b)(5)). Therefore, because it is not a “project,” this ordinance is not subject to CEQA’s requirements. Further, even if this ordinance were deemed a “project” and therefore subject to CEQA, the ordinance would be covered by the general rule that CEQA applies only to projects that have the potential to cause a significant effect on the environment. (Guidelines Section 15061(b)(3)). As an organizational or administrative activity which do not involve any commitment to any specific project which may result in a potentially significant physical impact on the environment, this ordinance does not have the potential to cause a significant effect on the environment and is therefore exempt under this general rule. Further, it can be seen with certainty that there is no possibility that the activity in question may have a significant effect on the environment, and thus this ordinance is not subject to CEQA. (Guidelines Section 15061(b)(3)).

     R.     1. On October 19, 2017, at a noticed public hearing, the mobilehome rent review commission (“commission”) conducted the biennial review, received testimony and made recommendations to the city council on proposed amendments to Chapter 15.20 of Title 15 of the Yucaipa Municipal Code (“Chapter 15.20 of the YMC” also referred to sometimes as the “rent stabilization ordinance” or the “ordinance”) and administrative rules.

     2.     On November 6, 2017, at a noticed public hearing, the city council conducted the biennial review, received testimony and considered the recommendations of staff and the commission with respect to proposed amendments to Chapter 15.20 of the YMC and administrative rules.

     S.     1. On February 21, 2019, at a noticed public meeting, the mobilehome rent review commission (“commission”) made recommendations to the city council on proposed amendments to Chapter 15.20 of Title 15 of the Yucaipa Municipal Code and Resolution No. 2011-52 pertaining to the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics updated definition of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for the area that includes Yucaipa.

     2.     On March 11, 2019, at a noticed public meeting, the city council considered the recommendations of staff and the commission with respect to proposed amendments to Chapter 15.20 of the YMC and Administrative Rules. (Ord. 375 § 3, 2019; Ord. 368 § 3, 2017; Ord. 351 § 1, 2016; Ord. 311 § 1, 2011; Ord. 255 §§ 1, 2, 3, 2007; Ord. 226 § 1, 2003; Ord. 214 § 1, 2002; Ord. 193 § 1, 1999; Ord. 170 § 1, 1997; Ord. 161 § 1, 1996; Ord. 126 § 1, 1994)

 

15.20.020 Definitions.
     “Abandoned in-place” means a resident voluntarily abandons his/her coach and the park owner gains title and sells the coach to a new resident.

     “Amortizable expenses” means:

     1.     Expenses for physical improvements and replacements which consist of more than ordinary maintenance or repairs, have a useful life of at least more than one year but less than five years and can be depreciated pursuant to the U.S. or California income tax codes; and

     2.     Other expenses that are reasonably expected to cover a period of years, such as maintenance that does not need to be done every year, payments of property taxes or property insurance covering more than one year, a major refurbishment of a park facility such as a clubhouse, where a number of non-capital items (painting, new flooring, new window coverings and furniture) are installed all at one time that will last more than one year, or physical work performed for aesthetic reasons that does not qualify for a capital improvement rent adjustment under Section 15.20.085.

     “Annual” means calendar year.

     “Capital improvement” means the installation of new improvements and facilities and/or the replacement or reconstruction of existing improvements and facilities which consist of more than ordinary maintenance or repairs, have a useful life of at least five years and satisfy the requirements of Section 15.20.085(A).

     “Complete” means submittal of all information and documentation to support any requested rent adjustment and/or appeal, in accordance with the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council.

     “Consumer Price Index (CPI)” means:

     1.     For the purpose of calculating the annual adjustments for each of the years 1987 through 2018, the “Consumer Price Index” or “CPI” means the CPI index for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange Metropolitan Area, All Urban Consumers, published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor.

     2.     For the purpose of calculating the 2019 annual adjustment the “Consumer Price Index” or “CPI” means the CPI index for the Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim Metropolitan Area, All Urban Consumers, published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor.

     3.     For the purpose of calculating annual adjustments beginning in 2020 the “Consumer Price Index” or “CPI” means the CPI index for the Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, Metropolitan Area, All Urban Consumers, published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, or any successor index.

     4.     For the purpose of calculating special rent adjustments the “Consumer Price Index” or “CPI” for the years subsequent to 2017 means the CPI index for the Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, Metropolitan Area, All Urban Consumers, published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, or any successor index.

     “Day” means a calendar day, unless otherwise defined in this chapter. If a deadline falls on a day on which City Hall is not open, the deadline shall be extended to the next business day.

     “Emergency capital improvements” mean capital improvements: (1) that are necessary in order to prevent an imminent threat to public health and safety of the park, its residents, or neighbors; (2) that must be carried out immediately; and (3) satisfy the requirements of Section 15.20.085(B) and the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council.

     “Housing services” mean services connected with use or occupancy of a rental space in a mobilehome park which are provided to residents for the rent charged for a space including, but not limited to: utilities, ordinary repairs, replacement and maintenance, laundry facilities, recreational facilities, a resident manager, refuse removal, parking, street cleaning and maintenance, and other benefits, privileges, facilities or terms and conditions of the residency.

     “In-place transfer” of a mobilehome means a sale, transfer or other conveyance of ownership of a mobilehome with the mobilehome remaining on the mobilehome space following the sale, transfer or other conveyance, including the following: (1) replacement of a mobilehome by the same resident for any reason (such as age, fire, flood, substantial destruction, or replacement with a new mobilehome); or (2) transfers ownership of the mobilehome by inheritance or other transfers to relatives, heirs, personal representatives of the estate and successors of interest; or (3) any other voluntary or involuntary transfers of ownership of the mobilehome by the resident to a creditor; or (4) any other voluntary or involuntary transfer of a mobilehome by the resident to the park owner as the result of an eviction or other termination of tenancy. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an in-place transfer of a mobilehome does not include an “abandoned-in-place” mobilehome as defined above.

     “Mobilehome” means a vehicle, designed or used for human habitation, including a camping trailer, travel trailer, motor home and slide-in camper, when used as the principal place of habitation for the occupants thereof, as well as mobilehomes as defined by Civil Code Section 798.3.

     “Mobilehome park” means any area of land within the city where two or more spaces are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation, but shall not include parks which rent spaces exclusively to recreational vehicles as that term is defined in Civil Code Section 799.30.

     “Owner” means a person or entity that receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use or occupancy of a mobilehome space or an agent or representative authorized to act on behalf of such person or entity.

     “Rent” means the consideration paid for use or occupancy of a mobilehome space and the provision of related housing services.

     “Rent administrator” means the person designated by the city manager to administer the provisions of this chapter.

     “Residency” means the right or entitlement of a mobilehome owner of a mobilehome, or subtenant of a mobilehome owner, to use, occupy and place a mobilehome on a rental space in a mobilehome park and to related housing services.

     “Resident” means an owner of a mobilehome who has a residency. “Resident” shall also mean any tenant or subtenant of a mobilehome owner who has a residency.

     Resident, Prospective. “Prospective resident” means a prospective purchaser of a mobilehome in a mobilehome park who has applied for a park residency. “Prospective resident” shall also mean a prospective subtenant of a prospective purchaser of a mobilehome park who has applied for a park residency.         “Vacancy” means any of the following:

     1.     Any mobilehome space which is empty because the mobilehome was voluntarily removed by the mobilehome owner who will no longer be a resident of the park; or

     2.     Any mobilehome space which is empty because the mobilehome was destroyed by fire, flood, earthquake or other natural catastrophe, and the mobilehome owner will no longer be a resident of the park; or

     3.     Any mobilehome space that is empty because the mobilehome is abandoned in-place, and the park owner gains title and sells the coach to a new resident. A vacancy under this subsection (3) shall not include the abandonment of a mobilehome resulting from an eviction or other involuntary termination of tenancy of the resident; or

     4.     Any “in-place transfer” of a mobilehome (as defined in this section) which remains in a the park; or

     5.     Any change in occupancy of a mobilehome on the same mobilehome space (but excluding an “abandoned in-place” mobilehome or an “in-place transfer” of a mobilehome as defined in this section); or

     6.     Any replacement of a mobilehome on a space with another mobilehome owned or occupied by the same resident(s); or

     7.     Any change in occupancy or ownership of an existing mobilehome on a space as a result of an eviction or other involuntary termination of tenancy. (Ord. 391 §§ 6—8, 2020; Ord. 375 § 4, 2019; Ord. 311 § 2, 2011; Ord. 255 §§ 5, 6, 2007; Ord. 193 § 2, 1999; Ord. 161 § 2, 1996; Ord. 126 § 2, 1994)

 

15.20.030 Exemptions.
     A.    This chapter shall not apply to:

     1.     Newly constructed mobilehome spaces first held out for rent on or after January 1, 1990;

     2.     Any mobilehome park which has signed and is in compliance with a mobilehome accord and agreement approved by resolution of the city council. This exemption shall apply during the term of the agreement including any extensions or renewals thereof, provided that upon its expiration, the mobilehome park shall again be subject to this chapter and the base rents in the mobilehome park shall be the rents last charged pursuant to the agreement.

     B.     The rent regulation provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any space while that space is subject to a lease which exempts that space from rent regulation pursuant to the California Mobilehome Residency Law, Civil Code Section 798 et seq. (Ord. 193 § 2, 1999; Ord. 161 § 3, 1996; Ord. 126 § 3, 1994)

 

15.20.040 Maximum permitted rent.
     A.    The base rent in effect on December 31, 1987, plus any increase imposed between that date and the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which do not exceed eighty (80) percent of the increase in the CPI between that date and the effective date of said ordinance.

     B.     An owner shall not demand, accept or retain rent for a mobilehome space exceeding the base rent for a space, except as hereinafter provided. No notice of a rent increase may be given by a park owner to residents until the rent increase has been approved pursuant to this chapter and no rent increase approved pursuant to this chapter shall be demanded, collected or retained until lawful notice pursuant to the Mobilehome Residency Law, Civil Code Section 798, et seq., of that increase has been given to the affected residents by the park owner. Retroactive increases shall not be permitted pursuant to this chapter. In the event that the city-approved annual rent increase has not been implemented by the effective increase date, the twelve (12) month period prior to the next increase shall begin at the actual date of implementation.

     C.     No owner shall reduce the housing services provided for the rent paid on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Any reduction in such housing services shall be deemed a rent increase in violation of this chapter unless the reduction has been approved pursuant to Section 15.20.090.

     D.    A resident may refuse to pay rent in excess of the maximum rent permitted by this chapter. The fact that any such unpaid rent is in excess of the maximum rent permitted by this chapter shall be a defense in any action brought to recover possession of a mobilehome space and for nonpayment of rent or to collect the illegal rent. (Ord. 226 § 2, 2003; Ord. 193 § 4, 1999; Ord. 161 § 4, 1996; Ord. 126 § 4, 1994)

15.20.050 Maximum permitted rent upon space vacancy.
     A park owner shall not be permitted to charge a new space rent for a mobilehome space upon vacancy except as expressly provided in this section. It is the intent of the city that no rent increase shall be allowed as a result of a vacancy resulting in a change in occupancy of a mobilehome on a space, the replacement of a mobilehome with another mobilehome on the same space and occupied by the same resident, or any in-place transfer of a mobilehome (as defined in Section 15.20.020 of this code), and that such mobilehome spaces shall continue to be subject to the rent control provisions of this chapter unless such space becomes subject to a long-term lease exempt from rent control pursuant to California Civil Code Section 798.17, or a vacancy adjustment is authorized pursuant to subsection B or C of this section. No vacancy adjustment shall be imposed pursuant to subsection B or C of this section without the park owner’s submittal of a complete application and the prior approval of the RA in accordance with this subdivision and the rules and regulations.

     A.    Upon “vacancy,” as defined in Section 15.20.020, subsection (4), (5), (6), or (7), the park owner shall be prohibited from raising the space rent for that space. No park owner shall impose any space rent in excess of the current rent in effect immediately preceding the vacancy of the space.

     B.     Upon “vacancy,” as defined in Section 15.20.020, subsection (1), (2), or (3), the park owner may increase the last rent in effect on the space prior to such vacancy based on either: (1) the combined average of rent controlled spaces in the park plus ten (10) percent, or (2) (thirty-five dollars ($35.00)), whichever is less, provided that space rents prior to the vacancy can be verified by information required on and/or documentation submitted with the annual registration application or annual rent increase application, whichever was approved later. This calculation shall be known as the vacancy adjustment. Any such approved vacancy adjustment shall constitute the new base rent for that space. The new space rent determined in accordance with this subsection B shall become the base rent upon which future rent increases pursuant to this chapter shall be calculated. At the time of rental of that space following a vacancy (as defined in “vacancy” subsection (1), (2) or (3) of Section 15.20.020), no park owner shall impose any space rent in excess of the last rent in effect immediately preceding the vacancy of the space, as modified by any vacancy adjustment approved by the city in accordance with this subsection for that vacant space. Procedures implementing the vacancy adjustment authorized under this subsection B shall be set forth in the rules and regulations adopted by resolution of the city council.

     C.     Park Owned Mobilehome Sold to a Resident. In the event that a park owned coach is sold to an existing resident (through a rent-to-own agreement or straight purchase) and the coach remains in the park, the base rent shall be either the last regulated space rent charged for the space, if the space was previously subject to this chapter, increased by the annual CPI increases properly charged by the park and any other applicable commission-approved rent increase for the spaces in the park; or if the space was never subject to this chapter, the average of the rents charged for comparable spaces in the park subject to rent control.

     D.    Spaces Previously Exempt. In the event a space was previously exempt under a lease pursuant to California Civil Code Section 798.17, the base space rent, for purposes of calculating the annual adjustment, shall be the rent in effect as of the date of expiration of the lease, provided that space rents can be verified by information required on, and/or documentation submitted with the annual registration application.

     E.     Upon occupancy of a vacant space, the park owner shall be prohibited from increasing the space rent, except in compliance with the provisions of Sections 15.20.080 through 15.20.100, concerning annual adjustments, capital improvement rent adjustments, net operating income adjustments and adjustments based on discontinuance of services or amenities.

     F.     No park owner shall require that a prospective resident sign a lease exempt from this code as a condition of tenancy.

     G.    Procedures for application and approval of rent adjustments upon space vacancy shall be in accordance with administrative rules set forth by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 391 § 9, 2020; Ord. 255 § 7, 2007: Ord. 193 § 5, 1999: Ord. 170 § 2, 1997; Ord. 161 § 4A, 1996: Ord. 126 § 4A, 1994)

 

15.20.060 Resident representatives.
     A.    The residents of each mobilehome park in the city shall annually elect by majority vote, with one vote per regulated space, a resident representative to receive all notices required by this chapter. The residents shall advise the rent administrator of the name, address and phone number of the elected resident representative in writing no later than January 31st of each year and shall promptly notify the rent administrator of any change of representative. If a resident representative or point of contact is not established, all notices required by this chapter shall be posted, in the clubhouse, park office and one other location accessible to the residents. (Ord. 390 § 3. 2020; Ord. 193 § 6, 1999: Ord. 161 § 5, 1996: Ord. 126 § 5, 1994)

 

15.20.070 Mobilehome rent review commission.
     A.    Composition and Compensation. There is established a mobilehome rent review commission (“commission”) consisting of five members who shall be appointed, one by each city councilmember and not restricted to councilmember district, and may be removed only by a four-fifths vote of the city council.

     1.     The members of the commission and the alternate members shall be persons who are neither residents nor park owners who have no financial interest (as defined by state law) in any mobilehome or mobilehome park and have no parents, children, spouses or siblings with any such interest. The members and alternates shall file a declaration to this effect with the rent administrator.

     2.     All members shall be residents of the city.

     3.     Commission members may be compensated for their services in an amount established by resolution of the city council and may receive reimbursement as provided by the city council for traveling and other expenses incurred while on official duty.

     4.     Terms of commission members shall be two years or until their successors are appointed. If a member is absent from five consecutive meetings, they shall be removed from the commission and their position posted as a vacancy and filled in accordance with city and state policy.

     B.     Powers and Duties. The commission shall have the following powers and duties:

     1.     To meet from time to time as required by the rent administrator;

     2.     To review, hear and determine rent adjustment applications pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and to adjust maximum rents or maintain rents upon completion of its hearings and investigations;

     3.     To render biennially a written report to the city council concerning its activities, holdings, actions, results of hearings, and all other matters pertinent to this chapter which may be of interest to the city council;

     4.     To adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind administrative rules to effectuate the purposes of this chapter, subject to the approval of the city council. (Ord. 390 § 4, 2020; Ord. 255 § 8, 2007; Ord. 214 § 2, 2002; Ord. 193 § 7, 1999: Ord. 170 § 3, 1997; Ord. 161 § 6, 1996: Ord. 152, 1996; Ord. 126 § 6, 1994)

 

15.20.073 Registration, posting and fees.
     A.    Every mobilehome park, except those exempt pursuant to Section

15.20.030(A), shall file an initial registration statement, on a form provided by the rent administrator.

     B.     Annual Registration. Every mobilehome park shall file an annual registration statement, on a form provided by the rent administrator and in accordance with the administrative rules adopted pursuant to this chapter, no later than the thirty-first (31st) day of January each year.

     C.     New Lease Registration. Every park owner shall file a statement on a form provided by the rent administrator whenever the lease terms, services and rental rate for a space changes pursuant to a new or renewed lease which is exempted from this chapter pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.17.

     D.    Fees. The City Council may adopt fees for the following by resolution:

     1.     Annual registration fees based on the number of spaces in the mobilehome park to be used for the costs of administering this chapter. Registration fees shall be paid by each park owner to the city for each space, which is not exempt pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.17 or 15.20.030(A) of this code at the time the initial and annual statements are filed.

     2.     Application fees to cover the costs of processing an application or appeal.

     E.     A park owner who fails to comply with subsections A, B, C and D of this section shall not be entitled to charge, collect, retain or apply for the rent increases permitted by this chapter.

     F.     The 2004 paramedic special tax, enacted by the voters at the rate of twenty-eight dollars ($28.00) per individual dwelling unit per year, may be collected, commencing on November 1, 2004, in twelve (12) monthly installments, in an amount not to exceed two dollars and thirty-four cents ($2.34) per month, which may be included with the monthly statement of rent due, but must be separately itemized. The tax shall not be included in the base rent when calculating rent adjustments.

     G.    A copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be posted in the office of every mobilehome park and in the recreation building or clubhouse of every mobilehome park. (Ord. 311 § 3, 2011; Ord. 255 § 15, 2007: Ord. 234 § 1, 2004; Ord. 214 §§ 4—6, 2002; Ord. 193 § 10, 1999: Ord. No. 161 § 10, 1996: Ord. 126 § 10, 1994)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.20.080 Annual rent adjustments by administrative application.
     Annual Adjustment Based on the CPI. The rent for a mobilehome space may be increased once every twelve (12) months by the lesser of either four percent of the current space rent as of the date of the complete application, or eighty (80) percent of the increase in the CPI during the preceding twelve (12) months, provided that this increase may not be imposed until twelve (12) months after that space comes under the regulations and shall not have had an annual adjustment under this section or an adjustment under Section 15.20.100 in the preceding twelve (12) months. Regulations for implementing this section shall be as set forth in the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council, including, but not limited to, application procedures and dissemination of CPI to park owners. (Ord. 368 § 4, 2017; Ord. 311 § 4, 2011; Ord. 255 §§ 9, 10, 11, 2007; Ord. 214 § 3, 2002; Ord. 193 § 8, 1999: Ord. 161 § 7, 1996: Ord. 152, 1996; Ord. 140, 1995; Ord. 126 § 7, 1994)

15.20.085 Rent adjustments based on capital improvements.
     A park owner may request approval of a rent adjustment based on capital improvements or emergency capital improvements in accordance with this section.

     A.    General Procedures.

     1.     An application for a rent increase based on the cost of a completed capital improvement may be filed with the rent administrator. It shall be approved if it satisfies the definition of capital improvement set forth in Section 15.20.020 and the criteria set forth in the capital improvement guidelines and as set forth in the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council; the park owner has provided documentation to demonstrate that prior to the completion of the proposed capital improvement, the park owner met with the park residents and considered input from the park residents regarding any proposed capital improvement; the park owner held a capital improvement ballot election (see sample “Election Ballot Form” in Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this section and incorporated by reference), in an attempt to gain fifty-one (51) percent approval of the occupied rent controlled spaces, with one vote per space having consented to the proposed capital improvement in one of the following methods: (a) at the noticed resident meeting; or (b) ballot mailed via certified mail/return receipt requested to each rent controlled space. Documentation of the meetings with the park residents shall include, but is not limited to, notice of meeting between the park owner(s) and residents, resident attendance sign-in sheets, official minutes from the meeting, a summary of each of the bids or proposals received and a written explanation from the park owner explaining the reasons for the selection of the contractor, and election ballot form(s). The summary shall include sufficient detail for the park residents to understand the nature and extent of the proposed work and the costs to be incurred therein. If the owner proposes to perform the capital improvement with his or her own labor, the summary provided to the residents shall include an explanation of the proposed work and costs. An increase application which meets all other requirements of this subsection but has not been consented to by fifty-one (51) percent of the occupied spaces may be granted when the improvement is necessary to protect the health and safety of the park, its residents and/or its neighbors. The requirement for the resident meeting and capital improvement ballot election shall not apply to improvements that qualify as emergency capital improvements in accordance with subsection B. Any increase granted under subsection A shall remain in effect only during the useful life of the improvement. Any such increase shall not be included as part of the monthly space rent but shall be itemized as a separate charge on the residents’ monthly rent statement. Regulations for implementing subsection A shall be set forth in the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council.

     2.     Upon receipt of the application, the rent administrator shall review the application and determine whether it is complete in accordance with Section 15.20.105. A rent increase application filed under this subsection shall be granted or denied within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application and written notice of the determination by the rent administrator shall be mailed to the applicant and affected residents within that thirty (30) day period. If the rent administrator determines that an application is incomplete, written notice that an application has been determined incomplete and the reasons for that determination shall be given to the applicant by the rent administrator within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application. A written determination to grant a requested increase or a modified increase shall specify the duration and amount of the monthly rent adjustment granted. If a modified increase is granted, the written determination shall specify the reason for the modification. If an increase is denied, the written determination that the application has been denied shall specify the reasons for the denial. All written notifications shall be issued in accordance with Section 15.20.105(E).

     B.     Emergency Capital Improvements. The rent administrator may approve a capital improvement rent adjustment for emergency capital improvements, as defined Section 15.20.020 and in this subsection, even if the park owner did not hold a resident meeting and capital improvement ballot election prior to completion of the capital improvement, only upon the terms set forth in this subsection and the administrative rules. The purpose of this subsection is to allow the park owner an opportunity to seek approval of a capital improvement rent adjustment application in those situations in which compliance with the resident meeting and capital improvement ballot election procedures is not feasible or possible due to an imminent threat to public health and safety resulting from an emergency event which damages the park.

     1.     Approval shall not be granted for a rent adjustment based on emergency capital improvements unless the rent administrator finds that all of the following requirements are met:

     a.     The work meets the definition of an emergency capital improvement; and

     b.     There was no time to hold a resident meeting and capital improvement ballot election prior to carrying out the emergency capital improvements due to the need to immediately prevent or correct the imminent threat to public health and safety of the park, its residents and/or its neighbors; and

     c.     The park owner commenced construction of the emergency capital improvement not later than two weeks (fourteen (14) days) after the event constituting the emergency and completed the improvements as expeditiously as possible. “Commencement of construction” means that within two weeks of the emergency event, the park owner obtained signed contracts with contractors, builders and other third parties necessary to carry out the emergency capital improvements, obtained necessary permits and commenced substantial physical construction on the improvements. If physical construction did not actually begin within the two-week period, the city may find that the park owner commenced construction within the required two-week period if the park owner provides documentation establishing that within the two-week period all of the following were met: (i) the park owner obtained signed contracts for construction, (ii) the park owner obtained (or applied for and made reasonable efforts to obtain) all necessary permits, (iii) the park owner established a firm date for the commencement of construction, (iv) construction actually commenced in accordance with that time schedule, and (v) construction proceeded in an expeditious manner and was completed prior to submittal of the application; and

     d.     The application for a capital improvement rent adjustment based on emergency capital improvements is submitted to the city: (i) within one month (thirty (30) days) of completion of the improvements, or (ii) within four months from the date of occurrence of the emergency, whichever occurs later. In no event shall an application for a rent adjustment based on emergency capital improvements be submitted more than six months after the occurrence of the emergency except as otherwise provided in the administrative rules.

     2.     Any increase granted under this subsection shall remain in effect only during the useful life of the emergency capital improvement. Any such increase shall not be included as part of the monthly space rent but shall be itemized as a separate charge on the residents’ monthly rent statement.

     C.     Application for Approval of Capital Improvement Rent Adjustment following Denial of Emergency Capital Improvement Adjustment Application. If the city issues a final decision denying a park owner’s application for a rent adjustment based on emergency capital improvements because the city finds that the work does not constitute an emergency capital improvement as defined in Section 15.20.020, or because the park owner failed to comply with the time deadlines set forth in subsection (B)(1)(c) or (B)(1)(d), the rent administrator shall not approve a subsequent capital improvement rent adjustment application based on the same work unless the park owner conducted a resident meeting and a capital improvement ballot election and either: (1) fifty-one (51) percent of the residents approved the improvement; or (2) the improvement was necessary for the health and safety of the park, its residents and/or its neighbors, as provided in the administrative rules. As used in this subsection, a “final decision” means either of the following: (1) a decision that becomes final due to the failure of the park owner or resident to file a timely appeal from the rent administrator’s or commission’s decision denying the emergency capital improvement rent adjustment application; or (2) a decision of the city council denying the emergency capital improvement rent adjustment pursuant to Section 15.20.115 following a timely appeal of the rent administrator’s or commission’s decision on such application.

     D.    Exclusion of Capital Improvement Costs from Special Rent Adjustment Applications.

     1.     Costs incurred for capital improvements or emergency capital improvements shall not be included as operating expenses in an application for an MNOI rent adjustment or a rent adjustment based on a readjusted 1987 NOI under Section 15.20.100(A) or (B). If a park owner includes expenses for capital improvements or emergency capital improvements in any such application, those expenses shall be processed and heard by the commission as a separate capital improvement rent adjustment application under subsection (A)(1) and (2) and the administrative rules. The city shall not approve a separate capital improvement rent adjustment unless such an application meets all requirements of subsection (A)(1), except that if the park owner held the resident meeting and capital improvement ballot election but did not obtain at least fifty-one (51) percent resident consent, the city shall not approve the application unless the city determines that the work qualifies as an improvement necessary for the health and safety of the park, its residents, and/or its neighbors and complies with all other requirements of subsection (A)(1) and (2) and the administrative rules.

     2.     Costs incurred for capital improvements shall not be included in a special rent adjustment application for a fair return under Section 15.20.100(C) except as expressly provided in the administrative rules. The requirements for a resident meeting, capital improvement ballot election and majority resident consent shall not apply to capital improvements submitted as part of a special rent adjustment application under Section 15.20.100(C).

     E.     Appeal of Rent Administrator Decision. Any decision of the rent administrator on the merits of a capital improvement rent adjustment or emergency capital improvement rent adjustment application pursuant to this section may be appealed to the commission by filing an application for appeal within ten days of the date the rent administrator’s written determination is mailed to the affected park owner and residents. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, appeals shall be filed, processed, and determined in accordance with Sections 15.20.105 and 15.20.110 and the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council.

     F.     Appeal of Commission Decision. Any decision of the commission may be appealed to the city council by filing an application for an appeal in accordance with the time deadline set forth in Section 15.20.110(C). Appeals to the city council shall be processed and determined in accordance with the requirements of Section 15.20.115 and the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 351 §§ 2, 3, 2016; Ord. 311 § 5, 2011; Ord. 255 §§ 9, 10, 11, 2007; Ord. 214 § 3, 2002; Ord. 193 § 8, 1999: Ord. 161 § 7, 1996: Ord. 152, 1996; Ord. 140, 1995; Ord. 126 § 7, 1994)

 

15.20.090 Rent adjustments based on discontinuance or reduction of a service or amenity.
     A.    Application by Park Owners. A park owner may reduce or discontinue a service or amenity upon a commensurate decrease in rent, provided that the service or amenity is not required by other laws or to maintain health and safety and habitability standards. Prior to the reduction or discontinuance of the service or amenity, the park owner shall submit a rent decrease application to the city pursuant to the requirements of this subsection and Section 15.20.105 and the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council.

     1.     Upon receipt of the application, the rent administrator shall review the application and determine whether the application is complete in accordance with Section 15.20.105(A).

     2.     If the rent administrator determines that the application is complete, the rent administrator shall provide written notice to the applicant and residents pursuant to Section 15.20.105(B) and (E).

     3.     If the rent administrator determines that the application is incomplete, the rent administrator shall provide written notice to the applicant of the manner in which the application is incomplete, pursuant to Section 15.20.105(B), (C) and (D), and shall advise the applicant that he/she must submit the additional information or documentation within thirty (30) days of service of the notice. If the applicant fails or refuses to submit the additional information or documentation within the thirty (30) day time period, the rent administrator shall give mailed notice to the affected residents and the park residents’ representative of the application and advise them that it is incomplete and of their right to submit opposition to the application pursuant to Section 15.20.105(E).

     4.     Applications shall be heard and determined by the commission in accordance with Section 15.20.110 and the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council.

     B.     Applications by Residents. A resident or group of residents may apply for a rent decrease based on a discontinuance or reduction in services or amenities. At least thirty (30) days before filing such an application the resident(s) seeking the adjustment shall make a written request to the park owner that the service or amenity be restored. The application shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of this subsection and Section 15.20.105, and the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council.

     1.     Upon receipt of the application, the rent administrator shall review the application and determine whether the application is complete in accordance with Section 15.20.105(A).

     2.     If the rent administrator determines that the application is complete, the rent administrator shall provide written notice to the applicant and park owner pursuant to Section 15.20.105(B) and (E).

     3.     If the rent administrator determines that the application is incomplete, the rent administrator shall provide written notice to the applicant pursuant to Section 15.20.105(B), (C) and (D), and shall advise the applicant that he or she must submit the additional information or documentation within thirty (30) days of service of the notice. If the applicant fails or refuses to submit the additional information or documentation within the thirty (30) day time period, the rent administrator shall mail written notice to the affected park owner of the application and advise them that it is incomplete and of their right to submit opposition to the application pursuant to Section 15.20.105(E). The park owner shall also be required to provide information concerning the cost of the service or amenity alleged to be discontinued or reduced within that time.

     4.     Any rent decrease granted pursuant to this subsection B shall be equal to the cost to the park owner of providing the service, maintenance or amenity. The resident(s) shall have the burden of proving that the service or amenity has been removed or decreased.

     5.     Applications shall be heard and determined by the commission in accordance with Section 15.20.110, and the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council.

     C.     Appeals. The decision of the commission on the merits of an application pursuant to subsection A or B of this section may be appealed to the city council, subject to the requirements of Section 15.20.115 and as set forth in administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 315 § 1, 2012; Ord. 311 § 6, 2011; Ord. 255 §§ 12, 13, 2007: Ord. 193 § 9, 1999: Ord. 161 § 8, 1996: Ord. 126 § 8, 1994)

 

15.20.100 Rent increases by application to the commission.
     A park owner may seek a rent increase in addition to those permitted by Section 15.20.080 pursuant to subsections A, B and C of this section. The park owner shall bear the burden of proof and provide the evidence to justify a rent increase based on any application submitted under subsections A, B, and/or C of this section. Subsection A provides for increases under a maintenance of net operating income (“MNOI”) formula and it is presumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary that the MNOI formula provides a fair or just and reasonable return. An application pursuant to subsection C cannot be filed unless an MNOI application has also been filed and the two applications can be heard together. However, an application can be filed under subsection A without filing an application under subsection C. Subsection B provides for modifications of the base year net operating income (“NOI”) used in the MNOI formula under specified circumstances.

     The applicant for a special adjustment under this section shall provide documentation of its income and expenses in the base year and of its income and expenses in each of the last five years or since its last special adjustment and such other information and documentation as is necessary to properly determine an MNOI calculation under subsections A and B and/or a fair return application under subsection C. An application cannot be deemed complete until information and documentation, as set forth in Section 15.20.105 and the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council, has been provided and the required filing fee paid to the city. Except as otherwise provided in the administrative rules, an application cannot be set for hearing before it is deemed complete. The factors and methodology for the commission to determine the gross income, operating expense and net operating income shall be as set forth in the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council.

     A.    MNOI Rent Adjustment. It shall be presumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary, presented pursuant to subsection B of this section that the NOI earned by the mobilehome park in calendar year 1987 provided a just and reasonable return to the park. Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (1) of this subsection, park owners shall be entitled to increase the park’s 1987 NOI by sixty-six and sixty-seven one hundredths (66.67) percent of the increase in the CPI since December 31, 1987, to October 28, 1996, and eighty (80) percent of the increase in the CPI from October 29, 1996, to the date of the application. In the event that there has been an increase of more than three percent in the vacancy rate in the park since the base year, any rent adjustment under this subsection shall be governed by subdivision (1) of this subsection. For the purposes of this subsection, the 1987 CPI shall be one hundred fourteen and eighty one hundredths (114.80) and the current CPI utilized in reviewing a rent increase application shall be the CPI last reported as of the date the application is deemed complete.

     1.     In the event that there has been an increase of more than three percent in the vacancy rate in the park since the base year, the city finds that it would be contrary to the purposes of rent stabilization to authorize additional rent increases for occupied spaces in order to offset reductions in income due to increased vacancies which occur because there is not sufficient demand to fill the vacant spaces at the legal rent ceiling. In effect, allowing additional rent increases for occupied spaces because there are more vacant spaces in a park would allow park owners to obtain higher rents from existing tenants, than it is possible to obtain from the prospective tenants, whose homes are still “mobile” and whose options have not been restricted by the process of moving into the park. Therefore, in the event that there has been an increase of more than three percent in the vacancy rate in the park since the base year, rent adjustments shall be governed by the following:

     a.     Gross income per rented space shall be computed based on the total gross income of the park divided by the total number of rented spaces. The park owner shall be entitled to increase the base year NOI per rented space by sixty-six and sixty-seven hundredths (66.67) percent of the increase in the CPI since December 31, 1987, to October 28, 1996, and eighty (80) percent of the increase in the CPI from October 29, 1996.

     b.     Calculations of base year and current year operating expenses may be adjusted by the commission so that a reasonable comparison of the expenses and charges associated with rented spaces is obtained for the purpose of comparing base year and current year operating expenses and to adjust for variations in operating expenses due to the increased vacancy rate.

     2.     In the event a park has received a special adjustment since the base year, the income and expense year on which the special adjustment was based shall be deemed the base year for the purposes of evaluating a rent adjustment application, and the CPI used as the “current CPI” in determining the prior special rent adjustment shall be deemed the “base year CPI” for the purpose of evaluating the special rent adjustment application.

     B.     Rent Adjustment Based on Re-adjusted Base Year NOI. A park owner may rebut the presumption that the park’s 1987 NOI provided a just and reasonable return at that time by presenting evidence as set forth in the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council.

     C.     Fair Return Rent Adjustment. A park owner may rebut the presumption that the increased calculations provided in subsection A of this section and modified calculations provided by subsection B of this section are sufficient to provide a just and reasonable return by presenting evidence that the rate of return being earned by the mobilehome park is not just and reasonable as set forth in the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council. The park owner shall have the burden of proving the park is not earning a just and reasonable return.

     D.    Resident Meeting. The city encourages the park owner to meet with the residents prior to a park owner’s submittal of an application for a special rent adjustment pursuant to subsections A, B and/or C of this section, in order to facilitate ongoing dialogue and communication between the park owner and park residents regarding the need for and basis of a proposed special rent adjustment, and to allow the park owner and park residents an opportunity to resolve any issues and disputes prior to the park owner filing its special rent adjustment application. Suggested procedures for use by park owners and residents for resident meetings are set out in the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council.

     E.     Rent Adjustment Based on Voluntary Meet and Confer. The city encourages park owners and park residents to voluntarily meet and confer in good faith in order to reach agreement on a proposed MNOI rent adjustment under subsection A or an MNOI rent adjustment based on a readjusted Base Year NOI under subsection B. Any such negotiated special rent adjustment shall be subject to all of the following requirements:

     1.     A special rent adjustment negotiated pursuant to a meet and confer shall not be effective unless consented to by at least fifty-one (51) percent of the regulated spaces in the park, and approved by the rent administrator, pursuant to the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council.

     2.     The special rent adjustment must be based upon an MNOI methodology, or MNOI based on a readjusted Base Year NOI, as provided in subsection A or B and the administrative rules. Costs associated with capital improvements shall be excluded.

     3.     The decision of the rent administrator on whether to approve a special rent adjustment pursuant to this subdivision shall be final and not subject to any public hearing before or appeal to the commission, or appeal to the city council. The provisions of subsection G of this section and Sections 15.20.105 and 15.20.110 shall not apply.

     F.     Nonretaliation. The city encourages park owners and residents to engage in the special rent adjustment procedures, including, but not limited to, resident meetings and meet and confer, without any fear of retaliation and in the spirit of cooperation.

     G.    An application filed under this section shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with Section 15.20.105 and the administrative rules established by resolution of the city council. The rent administrator shall have thirty (30) days in which to determine whether a maintenance of net operating income (MNOI) rent adjustment, rent adjustment based on a readjusted base year NOI, or fair return adjustment application filed under subsections A, B, and/or C, is complete in accordance with Section 15.20.105 and the administrative rules established by resolution of the city council. Hearings on applications shall be conducted in accordance with Section 15.20.110 and the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 390 §§ 5, 6, 2020; Ord. 311 § 7, 2011; Ord. 255 § 14, 2007: Ord. 193 § 10, 1999: Ord. 161 § 9, 1996: Ord. 152, 1996: Ord. 126 § 9, 1994)

 

15.20.105 Complete applications.
     A.    All rent adjustment applications and appeals of decisions of the rent administrator on an application, shall be filed on an application form or appeal form provided by the rent administrator, or in a written form which provides all information and documentation required by the city-approved form and shall be accompanied by payment of filing fee, in accordance with the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council. At least one copy of the completed application or appeal, a declaration under penalty of perjury and all back-up documentation, along with an electronic copy of the complete application or appeal, must be provided to the city in order for the application to be deemed complete by staff. All information and documentation submitted shall be paginated, labeled and correlated to the specific section, question or item of the city-approved form to which the information and/or documentation pertains. If an applicant or appellant fails or refuses to provide all required information or documentation in accordance with the format of the city-approved forms and these rules, or to pay the required filing fee, the rent administrator is authorized to deem the application or appeal incomplete. At the time the application or appeal is filed, the applicant or appellant shall also post in three conspicuous places in the park, a notice and a complete copy of the application or appeal. The notice shall be in accordance with the city-approved form, and shall advise the park residents or park owner that an application or appeal has been filed with the rent administrator. The park owner shall maintain the copies of the notice and application or appeal in each location in the park for review and inspection by the residents as required by the administrative rules, until the city has issued a final decision on the application or appeal. The applicant or appellant shall also provide any resident representative or park owner with any copies of the complete application, as required by the administrative rules adopted pursuant to this chapter.

     B.     Upon receipt of an application or appeal, the rent administrator shall determine whether the application or appeal is complete. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application or appeal, the rent administrator shall mail written notice to the applicant or appellant advising him or her whether the application or appeal is complete. If the rent administrator determines that the application or appeal is complete, the rent administrator shall also mail written notice to the affected residents or park owner advising them that a complete application or appeal has been filed and that they have the right to submit opposition to the application or appeal pursuant to subsection E. A copy of the application or appeal and the notice to the applicant shall also be concurrently mailed to the park residents’ representative.

     C.     If the rent administrator determines that an application or appeal is incomplete, the rent administrator’s written notification to the applicant or appellant shall include an explanation of the deficiencies, and the deadline by which the applicant or appellant must submit the additional documentation or information or filing fee necessary for the rent administrator to find that the application or appeal is complete. If the applicant or appellant fails to submit the additional information or documentation, or pay the required filing fee, to the city by the deadline, the rent administrator shall notify the applicant or appellant in writing that he or she has no more than an additional thirty (30) days to submit the information and documentation or pay the required filing fee necessary to deem the application complete. The rent administrator will also notify the applicant or appellant that failure or refusal to submit the necessary information and/or documentation by the stated deadline may impact the commission’s decision on whether the applicant or appellant met his or her burden of proof that he or she is entitled to any rent adjustment or the particular rent adjustment sought by the applicant; and that the application or appeal will not be set for hearing before the commission until payment of the required filing fee.

     D.    Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (D)(1), if the applicant or appellant fails to submit the additional information or documentation within the deadline established under subsection C, the rent administrator shall provide written notice to the applicant or appellant that the application will be set for hearing on the merits, but that the hearing shall not constitute any determination by the city that the application or appeal is complete, or that the applicant or appellant met his or her burden of proof that he or she is entitled to a rent adjustment under this section. The rent administrator shall also mail a copy of the notice to the affected residents and their resident representative or park owner along with the notice advising them of their right to submit opposition to the application or appeal pursuant to subsection E.

     1.     An application or appeal shall not be deemed complete until the applicant pays the filing fee. If the application or appeal is incomplete due to the applicant’s or appellant’s failure to pay the filing fee and/or any required hearing deposit, the written notice shall inform the applicant or appellant that the application or appeal is incomplete and that the application or appeal will not be set for hearing until the filing fee and/or hearing deposit has been paid.

     E.     Written notice of the application or appeal shall be mailed by the rent administrator to the affected residents or park owner on the date on which it is determined to be either complete or incomplete.

     1.     If the rent administrator deemed the application or appeal complete, the notice shall inform the affected residents or park owner of the right to submit written, documentary and photographic responses to the application or appeal to the rent administrator within twenty (20) days of the date notice of the application is mailed by the city. The affected residents or park owner shall provide the applicant or appellant with copies of any response or opposition in accordance with the requirements of the administrative rules adopted pursuant to this chapter. One copy of the application shall be furnished to the resident representative of the affected residents by the rent administrator together with the notice of the application.

     2.     If the rent administrator deemed the application or appeal incomplete following the failure or refusal of the applicant or appellant to submit all necessary information or documentation by the final deadline imposed pursuant to subsection C of this section, the rent administrator shall mail written notice of the incomplete application or appeal to either the residents or park owner on the date that the rent administrator issued his or her final notification to the applicant or appellant that the application or appeal is incomplete. The notice shall inform the affected residents or park owner of the right to submit written, documentary and photographic responses to the application or appeal to the rent administrator within twenty (20) days of the date notice of the application is mailed by the city. The affected residents or park owner shall provide the applicant or appellant with copies of any response or opposition in accordance with the requirements of the administrative rules adopted pursuant to this chapter. One copy of the application shall be furnished to the resident representative of the affected residents by the rent administrator together with the notice of the application.

     F.     Procedures for implementation of this section, including, but not limited to, the rent administrator’s determination whether an application or appeal is complete shall be set forth in the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 390 § 7, 2020; Ord. 315 § 2, 2012; Ord. 311 § 8, 2011; Ord. 255 § 14, 2007: Ord. 193 § 10, 1999: Ord. 161 § 9, 1996: Ord. 152, 1996: Ord. 126 § 9, 1994)

 

15.20.110 Hearing procedures.
     Hearings on rent adjustment applications filed under Section 15.20.090 or 15.20.100(A), (B) and/or (C), or hearings on appeals to the commission from a rent administrator decision on an application under Section 15.20.085, shall be processed, heard and determined in accordance with this section.

     A.    A hearing of the commission shall be held: (i) not later than sixty (60) days from the date on which the rent administrator determines the application or appeal is complete; or (ii) not later than sixty (60) days from the final thirty (30) day deadline by which the applicant or appellant must submit additional information or documentation to the city in order for the rent administrator to find that the application or appeal is complete, as provided in Section 15.20.105. If the applicant or appellant fails to pay the required filing fee, the application or appeal shall not be set for hearing until the filing fee has been paid.

     B.     The commission shall render its decision in writing, including findings of fact: (i) within seventy-five (75) days after the date that the rent administrator determines that an application or appeal is complete; or (ii) not later than seventy-five (75) days from the final thirty (30) day deadline by which the applicant must submit additional information or documentation to the city in order for the rent administrator to find that the application or appeal is complete, as provided in Section 15.20.105.

     C.     Any decision of the rent review commission may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Section 15.20.115 of this chapter. The appeal to city council must be filed within ten days of the date of service of the commission’s written decision. (Ord. 390 § 8, 2020; Ord. 311 § 9, 2011; Ord. 255 § 14, 2007: Ord. 193 § 10, 1999: Ord. 161 § 9, 1996: Ord. 152, 1996: Ord. 126 § 9, 1994)

 

15.20.115 Appeal to the city council.
     A.    Either party may, and prior to commencing any action in a court of competent jurisdiction shall, appeal any final decision or order of the commission to the city council by filing written notice of the appeal, a written summary of the basis of the appeal and payment of the appeal fee with the rent administrator not later than ten days after the decision of the commission has been deposited in the mail, addressed to the petitioner and the affected residents. The appellant shall serve written notice of the filing of the appeal, the written summary of the basis of the appeal, and any documents supporting the appeal, on the opposing party, and shall post a copy of the appeal in three conspicuous places in the park in accordance with Section 15.20.105(A). Such service may either be in person or by mail to the last known address of the opposing party. No appeal shall be considered filed until proof of service of such notice, posting of the appeal, appeal application and supporting documentation are received by the rent administrator, and the cost of the appeal is deposited with the rent administrator. The rent administrator shall estimate the cost of the appeal. Proof of service shall be on a form provided by the rent administrator. The rent administrator shall have ten days in which to determine whether the appeal application is complete, in accordance with Section 15.20.105 and the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council. Prior to the appeal hearing, the appellant shall also pay the costs or preparing the transcript of the commission proceedings, based on an estimate provided by the rent administrator, in accordance with the administrative rules.

     B.     If the rent administrator determines that the appeal application is incomplete, the rent administrator shall mail written notification to the applicant with the specifics why the appeal application is not complete, and shall inform the appellant that the appellant shall have an additional ten days to submit such additional information or documentation, or pay any required appeal fee or transcript deposit, necessary to deem the appeal complete, in accordance with the administrative rules. The rent administrator’s notice shall also inform the appellant that if he or she fails or refuses to submit the requested documentation within the ten-day deadline the appeal will be set for hearing on the merits of the submitted information and documentation only, and that the appellant’s failure or refusal to submit a complete appeal may affect the city council’s determination whether the appellant met his or her burden of proof on the appeal. If the appeal is incomplete due to the appellant’s failure to pay the appeal fee or deposit the cost of the transcript by the deadline for filing the rent administrator shall notify the appellant that the appeal is not complete and shall not be set for hearing before the city council until the appellant has paid the appeal fee and/or deposited the cost of the transcript with the rent administrator.

     C.     If the rent administrator determines that the appeal is complete, the rent administrator shall set the appeal for a public hearing at a meeting of the city council to be held not later than thirty (30) days from the date on which the rent administrator determines that the appeal application is complete.

     D.    The city council shall issue its decision in writing, including findings of fact, within fifteen (15) days of the date of commencement of the appeal hearing; provided that the city council may extend the time limits under this subsection for reasonable cause, and failure of the city to act within the time limit specified herein shall not result in the automatic granting of any appeal or the relief sought therein. Upon issuance of the city council’s written decision on an appeal, the rent administrator shall serve a copy of the city council’s decision on the park owner and park residents by mail, along with an affidavit of mailing. The decision of the city council on any appeal shall be final. (Ord. 311 § 10, 2011; Ord. 255 § 16, 2007: Ord. 193 § 11, 1999)

 

15.20.116 Recovery of application costs in connection with successful approval of a rent adjustment application to the commission.
     A.    A park owner may seek a temporary rent adjustment to reimburse the park owner for the reasonable cost of professional services actually incurred by the park owner in preparing and presenting an application under Section 15.20.100 to the commission as set forth in the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council. The park owner shall bear the burden of proof and shall provide the evidence to justify a temporary rent adjustment submitted under this section, and approval of the application will be conditioned upon the park owner’s successfully obtaining approval of a rent adjustment pursuant to Section 15.20.100 of this chapter. Any temporary rent adjustment shall be amortized over a five-year period with interest at the rate of seven percent per year, compounded monthly, and any increase granted shall remain in effect only during the five-year period. Any such increase shall not be included as part of the monthly space rent but shall be itemized as a separate charge on the residents’ monthly rent statement. Nothing in this provision shall preclude a park resident from paying the full amount of the temporary rent adjustment as one lump sum without any payment of interest, following issuance of the city’s final decision. Any such lump sum payment shall be made in accordance with the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council.

     B.     The procedures, factors and methodology for submittal of applications and consideration by the commission, or the city council on any appeal, shall be set forth in the administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 368 § 5, 2017; Ord. 311 § 11, 2011)

 

15.20.120 Rules and guidelines.
     The rent administrator may adopt rules and procedures to implement the applications, notices, registration, verification and certification required by this chapter, and for the review of rent increase applications and the conduct of hearings. Such rules and guidelines shall be submitted to the commission and city council for review and approval. (Ord. 193 § 13, 1999: Ord. 161 § 11, 1996: Ord. 126 § 11, 1994)

 

15.20.130 Remedies.
     A.    Any person who demands, accepts or retains any rent in excess of the maximum rent permitted by this chapter shall be liable in a civil action to the person from whom such payment is demanded, accepted or retained in the sum of three times the amount by which the payments demanded, accepted or retained exceed the maximum rent permitted by this chapter together with reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs as determined by the court.

     B.     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each violation of this chapter and each day during which any such violation is committed or continued shall constitute a separate offense.

     C.     The city council may institute a civil action to compel compliance with this chapter.

     D.    Any legal challenge to a final decision of the rent administrator on an annual adjustment under Section 15.20.080 must be filed within ninety (90) days of the date of service of the rent administrator’s written decision and affidavit of mailing pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 as now in effect or subsequently amended.

     E.     Any legal challenge to a final decision of the city council granting, denying or modifying a rent adjustment under this chapter must be filed within ninety (90) days of the date of service of the city council’s written decision and affidavit of mailings, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 as now in effect or subsequently amended. The city council’s written decision shall be final upon the date that the rent administrator mails a copy of the city council’s written determination and affidavit of mailing to the park owner and park residents in accordance with Section 15.20.115(D).

     F.     Conflicts between the administrative rules and rules adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be resolved in favor of this chapter. (Ord. 311 §§ 12, 13, 2011; Ord. 255 § 17, 2007; Ord. 193 § 14, 1999: Ord. 161 § 12, 1996: Ord. 126 § 12, 1994)

 

15.20.140 Biennial review.
     This chapter shall be reviewed by the city council in odd-numbered years to determine whether it is still appropriate and whether there should be any modifications of its provisions. (Ord. 193 § 15, 1999: Ord. 170 § 4, 1997: Ord. 161 § 13, 1996: Ord. 126 § 13, 1994)

Chapter 15.24 MOBILEHOME PARK SPACE NUMBERING
15.24.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meaning:

     “City” means the city of Yucaipa.

     “Directory” means an exhibit or map showing the location of all streets and amenities, and space identification numbers for every space in the mobilehome park; and an exhibit or map showing the location of all streets and amenities, space identification numbers for every space in the recreational vehicle park.

     “Mobilehome” means a vehicle, designed or used for human habitation, including, but not limited to, a camping trailer, travel trailer, motor home and slide-in camper, when used as the principal place of habitation for the occupants thereof. “Mobilehome” shall also mean a mobilehome as defined by Civil Code Section 798.3 and Health and Safety Code Section 18008.

     “Mobilehome park” means any area of land in the city where two or more spaces are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation, but shall not include parks which rent spaces exclusively to recreational vehicles as that term is defined in Health and Safety Code 18010.

     “Park owner” means a person or entity who receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use or occupancy of a mobilehome space or recreational vehicle space, or an agent or representative authorized to act on behalf of such person or entity.

     “Park resident” means a homeowner or other person who lawfully occupies a mobilehome in a mobilehome park or a recreational vehicle in a recreational vehicle park.

     “Recreational vehicle” means a recreational vehicle as defined in Section 18010 of the Health and Safety Code.

     “Recreational vehicle park” means a recreational vehicle park as defined in Section 18215 of the Health and Safety Code.

     “Rent” means the consideration paid for use or occupancy of a mobilehome space or recreational vehicle space and the provision of related housing services such as utilities, repairs, laundry facilities, recreational facilities, management, refuse removal, parking, street cleaning and maintenance, and other benefits, privileges, facilities or terms and conditions of the residency. (Ord. 157 § 9, 1996: Ord. 88 § 1, 1991)

 

15.24.020 Installation and maintenance of park directory.
     A.    The park owner of every mobilehome park shall prominently display a space identification number at all times for his or her mobilehome or recreational vehicle. The numbering system used shall be consistent with the directory installed by the park owner pursuant to Section 15.24.020, and shall be substantially in the size, location and format approved by resolution of the city council. The space identification number shall be prominently displayed on the front of the coach to direct fire, police and other emergency and rescue personnel.

     B.     Every park resident shall install the space identification number on his or her coach within sixty (60) days of the adoption of the resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter.

     C.     No such space identification number shall be installed unless it complies with all other provisions of this code.

     D.    The park resident shall maintain the space identification number on his or her coach in a clean, safe and sanitary condition so that it is visible and legible at all times to police, fire and other emergency and rescue personnel. (Ord. 88 § 3, 1991)

 

15.24.030 Installation and maintenance of space numbering system in mobilehome parks.
     A.    Every park resident of a mobilehome park shall prominently display a space identification number at all times for his or her mobilehome or recreational vehicle. The numbering system used shall be consistent with the directory installed by the park owner pursuant to Section 15.24.020, and shall be substantially in the size, location and format approved by resolution of the city council. The space identification number shall be prominently displayed on the front of the coach to direct fire, police and other emergency and rescue personnel.

     B.     Every park resident shall install the space identification number on his or her coach within sixty (60) days of the adoption of the resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter.

     C.     No such space identification number shall be installed unless it complies with all other provisions of this code.

     D.    The park resident shall maintain the space identification number on his or her coach in a clean, safe and sanitary condition so that it is visible and legible at all times to police, fire and other emergency and rescue personnel. (Ord. 88 § 3, 1991)

 

15.24.040 Installation and maintenance of space numbering system in recreational vehicle parks.
     A.    The park owner of a recreational vehicle park shall install and prominently display a space identification number at all times on each space within his or her recreational vehicle park. The numbering system used shall be consistent with the directory installed by the park owner pursuant to Section 15.24.020, and shall be substantially in the size, location and format approved by resolution of the city council. The space identification number shall be prominently displayed at the front of each space to direct fire, police and other emergency and rescue personnel.

     B.     Every park owner shall install said space identification number at each space in the recreational vehicle park within sixty (60) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     C.     No such space identification number shall be installed unless it complies with all other provisions of this code.

     D.    The park owner shall maintain each space identification number on his or her coach in a clean, safe and sanitary condition so that it is visible and legible at all times to police, fire and other emergency and rescue personnel. (Ord. 88 § 4, 1991)

 

15.24.050 Costs.
     A.    All costs associated with the installation and maintenance of any directory in a mobilehome park or recreational vehicle park, or the installation or maintenance of a space numbering system in a recreational vehicle park, as required by this chapter, shall be borne by the park owner. No costs associated with compliance with this chapter shall be passed on to the residents of any mobilehome park or recreational vehicle park either in the form of a rent increase or separate charge.

     B.     All costs associated with the installation and maintenance of the identification number on an individual mobilehome, shall be borne by the occupant of the mobilehome. (Ord. 88 § 5, 1991)

 

15.24.060 Violation—Penalty.
     A.    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each violation of this chapter, and each day during which any such violation is committed or continued, shall constitute a separate offense.

     B.     The city council may authorize the institution of a civil action to compel compliance with this chapter, or such other legal action as the city council may deem appropriate. (Ord. 88 § 6, 1991)

DEVELOPMENT CODE
DIVISION 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
DIVISION 2 REVIEWING AUTHORITIES
DIVISION 3 PROCEDURES
DIVISION 4 LAND USES
DIVISION 5 OVERLAY DISTRICTS
DIVISION 6 PLANNING AREAS
DIVISION 7 GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS
DIVISION 8 SPECIFIC USE DESIGN STANDARDS
DIVISION 9 PLANT PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT
DIVISION 10 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
DIVISION 11 PUBLIC FACILITIES FINANCING
DIVISION 12 GENERAL DEFINITIONS

DIVISION 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL AUTHORITY
81.0101 Citation.
This Ordinance shall be known as the “Development Code of the City of Yucaipa” or as the “Development Code.”

 

81.0110 Authority for Regulations.
The Development Code is adopted pursuant to the following authority.

 

(a)    Local Ordinances and Regulations, California Constitution, Article XI, Section 7.

 

(b)    Planning and Zoning Law, California Government Code, Title 7.

 

(c)    Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, California Public Resources Code, Division 2, Chapter 9.

 

(d)    California Environmental Quality Act, California Public Resources Code, Division 13.

 

(e)    Mobilehome Parks Act, California Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.1.

 

(f)    Forest Practice Act of 1973, California Public Resources Code, Division 4, Part 2, Chapter 8.

 

81.0115 Consistency with General Plan.
All of the provisions of the Development Code, as well as any land use authorized by the Development Code, shall be consistent with the Yucaipa General Plan.

 

81.0120 Minimum Requirements.
The provisions of the Development Code constitute minimum requirements. The City of Yucaipa may establish more stringent requirements where they are deemed necessary.

 

81.0125 Interpretation.
Unless otherwise provided, any ambiguity concerning the content or application of the Development Code shall be resolved by the Planning Agency.

 

81.0130 Effect on Other Regulations, Easements, Etc.
Where the Development Code imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land, or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules or regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of the Development Code shall control.

 

81.0135 Permits and Licenses.
No City-issued licenses or permits shall be issued for uses or buildings or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of the Development Code or the City’s General Plan. Any such license or permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions hereof, shall be null and void and shall not support any claim to a vested right to develop.

 

81.0140 Validity.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of the Development Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the Code.

 

 

The City hereby declares that it would have adopted the Development Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional.

 

81.0145 Adoption of Official Land Use Plan.
An Official Land Use Plan for the incorporated area of the City of Yucaipa, County of San Bernardino, State of California, is hereby adopted and established as is hereafter set forth in this Code, to promote, protect and secure the public health, safety and general welfare; to provide the social and economic advantages resulting from an orderly, planned use of land resources; and to encourage, guide and provide a definite plan for the future growth and development of said City.

 

It is recognized that the Official Land Use Plan referred to herein must be periodically reviewed, refined, and maintained, and the City Council in conformity with the State Planning and Zoning Law as amended, and the provisions of this Code, hereby delegates to the Community Development Department of the City of Yucaipa, the responsibility for conducting necessary studies, surveys and the preparation of maps in order to develop detailed land use plans, and the responsibility for processing changes of land use districts for adoption by the City Council for the various portions of the incorporated territory of Yucaipa as it becomes desirable, practical and practicable so that the result shall be a comprehensive land use plan for the City.

 

81.0150 Legal Defense Fee Responsibility.
(a)    As a condition of approval of a land use application, the applicant shall agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City or its agents, officers and employees from any claim, action, or proceeding against the City or its agents, officers or employees to attack, set aside, void, or annul an approval of the City, an advisory agency, appeal board or legislative body concerning the map or permit or any other action relating to or arising out of such approval when such action is brought within the applicable statute of limitations.

 

(b)    Any condition of approval imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall include a requirement that the City promptly notify the applicant of any claim, action, or proceeding and that the City cooperate fully in the defense. If the City fails to promptly notify the applicant of any claim, action or proceeding, or if the City fails to cooperate fully in the defense, the applicant shall not thereafter be responsible to defend, indemnify, or hold the City harmless.

 

(c)    If any provision of this section is found invalid by a court of law, the remaining provisions of this section shall remain in full force and effect.

 

CHAPTER 2 VIOLATIONS
81.0205 Penalty for Violations.
Unless otherwise provided, any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity violating any provision of this Code shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified, and each day or portion thereof such violation is in existence shall be a new and separate offense. In addition, when one or more plants or trees are removed in violation of the provisions of this Code, the removal of each such separate plant or tree shall be a new and separate offense.

 

Any person so convicted shall be guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not greater than $100 and not less than $50 for a first offense and shall be guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not greater than $200 and not less than $100 for a second offense. The third and any additional offenses shall constitute misdemeanors and shall be punishable by fines not greater than $1,000 and not less than $500, six months in jail, or both. Notwithstanding the above, a first or second offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor. Payment of any fine or service of a jail sentence herein provided shall not relieve a person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity from the responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the violation. In addition to the above penalties, the court may order that the guilty party reimburse the City for all of its costs of investigating, analyzing and prosecuting the enforcement action against the guilty party; the court shall fix the amount of any such reimbursement upon submission of proof of such costs by the City. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 2, 2001)

 

81.0210 Enforcement.
(a)    The provisions of this Code shall be enforced by the officers and authorized representatives of the City agencies, departments, and offices charged with the responsibility of administering, implementing, and ensuring compliance with the provisions of this Code. Among these, but not limited to, are the following designated enforcement officers for the provisions of the Development Code.

 

(1)    City Manager

(2)    Assistant City Manager

(3)    Community Development Director

(4)    City Planner

(5)    City Building Official

(6)    City Engineer

(7)    City Code Enforcement Officer

(8)    City Fire Marshall

 

(b)    No person shall stop, impede, or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the City or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any land which is subject to a review, study, or compliance inspection process under the provisions of this Code, or with any person to whom such land has been lawfully sold, whenever such officer, employee, contractor, or authorized representative of the City, or person having an interest or estate in such land or purchases, is engaged in the work of conducting a review, study, or compliance inspection process on any such land pursuant to the provisions of this Code or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work as authorized or directed pursuant to this Code.

 

(c)    Any person, firm, company, corporation or other entity violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon arrest and conviction, shall be punished by a fine not greater than $500 and imprisonment for no more than 90 days, or both.

 

(d)    Whenever the City of Yucaipa institutes a judicial action or proceeding to enforce the land use district regulations of the Development Code, a City enforcement officer may file a Notice of Pendency of the action or proceeding with the County Recorder. The Notice shall be filed at the time of the commencement of the action or proceeding, and upon recordation of such notice as provided in this subsection, shall have the same effect as a notice recorded pursuant to Section 409 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of California.

 

(1)    The County Recorder shall record and index the Notice of Pendency of action or proceeding in the Grantor/Grantee Index.

 

(2)    Any Notice of Pendency of action or proceeding filed pursuant to this subsection may, upon motion of a party to the action or proceeding, be vacated upon an appropriate showing of need therefore by an order of a judge of the court in which the action or proceeding is pending. A certified copy of the Order to Vacate may be recorded with the County Recorder, and upon such recordation, the Notice of Pendency of the action or proceeding shall not constitute constructive notice of any of the matters contained therein nor create any duty of inquiry in any person thereafter dealing with the property described therein. Such an Order to Vacate shall not be appealable, but the party aggrieved by such order may, within 20 days after service of written notice of the order, or within such additional time not exceeding 20 days as the court may, within the original 20 days allow, but in no event later than 60 days after entry of the order, petition the proper reviewing court to review such order by Writ of Mandate.

 

No such Order to Vacate shall be effective, nor shall it be recorded with the County Recorder, until the time within which a petition for the filing of a Writ of Mandate has expired, pursuant to this subsection. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 3, 2001)

 

81.0220 Acts Include Causing, Aiding and Abetting.
Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful in the Development Code, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding or abetting such act or omission.

 

81.0225 Injunction.
Any building or structure erected or maintained, or any use of property contrary to the provisions of the Development Code or an adopted Specific Plan shall and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. Upon order of the City Planning Commission, Director of Community Development, Building Official, or other City enforcement officer, an action for injunctive relief shall be commenced for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. Application shall be made to such court or courts which have jurisdiction to grant such relief, to abate or remove such building, structure or use, and restrain and enjoin any person from erecting or maintaining such building or structure or using any property contrary to the provisions of the Development Code.

 

81.0230 Cumulative Remedies.
All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. The conviction and punishment of any person hereunder shall not relieve such person from the responsibility of correcting prohibited conditions or removing prohibited buildings, structures or improvements, nor prevent the enforced correction or removal thereof, including the payment of attorney fees. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 4, 2001)

 

81.0235 Statute of Limitations.
Any court action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul any land use decision subject to court review (other than those described in Sections 65907 and 66499.37 of the California Government Code and Section 21167 of the California Public Resources Code) or concerning any of the proceedings, acts or determinations taken, done or made prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality or validity of any conditions attached thereto, shall not be maintained by any person unless such action or proceeding is commenced and service of summons effected within 30 days after the effective date of such decision. Thereafter, all persons are barred from any such action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of such decision or of such proceedings, acts or determinations.

 

CHAPTER 3 GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
81.0305 General Exception.
The provisions of this Development Code shall not apply to any uses or activities which are exempt from local regulation under state or federal law.

DIVISION 2 REVIEWING AUTHORITIES
CHAPTER 1 PLANNING AGENCY
82.0101 Establishment.
Pursuant to the authority granted to local jurisdictions by the California Government Code, a Planning Agency is hereby established.

 

(a)    The City Council shall act as the Planning Agency for all land use applications which require public hearing and legislative action, and for those which are referred or appealed to the Council.

 

(b)    The Planning Commission shall act as the Planning Agency for all other land use applications which require public hearing and for those which are referred or appealed to the Commission.

 

(c)    The Planning Commission Subcommittee shall act as the Planning Agency for all land use applications which are referred or appealed to the Subcommittee.

 

(d)    The Community Development Director shall act as the Planning Agency for all land use applications requiring Administrative Review.

 

(e)    As applicable and as specified in Division 3 of this Code, the Community Development Director, the Building Official or other City Department Head when needed, as determined by the Community Development Director, shall act as the Planning Agency for those land use applications requiring Staff Action With Notice or Staff Action Without Notice. In these instances, the Building Official or other City Department Head, where applicable, will assume or coordinate with the Community Development Director, the functions detailed by this chapter for the Community Development Director.

 

(f)    The Community Development Director shall act as the Planning Agency when preparing required documents to implement State Planning and Land Use Law (Title 7 of the California Government Code), and other land use planning related state laws.

 

82.0105 Functions.
(a)    The Planning Agency shall perform all of the following functions.

 

(1)    Prepare, periodically review, and revise the General Plan as necessary.

 

(2)    Implement the General Plan through actions including, but not limited to, the administration of specific plans, land use districts, and subdivision ordinances.

 

(3)    Annually review the capital improvement program of the City and the public works projects of other local agencies for their consistency with the General Plan.

 

(4)    Promote public interest in, comment on, and understanding of the General Plan, and related regulations.

 

(5)    Consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional, and other organizations, and citizens generally concerned with implementation of the General Plan.

 

(6)    Promote the coordination of local plans and programs with the plans and programs of other public agencies.

 

(7)    Perform other functions as required by the City Council, including conducting studies and preparing plans other than those required or authorized by Title 7 of the Government Code for the State of California.

 

(b)    The Planning Agency shall be responsible for determining the adequacy of Environmental Impact Reports (EIRs) and other special reports in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

 

(c)    The Planning Agency shall be responsible for certification of Environmental Impact Reports and the filing of either a Notice of Determination or Notice of Exemption on each approved project.

 

(d)    The Planning Agency hereby has the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny all land use applications and make related environmental review determinations, including the authority to impose mitigation measures as conditions of approval. Such land use applications include all maps, plans, designs, and other forms of application for subdivision, development or use of property.

 

(e)    The Planning Agency shall only consider environmental review decisions in conjunction with the consideration of a related project. However, the Planning Commission may, when necessary, consider separately the decision by the Community Development Director to require the preparation of an Environmental Impact Report prior to such preparation.

 

(f)    In addition to the above functions, the Community Development Director, as part of the Planning Agency, will have the following duties.

 

(1)    The Community Development Director is charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvements of proposed subdivisions and other land use applications affecting the development of real property and to make or recommend imposition of requirements or conditions thereon.

 

(2)    The Community Development Director shall be responsible for the preliminary screening of projects to determine which projects are exempt from, and which projects are subject to, the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and the preparation, filing and distribution of environmental documents as appropriate.

 

(3)    The Community Development Director shall be responsible for conducting Initial Studies and making determinations or recommendations as to whether a Negative Declaration or Notice of Exemption will be issued or whether an EIR will be required.

 

(4)    The Community Development Director shall be responsible for determining or recommending whether an Environmental Impact Report on a multi-phased project that requires subsequent discretionary actions by the City adequately describes the impacts of the phase of the project under consideration.

 

(5)    The Community Development Director shall be responsible for reviewing information reports to determine or recommend whether a proposed project may have a significant adverse effect on the environment.

 

(6)    The Community Development Director shall be responsible for the preparation of documents for the implementation of State Planning and Land Use Law (Title 7 of the California Government Code) and other miscellaneous planning related laws. These documents shall include, but not be limited to, ordinances, resolutions, administrative policies and procedures, land use application filing requirements, information and forms, and other public information documents.

 

(7)    The Community Development Director shall act as the zoning administrator for purposes of California Government Code Section 65900 et seq.

 

82.0110 Procedures.
The procedures followed by the Planning Agency shall be those specified by this Code, including the associated administrative policies and procedures for all such reviews.

 

CHAPTER 2 PLANNING COMMISSION
82.0201 Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of the California Government Code, there is established a Planning Commission for the City of Yucaipa, County of San Bernardino, State of California.

 

82.0205 Appointment of Members.
The appointment of Planning Commissioners, their terms of office, and the expiration of said terms shall be as provided by the ordinances and resolutions of the City. (Amended by Ord. 137 § 8, 1995)

 

82.0220 Functions.
The functions of the Commission shall be as set forth in the California Government Code, City of Yucaipa Code and City policy.

 

82.0225 Procedures.
The City Council shall ratify the rules adopted by the Planning Commission for the time, place and conduct of meetings of the Commission.

 

CHAPTER 3 PLANNING COMMISSION SUBCOMMITTEE
82.0301 Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of the California Government Code, there is established a Planning Commission Subcommittee.

 

82.0305 Appointment of Members.
The Planning Commission Subcommittee shall consist of three members of the City of Yucaipa Planning Commission who shall be appointed by the Chair of said Commission to serve on a rotating schedule.

 

82.0315 Functions.
The functions of the Planning Commission Subcommittee shall be as set forth in the California Government Code, City of Yucaipa Code and City policy.

 

82.0320 Procedures.
The City Council shall ratify the rules adopted by the Planning Commission for the time, place, and conduct of meetings of the Planning Commission Subcommittee.

 

CHAPTER 4 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE
82.0401 Establishment.
A Development Review Committee (DRC) is hereby established to act in a technical capacity for the Planning Agency.

 

82.0405 Membership.
The Development Review Committee shall consist of the following members or their duly authorized designees: the Community Development Director, who shall serve as the committee Chair, the City Engineer; the Building Official, the Police Chief, the Water District Engineer, and the County Fire Warden.

 

On projects which affect other fire agencies, departments, or organizations which are independent of the responsibilities, authority, or jurisdiction of the County Fire Warden, then said Fire Warden shall coordinate and receive the comments of said agencies, departments, or organizations and shall ensure that their comments are considered in the examinations and recommendations of the Development Review Committee.

 

In addition, the Planning Commission Chair, or other Commission member designated by the Chair, shall attend and observe each meeting of the Development Review Committee. The Planning Commission representative may require that a project be referred to the Planning Commission for action at a public hearing.

 

82.0415 Duties of Committee.
It shall be the duty of the Development Review Committee to review and make recommendations to the Planning Agency regarding any of the following.

 

(a)    All Tentative Maps involving five or more lots, including those specifically exempted from the requirement for a Final Map.

 

(b)    All Planned Developments.

 

(c)    Any associated land use application that is related to a project already being reviewed by the committee, including requests for a variance or General Plan Amendment.

 

(d)    Any other project or action deemed by the Planning Agency to require the review and recommendation of the Development Review Committee.

 

The Development Review Committee shall review and identify the technical design features which are necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, including but not limited to adequate traffic and pedestrian circulation, proper grading, and proper erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation, or flood damage to off-site property. In addition, the Development Review Committee shall consider the adequacy of existing public facilities and services and any fire-hazard problems that may pose a threat to life, property, or the environment.

 

82.0420 Findings.
The Development Review Committee recommendation for approval, denial, or modifications to the development project shall be based upon the findings required and provisions imposed by this Code and State law.

 

82.0425 Meeting Dates and Procedures.
The Community Development Director shall establish regular meeting dates and rules of procedure for the Development Review Committee. Such dates and procedures shall be available to the public in appropriate formats and locations to advise interested persons or groups.

 

(a)    Meetings Open to Public

 

Development Review Committee meetings shall be open to the public, and any applicant, property owner, developer, subdivider, official of any agency, department organization, or other person interested in a development project shall have the privilege of attending any such meeting and presenting any appropriate matter.

 

(b)    Notification

 

The applicant, developer, subdivider, the engineer, or other applicant-designated representative shall be notified of the date, time, and place of such meeting by written notification placed in the U.S. Mail at least 10 days prior to the first Development Review Committee meeting at which the development project is to be considered. Such notification may be waived by the applicant, subdivider, developer, engineer, or applicant-designated representative where necessary to expedite review of a development project. Notice shall also be given to any individual group, association or organization that has requested in writing notification of meetings and hearings regarding the specific project or that has caused themselves to be properly placed on a mailing list of all DRC agendas.

 

(c)    Recommendation by Report

 

Offices, officers, departments and agencies shall submit to the Development Review Committee their recommendations relative to the development projects or subdivisions being discussed at each meeting. Whenever possible, these reports should be in writing and in such detail that all interested parties will be properly informed in detail as to the recommended requirements, map revisions, and proposed conditions of approval.

 

CHAPTER 5 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW COMMITTEE
82.0501 Establishment.
An Environmental Review Committee (ERC) is hereby established to act in a technical advisory capacity for the Planning Agency.

 

82.0505 Membership.
The Environmental Review Committee shall consist of membership as determined by the Community Development Director, who shall serve as the committee chairperson unless otherwise designated by the Director.

 

When the Community Development Director deems it applicable, members of the Development Review Committee, as specified in Section 82.0405, representatives of affected agencies, departments, or expert technical advisors may also serve as members of the Environmental Review Committee.

 

In addition, the Planning Commission Chair, or other Commission member designated by the chair, shall attend and observe each meeting of the Environmental Review Committee. The Planning Commissioner may require that a project be referred to the Planning Commission for action at a public hearing.

 

82.0515 Duties of Committee.
The Environmental Review Committee (ERC) shall act on all projects referred to it by the Planning Agency. The ERC shall review and make recommendations to the Planning Agency regarding environmental concerns in accordance with the provisions of the Development Code. The Environmental Review Committee shall also consider the adequacy of an EIR which is being reviewed by the Committee, including the identification of any significant adverse effects, possible mitigation measures and alternatives to the proposed project.

 

82.0525 Meeting Dates and Procedure.
The Environmental Review Committee shall meet when needed, as determined by the Community Development Director and using the following procedures.

 

(a)    Meetings Open to the Public

 

Environmental Review Committee meetings shall be open to the public, and any applicant, property owner, developer, subdivider, official of any agency, department, organization, or other person interested in a development project may attend any such meeting and present any appropriate testimony.

 

(b)    Notification

 

The applicant, developer, subdivider, the engineer, or other applicant-designated representative shall be notified of the date, time, and place of such meeting by written notification placed in the U.S. Mail at least 10 days prior to the first Environmental Review Committee meeting at which the development project is to be considered. Notice shall also be given to any individual group, association or organization that has requested in writing notification of meetings and hearings regarding the specific project or that has caused themselves to be properly placed on a mailing list of all ERC agendas.

 

(c)    Recommendation by Report

 

Offices, officers, departments, and agencies shall submit to the Environmental Review Committee their recommendations relative to the development projects or subdivisions being discussed at each meeting. Whenever possible, these reports should be in such detail that all interested parties will be properly informed in detail as to the recommended requirements, map revisions, proposed conditions of approval, and any proposed environmental determination or action.

 

CHAPTER 6 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ADMINISTRATOR
82.0601 Responsibilities.
The city Engineer is hereby appointed as the Floodplain Management Administrator to administer and implement the flood management provisions of this Code by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Management Administrator or an appropriate designee shall include, but not be limited to, the following.

 

(a)    Permit Review

 

(1)    Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this Code have been satisfied.

 

(2)    Require that all other required state and federal permits be obtained.

 

(3)    Determine if the site is reasonably safe from flooding.

 

(b)    Use of Other Basic Flood Data

 

When base flood elevation data has not been provided, the Floodplain Management Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal, state or other sources, in order to administer the Development Standards and provisions established by the Floodplain Safety Overlay District.

 

(c)    Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated and is within a Floodplain Safety Overlay District or within an area identified as subject to flooding in any City-approved Flood Hazard Study, the Floodplain Management Administrator or designee shall perform the following actions.

 

(1)    Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. The responsibility of providing such notification shall rest with the Public Works Department for development projects and the Flood Control District for their respective projects.

 

(2)    Require that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse be maintained.

 

(d)    Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available the certifications required for developments within the Floodplain Overlay District.

 

(e)    Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary may appeal the interpretation in accordance with the provisions of this Code.

 

(f)    Take action to prosecute violations of the Flood Safety provisions of this Code as specified in Section 85.020315 herein.

DIVISION 3 PROCEDURES
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROCEDURES
ARTICLE 1 INTRODUCTION
83.010105 Organization.
(a)    The Development Code utilizes five basic procedures to review all types of applications: Public Hearing, Development Review, Administrative Review, Staff Review with Notice, and Staff Review without Notice. Chapter 1 describes each of the five procedures and then follows with the application provisions common to each.

 

(b)    Chapter 2 describes each policy development application type and the provisions of this Code unique to that application type, as well as the reviewing authority for each. The types of policy development applications appear in the following order.

 

(1)    General Plan Amendment

(2)    Amendment of Development Code

(3)    Specific Plan Adoption and Amendment

(4)    Agricultural Preserves/Land Conservation Contract Actions

 

(c)    Chapter 3 describes each land use and design application type and the provisions of this Code unique to that application type, as well as the reviewing authority for each. The types of land use applications appear in the following order.

 

(1)    Conditional Use Permit

(2)    Planned Development Review

(3)    Land Use Compliance Review

(4)    Occupancy Verification (Reserved)

(5)    Certificate of Land Use Compliance

(6)    Special Use Permit

(7)    Temporary Use Permit

(8)    Sign Location Plan

(9)    Variances

(10)  Flood Hazard Development Review

(11)  Pre-Construction Inspection

 

(d)    Chapter 4 describes each division of land application type and the provisions of this Code unique to that application type, as well as the reviewing authority for each. The types of land use applications appear in the following order.

 

(1)    Tentative and Final Map

(2)    Parcel Maps and Minor Subdivisions

(3)    Vesting Tentative Map

(4)    Composite Development Plan

(5)    Lot Line Adjustments

(6)    Lot Mergers

(7)    Reversions to Acreage

(8)    Certificate of Subdivision Compliance

(9)    Official Maps

(10)  Resident-Initiated Mobilehome Park Conversion

 

ARTICLE 2 BASIC REVIEW PROCEDURES
83.010205 Public Hearing.
(a)    Public Hearing procedures are distinguished by a formal open forum for public review of a proposal. During the course of the public hearing, the reviewing authority invites public testimony for and against the land use proposal, reviews evidence, and then renders its decision.

 

(b)    Public Hearing procedures shall be used to give all interested parties an opportunity to review the evidence and to state their relative positions in a common public forum before the reviewing authority.

 

83.010210 Development Review.
(a)    Development Review procedures include evaluation of proposals at a scheduled meeting of the Development Review Committee (DRC).

 

(b)    The DRC meeting allows informal discussions between the applicant, City staff, and others regarding the design and proposed conditions for a given proposal. The DRC provides a recommendation to the reviewing authority.

 

83.010215 Administrative Review.
(a)    Administrative Review procedures are distinguished by a written or published notice given to affected and interested parties, followed by a decision by the reviewing authority. The notice shall be designed to insure that all interested parties are aware of the pending decision and are given a chance to comment before the reviewing authority renders its decision.

 

(b)    Administrative Review procedures shall be used to permit the reviewing authority to render a decision without the delay and expense of a public hearing.

 

83.010220 Staff Review with Notice.
Staff Review with Notice procedures are distinguished by land use decisions which are based upon specific findings or conditions which limit the discretion of the reviewing authority.

 

83.010225 Staff Review without Notice.
(a)    Staff Review without Notice procedures are distinguished by land use decisions made by the reviewing authority based upon standards that have been adopted by the City as law or as policy.

 

(b)    Staff Review without Notice procedures shall be used when sufficient standards have been adopted by the Planning Commission or the City Council to allow the reviewing authority to render a decision without giving notice to surrounding property owners and other parties.

 

ARTICLE 3 APPLICATION PROCEDURES
83.010305 Applications for Land Use Decisions.
Applications for all land use decisions shall be made at the offices of the reviewing authority on forms supplied by that authority. Each application for a land use decision shall be accompanied by such information and materials deemed necessary to render the requested land use decision before such application is deemed complete and accepted for filing. Any application made under the provisions of the Development Code may be initiated by the City Council or by any interested party unless otherwise indicated in this Code.

 

83.010310 Environmental Review.
(a)    All land use applications that are subject to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) shall be reviewed by the Community Development Department as provided for in the City of Yucaipa Environmental Review Guidelines.

 

(b)    Prior to taking an action to approve a land use application that is subject to CEQA, the Planning Agency shall make one or more environmental findings. The environmental finding(s) are required in addition to the findings specified in this division for each application type.

 

83.010315 Concurrent Applications.
When more than one land use decision is required for a single project, all applications may be filed concurrently.

 

83.010320 Application Forms and Information Packets.
(a)    Each land use application form and information packet shall include a list of the information and materials required for the application to be considered complete under Section 83.010405, below.

 

(b)    Any application for a land use decision which does not contain the required information and materials, or which is not accompanied by the appropriate application fee, may be rejected as incomplete by the planning agency as provided in Section 83.010405, below.

 

83.010325 Preapplication Review.
When the complexity of a land use application warrants it, the designated reviewing authority or the office given responsibility for accepting the land use application may require that the applicant submit materials and attend necessary conferences or hearings to conduct a preliminary review of a development proposal prior to the acceptance of the application.

 

83.010330 Notice of Pending Land Use Decisions.
(a)    Upon receipt of a request for a land use decision that utilizes the Public Hearing, Administrative Review, Development Review, or Staff Review with Notice procedures, the reviewing authority shall cause notice to be given specifying the time and place at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the scheduled land use decision by the following applicable methods.

 

(1)    Notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the respective community of the proposal for the following land use decisions using the Public Hearing procedure.

 

(A)   Subdivisions, where a tentative and final map are required

 

(B)   Development Code Amendment

 

(C)   General Plan Map Amendments

 

(D)   Amendments to the text of the General Plan or a Specific Plan

 

(2)    Notice shall be given by first class mail to any person who has filed a written request for a specific application.

 

(3)    Notice shall be given by first class mail or delivery to all surrounding property owners for land use decisions using the Public Hearing, Administrative Review, or Development Review procedures.

 

(4)    Notice shall be given by first class mail or delivery to all contiguous property owners for land use decisions using the Staff Review with Notice procedure.

 

(5)    Notice shall also be given, as required by Section 66451.3 of the California Government Code, in the case of a conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock cooperative.

 

(6)    Notice may be given in such other manner as is deemed necessary or desirable.

 

(b)    Said notice shall include sufficient information to give those receiving the notice a reasonable opportunity to evaluate the implications of the proposal and to participate in the decision making process. Furthermore, notices for land use decisions involving subdivisions for which a tentative and final map are required shall inform the recipient of his or her right to request, prior to the noticed land use decision date, that the proposal be reviewed by the City under the Public Hearing procedures.

 

(c)    A one-eighth (1/8) page legal display advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation may be substituted for individual property owner notice whenever the individual notice would require notification of more than 1,000 property owners.

 

(d)    Ownership and addresses of surrounding and contiguous properties shall be determined from the latest equalized tax assessment roll or from other records of the County Assessor or County Tax Collector, whichever contains more recent information.

 

(e)    During the public hearing, items which are continued by the reviewing authority to a specific date shall not be re-noticed unless specifically requested by the reviewing authority.

 

83.010335 Conditions of Approval.
In approving an application for a land use decision, the reviewing authority may establish reasonable conditions to its approval that are found to be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare that are consistent with the City’s General Plan and the provisions of this Code.

 

83.010340 Revisions.
Minor modifications to the conditions of approval or project design for a conditionally approved development project may be revised by the Community Development Director through the Staff Review without Notice procedure. However, should the Community Development Director determine that the modification(s) may be controversial, the requested modification(s) shall be referred back to the reviewing authority who required the condition(s). Those review procedures which were applicable when the condition(s) requested to be modified were originally imposed shall be used for such modification(s).

 

83.010345 Automatic Conditions.
Any development project defined in Government Code Sections 65927 and 65928 which is automatically approved pursuant to California Government Code Section 65956 shall be approved subject to the following standard conditions.

 

(a)    The development project must be a permitted use in the applicable land use district.

 

(b)    The development project must be consistent with the General Plan.

 

(c)    The development project must comply with the public health, safety, and welfare requirements of other public agencies. These agencies include, but are not limited to, the County Departments of Environmental Health Services, City Engineer, and the Office of Building and Safety.

 

(d)    Any automatic approval of a development project shall become null and void unless all conditions imposed by this section have been complied with, and the occupancy, use of the land, and use of the proposed or existing structures authorized by such automatic approval, has taken place within 36 months after the date of the automatic approval.

 

83.010350 Extension and Expiration of Land Use Decisions.
Any conditional land use decision made in accordance with the provisions of this Code shall be subject to the following time limitations.

 

(a)    Unless all conditions have been complied with and the occupancy, use, or division of land authorized by the land use decision has taken place or been recorded within 36 months after the day the land use decision becomes effective, the land use decision shall become null and void.

 

(b)    Planned Development

Notwithstanding the above provisions of this section, a conditionally approved Planned Development for a phased project shall be subject to a time limitation not to exceed that specified by the condition of approval for the Development Plan approval. The applicant, however, shall either record a tract map or obtain building permits for at least one phase of the project within five years of the development plan conditional approval and, as applicable, within each succeeding five-year period.

 

(c)    Where circumstances warrant, the Planning Agency or such other agency, department or person designated by the reviewing authority may grant an extension of time for a period or periods not to exceed a total of 36 months. The findings then required to approve such a permit must be made prior to approving an extension for that permit. All such extensions must be found to be consistent with the provisions of the General Plan and the City Code. This subsection shall not be applied to extend the time limits provided in subsection (b) above, or for Planning Use Permits.

 

(d)    A request for an extension of time shall be filed at least 30 days and no more than 90 days prior to the expiration date of an application. Any land use application for which an extension request has been filed within this time period shall not expire for 60 days or until an action is taken upon the extension request, whichever occurs first. If approved, an extension shall commence on the expiration date, even if it is not approved until after the expiration date.

 

(e)    Public projects shall not be subject to a time limitation unless specific time limits are included within conditions placed upon the project’s approval. When time limits are placed on the conditional approval of a public project, extensions of time may be granted whenever warranted, provided that no single extension shall be greater than 12 months.

 

ARTICLE 4 TIME LIMITATIONS
83.010405 Time Limits for Accepting Land Use Applications as Complete.
(a)    Pursuant to California Government Code Section 65943, no later than 30 days after the City has received an application for a development project, the City shall determine, in writing, whether the submitted application materials are complete and shall immediately transmit such determination to the applicant. Upon receipt of any resubmittal of the application, a new 30-day time period shall begin, during which time the City is to determine the completeness of the application. If the application, together with these submitted materials, are determined not to be complete, the applicant may appeal the decision to require additional information to the Planning Commission Subcommittee. If the final written determination on the appeal is not made within 60 days, the application with the submitted materials shall be deemed complete.

 

(b)    The Planning Agency and the applicant may mutually agree to a reasonable extension of these time limits.

 

(c)    Applications which depend on approval of another enabling application (e.g., General Plan Amendments) shall not be considered accepted until the effective decision date for the enabling application(s). Such dependent applications may, however, be accepted for preapplication review to allow concurrent processing and thereby streamline the review process.

 

83.010410 Time Limit for Land Use Review and Decisions.
Except for legislative acts of the City Council, the Planning Agency shall render its decision on a land use application within the following time limits or the application shall be deemed approved in accordance with State law.

 

(a)    If a Negative Declaration is prepared or if the project is exempt from Division 13 (commencing with Section 21000) of the California Public Resources Code, the project shall be approved or disapproved within six months from the date on which an application requesting approval of the project has been received and accepted as complete by the Planning Agency.

 

(b)    If an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) is prepared, pursuant to Section 21100 or 21151 of the California Public Resources Code, the project shall be approved or disapproved within one year from the date on which an application requesting approval of the project has been received and accepted as complete by the Planning Agency.

 

(c)    Pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 21151.5, should compelling circumstances justify additional time beyond 105 days to complete a Negative Declaration or beyond one year to complete and certify an Environmental Impact Report, then a reasonable extension of time may be granted by the Planning Agency if the project applicant requests or consents to such an extension, subject to the following provisions.

 

(1)    In the case of an Environmental Impact Report, pursuant to California Government Code Section 65950.1, the Planning Agency shall approve or disapprove the project within 45 days after certification of the Environmental Impact Report for a tentative map or parcel map, and 90 days after the certification of the Environmental Impact Report for all other types of development projects.

 

(2)    In the case of a Negative Declaration, a reasonable extension of time shall not exceed the six months and an additional 90 days as referenced in California Government Code Sections 65950 and 65957 for all development projects, provided, however, that subdivisions shall be subject to the time limits specified in Division 8, unless a waiver has been obtained in accordance with subsection (d) below to allow for such an extension of time.

 

(d)    The Planning Agency shall approve, conditionally approve, extend, or disapprove a tentative map, tentative parcel map, or minor subdivision plot plan or a proposed subdivision within 50 days after certification of the EIR, adoption of a Negative Declaration, or a determination that the project is exempt from CEQA requirements. These time limits or any other time limits for reporting and acting on maps may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Planning Agency. Upon consent of the subdivider, a waiver of any of these time limits may be obtained or the purpose of permitting concurrent processing of related land use applications or an environmental review on the same development project or subdivision.

 

(e)    When a land use application decision is contingent upon approval of another application or ordinance which requires legislative action (e.g., General Plan Amendment, ordinance, etc.), the time limits specified by subsection (a) above for acting on such a land use application shall commence on the effective date of the last such legislative action on which that land use application is contingent.

 

83.010415 Effective Date of Land Use Decisions.
(a)    Unless appealed, land use application decisions become effective as follows.

 

(1)    Unless adopted on an urgency basis or adopted pursuant to California Government Code Section 65858, land use ordinances shall become effective a minimum of 30 days after the second reading of the ordinance. In the case of an ordinance adopted pursuant to California Government Code Section 65962 regarding or affecting land use application fees, ordinances shall become effective no sooner than 60 days after the second reading of the ordinance.

 

(2)    Land use decisions made at Public Hearing by the Planning Agency other than decisions made by the City council shall be effective 11 days after the action of the Planning Agency, except when the tenth such day is not a City business day. In such instances, the land use decision shall become effective on the second consecutive City business day following such tenth day.

 

(3)    Land use decisions not made at a public hearing by a reviewing authority become effective 11 days after the written notice of the land use decision has been deposited in the U.S. Mail, except when the tenth such day is not a City business day. In such instances, the land use decision shall become effective on the second consecutive City business day following such tenth day.

 

(4)    Decisions regarding a request for the extension of time for a period beyond that granted by an approved land use application shall become effective 16 days after the written notice of such a decision has been deposited in the U.S. Mail or after the action has been taken by the Planning Agency at a public hearing, except when the fifteenth such day is not a City business day. In such instances, the decision shall become effective on the second consecutive City business day following such fifteenth day.

 

(b)    Land use application decisions which are made contingent upon the approval of another application or ordinance requiring legislative action (e.g., General Plan Amendment, ordinance, etc.) shall become effective on the date when the approval of the last such application to which they are subject becomes effective.

 

ARTICLE 5 DECISION BY REVIEWING AUTHORITY
83.010505 Referral to Next Succeeding Reviewing Authority.
(a)    A reviewing authority may refer a request for a land use decision to the reviewing authority designated as the appeal body or that type of land use application.

 

(b)    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), the Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to the City Council or shall state the reasons it cannot do so.

 

(c)    An applicant for a land use decision may waive his option for a decision by any reviewing authority other than the Planning Commission and request that his application be reviewed by the appeal body or that type of land use application.

 

(d)    Any land use decision made by the Planning Commission as a result of a referral in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be made at a public hearing.

 

(e)    All land use decisions which require a legislative act prior to their approval or denial shall be referred to the City Council for final action.

 

 

 

 

ARTICLE 6 APPEAL PROCEDURES
83.010605 Appeal of a Land Use Decision.
Prior to its effective date, any land use decision made in accordance with the provisions of this Code by a reviewing authority other than the City Council may be appealed by the applicant or other affected party as follows.

 

(a)    The Community Development Director’s decision to require preparation of an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) is subject to appeal to the Planning Commission for final decision.

 

(b)    The Planning Commission or Planning Commission Subcommittee shall consider appeals regarding land use decisions made by any City agency, department, office, official, or officer.

 

The Planning Commission may refer consideration of an appeal to the City Council, except for those decisions involving only a minor variance, determination as to the completeness of an application, or the requirement for preparation of an Environmental Impact Report. In these instances, the Planning Commission decision shall be the final and conclusive decision. The City Council will not accept nor consider an appeal of these Planning Commission decisions.

 

(c)    Except as specified above, the City Council shall consider appeals regarding land use decisions made by the Planning Commission, or may, in accordance with a procedural resolution adopted by the City Council, call any land use decision up to the City Council for consideration and final determination by the City Council.

 

(d)    The City Council shall only conduct hearings regarding an EIR or other environmental action in conjunction with consideration of the subject land use application and project for which the EIR was prepared or other environmental action proposed. (Amended by Ord. 221 §§ 4, 5, 2002)

 

83.010610 Application for the Appeal of a Land Use Decision.
Applications for an appeal of a land use decision shall be made on forms supplied by the reviewing authority to which the appeal is being made. Applications for appeals shall be accompanied by a written statement of the grounds upon which the appeal is based. A uniform fee, as established by the City Council, shall be paid to the City upon the filing of each appeal. The appeal application shall identify (1) the subject land use application, (2) the specific decision, condition of approval, or other matter being appealed, (3) the date of such action, (4) the justification for the appeal and, (5) any remedy or solution for which the appellant petitions. A properly filed application for appeal stays proceedings in the matter appealed until a decision is rendered on the appeal.

 

83.010615 Time for Filing an Appeal.
The Community Development Director or, in the case of an appeal to the Council, the City Clerk shall be notified by the appellant of an appeal of a land use application decision prior to the date on which such land use application decision becomes effective. The appellant shall submit an application for the appeal at the time of such notification, or on the next City business day following such notification.

 

83.010620 Notice of Appeal.
Within 30 days of the acceptance of an application for an appeal of a land use decision, the City Office of Planning or the City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing and shall give notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and to any other party who has requested in writing to be so notified. In addition, notice shall also be given in the same manner as notice was given for the land use decision being appealed.

 

83.010625 Authority of Appeal Body.
Upon hearing the appeal, the appeal body shall consider the record and such additional evidence as may be offered, and may affirm, reverse, or modify, in whole or in part, the decision appealed. The appeal body is subjected to all of the criteria, findings, and requirements imposed by this Code upon the original decision maker.

 

83.010630 Withdrawal of Appeal.
An appeal may be withdrawn prior to the time that the reviewing authority issues a decision. The applicant or his/her representative must notify the Planning Office in writing that he/she wishes to withdraw the appeal.

 

 

ARTICLE 7 DENSITY BONUS PROCEDURES
83.010705 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide incentives for the production of housing for very low-income, low-income, moderate-income, and senior households in accordance with Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918. In enacting this article, it is the intent of the City to facilitate the development of affordable housing and to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the housing element of the City’s General Plan. (Added by Ord. 297 § 4, 2010)

 

83.010710 Definitions.
Whenever the following terms are used in this article, they shall have the meanings established by this section.

 

(a)    “Affordable rent” means monthly housing expenses, including a reasonable allowance for utilities, for rental target units reserved for very low-, low-, or moderate-income households, not exceeding the following calculations:

 

(1)    Very Low-Income. Unless otherwise provided by law, the product of thirty (30) percent times fifty (50) percent of the area median income adjusted for family size appropriate for the unit, divided by twelve (12).

 

(2)    Low-Income. Unless otherwise provided by law, the product of thirty (30) percent times sixty (60) percent of the area median income adjusted for family size appropriate for the unit, divided by twelve (12).

 

 

(3)    Moderate-Income. Unless otherwise provided by law, the product of thirty (30) percent times one hundred ten (110) percent of the area median income adjusted for family size appropriate for the unit, divided by twelve (12).

 

(b)    “Affordable sales price” means a sales price at which very low-, low-, or moderate-income households can qualify for the purchase of target units, calculated in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5 and the regulations adopted by the California Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to that section.

 

(c)    “Concession” has the same meaning as the term “Incentive” defined herein.

 

(d)    “Density bonus” means a density increase of up to those percentages specified in this article above the otherwise maximum residential density.

 

(e)    “Density bonus housing agreement” means a legally binding agreement between a developer of a housing development and the City, which ensures that the requirements of this article and State density bonus law are satisfied. The agreement shall establish, among other things, the number of target units, their size, location, terms and conditions of affordability and production schedule.

 

(f)    “Density bonus units” means those residential units granted pursuant to the provisions of this article that exceed the maximum residential density for the development site.

 

(g)    “Housing cost” means the sum of actual or projected monthly payments for all of the following associated with for-sale target units: principal and interest on a mortgage loan, including any loan insurance fees, property taxes and assessments, fire and casualty insurance, property maintenance and repairs, homeowner association fees and a reasonable allowance for utilities.

 

(h)    “Housing development” means a construction project consisting of five or more residential units or lots, including single-family and multi-family, and otherwise defined in accordance with Government Code Section 65915(i).

 

(i)     “Incentive” means a regulatory incentive or concession as defined in Government Code Section 65915(k) that may include, but not be limited to, the reduction of site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements, approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing development, or any other regulatory incentive which would result in identifiable cost avoidance or reductions, that are offered in addition to a density bonus.

 

(j)     “Low-income household” means a household whose income does not exceed the low-income limits applicable to San Bernardino County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5.

 

(k)    “Maximum residential density” means the maximum number of residential units permitted by the City’s General Plan Land Use Element and Development Code, applicable to the subject property at the time an application for the construction of a housing development is deemed complete by the City, excluding the additional density bonus units permitted by this article. If a range of density is permitted by either the Land Use Element or the Development Code, maximum residential density shall mean the maximum allowable density within the range of density. If the Land Use Element and the Development Code conflict, the density set forth in the Land Use Element shall govern.

 

(l)     “Moderate-income household” means a household whose income does not exceed the moderate-income limits applicable to San Bernardino County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 50093.

 

(m)   “Non-restricted units” mean all units within a housing development excluding the target units.

 

(n)    “Senior citizen housing” or “senior housing development” means a senior citizen housing development, as defined in Sections 51.3 and 51.12 of the Civil Code, or mobilehome park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Section 798.76 or 799.5 of the Civil Code.

 

(o)    “Target unit” means a dwelling unit within a housing development which will be reserved for sale or rent to, and affordable to, very low-, low-, or moderate-income households.

 

(p)    “Very low-income household” means a household whose income does not exceed the very low-income limits applicable to San Bernardino County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 50105. (Added by Ord. 297 § 4, 2010)

 

83.010715 Implementation.
(a)    The City shall grant a density bonus and incentives pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) herein, to an applicant who agrees to provide the following target units:

 

(1)    Low-Income Units. Designate at least ten (10) percent of the total units of a housing development as target units affordable to low-income households;

 

(2)    Very Low-Income Units. Designate at least five percent of the total units of a housing development as target units affordable to very low-income households;

 

(3)    Moderate-Income Condominium Units. Designate at least ten (10) percent of the total units of a condominium project, as defined in Civil Code Section 1351(f), or planned development, as defined in Civil Code Section 1351(k) as target units affordable to moderate-income households; or

 

(4)    Any senior housing development.

 

(b)    In determining the number of density bonus units to be granted pursuant to this section, the density bonus for the site shall be computed as follows:

 

(1)    Low-Income Household. The maximum allowable residential density for the site shall be increased by twenty (20) percent; provided, however, that for each one percent increase above ten (10) percent in the percentage of units made affordable to low-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half percent up to a maximum density bonus of thirty-five (35) percent;

 

(2)    Very Low-Income Household. The maximum allowable residential density for the site shall be increased by twenty (20) percent; provided, however, that for each one percent increase above five percent in the percentage of units made affordable to very low-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by two and one-half percent up to a maximum density bonus of thirty-five (35) percent;

 

(3)    Moderate-Income Condominium. The maximum allowable residential density for the site shall be increased by five percent; provided, however, that for each one percent increase above ten (10) percent of the percentage of units made affordable to moderate-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent up to a maximum density bonus of thirty-five (35) percent;

 

(4)    Senior Housing Development. In the RM-24 District, the maximum allowable residential density for the site shall be increased by twenty-five (25) percent; in all other RM Districts, a one hundred (100) percent increase shall be permitted.

 

(5)    In no instance shall the City grant a density bonus for a site that exceeds thirty-five (35) percent of the maximum allowable residential density.

 

(6)    Certain Donations of Land. When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates land to the City that satisfies the requirements of Government Code Section 65915(g), and complies with all procedural requirements of that subsection, including recordation of a deed restriction, the maximum allowable residential density for the site shall be increased by fifteen (15) percent; provided, however, that for each one percent increase above the minimum percentage of land required to be donated pursuant to Government Code Section 65915(g), the density bonus shall be increased by one percent up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent. This increase shall be in addition to any increase required by Section 83.010715(a) of this article, up to a maximum combined density increase of thirty-five (35) percent, if an applicant seeks both the increase required by this subsection and by subsection (a).

 

All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. The density bonus shall not be included when determining the percentage of target units. When calculating the required number of target units, any resulting fraction of units shall be deleted.

 

(c)    Number of Incentives. The applicant shall receive the following number of incentives or concessions:

 

(1)    One incentive shall be provided to a developer who agrees to construct at least ten (10) percent of the total units for low-income households, five percent of the total units for very low-income households, or ten (10) percent  of units in a condominium for moderate-income households.

 

(2)    Two incentives shall be provided to a developer who agrees to construct at least twenty (20) percent of the total units for low-income households, ten (10) percent of the total units for very low-income households, or twenty (20) percent of units in a condominium for moderate-income households.

 

(3)    Three incentives shall be provided to a developer who agrees to construct at least thirty (30) percent of the total units for low-income households, fifteen (15) percent of the total units for very low-income households, or thirty (30) percent of units in a condominium for moderate-income households. In cases where a density increase of more than the amount specified in subsection (b) is requested, the density increase, if granted, shall be considered an additional incentive.

 

(d)    In cases where the developer agrees to construct a housing development that qualifies for a density bonus pursuant to subsection (a), and that includes a childcare facility as defined in Government Code Section 65915(h)(4), the developer shall be entitled to either an additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the childcare facility, or an additional incentive described in Section 83.010720 of this article, that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the childcare facility. Any such childcare facility shall comply with the following:

 

(1)    The childcare facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long or longer than the period of time during which the density bonus units are required to remain affordable;

 

(2)    Of the children who attend the childcare facility, the children of very low-income households, low-income households, or families of moderate-income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for very low-income households, lower-income households, or families of moderate-income, pursuant to this article.

 

(3)    Notwithstanding the foregoing, City shall not be required to provide a density bonus or incentive for a childcare facility when it is found, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate childcare facilities. (Added by Ord. 297 § 4, 2010)

 

83.010720 Types of Incentives Allowed.
If requested by the applicant, a qualifying project shall be entitled to the following incentives, the number of which shall be determined pursuant to Section 83.010715(c), unless the City makes the written findings required by Government Code Section 65915(d)(1):

 

(a)    Incentives may include, but are not limited to, any of the following:

 

(1)    A reduction in site development standards or a modification of the requirements of this Development Code, which exceed the minimum building standards provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code. These may include, but are not limited to, one or more of the following:

 

(A)   Reduced minimum lot sizes and/or dimensions,

 

(B)   Reduced minimum lot setbacks,

 

(C)   Reduced minimum outdoor and/or private outdoor open space,

 

(D)   Increased maximum lot coverage,

 

(E)   Increased maximum building height,

 

(F)    Reduced on-site parking standards,

 

(G)   Reduced minimum building separation requirements,

 

(H)   Other site or construction conditions applicable to a residential development;

 

(2)    Mixed use zoning to allow the housing development to include nonresidential uses and/or allow the housing development within a nonresidential zone. Approval of mixed use activities in conjunction with the housing development if other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development, and the other land uses are compatible with the housing development and the existing or planned development in the area, and is consistent with the General Plan;

 

(3)    Another regulatory incentive or concession proposed by the applicant and agreed to by the City, that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. Permissible incentives include direct financial aid (e.g., redevelopment set-aside, Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funding) in the form of a loan or a grant to subsidize or provide low interest financing for on- or off-site improvements, land or construction costs;

 

(4)    A density bonus of more than thirty-five (35) percent;

 

(5)    Waived, reduced or deferred plan check, construction permit and/or development impact fees (e.g., capital facilities, park, traffic, etc.).

 

(b)    Requirements.

 

(1)    Economic Feasibility. Any development incentive granted shall contribute to the economic feasibility of providing the target units.

 

(2)    Waivers or Modifications. In addition to any density bonus or incentives provided, an applicant may seek a waiver or modification of development standards that would physically preclude the construction of a housing development at the densities or with the incentives permitted by this article. The applicant may request a meeting with City staff to discuss the applicant’s proposal for reduced development standards. The City may not apply any development standard that would physically preclude the construction of a housing development at the densities or with the incentives permitted by this article. (Added by Ord. 297 § 4, 2010)

 

83.010725 Requirements for Density Bonus Projects.
(a)    The entry into and execution of the density bonus housing agreement shall be a condition of a discretionary planning permit (e.g., tract maps, parcel maps, site plans, planned development or conditional use permits) or a ministerial building permit for a housing development proposed pursuant to this article. The agreement shall be recorded at the applicant’s cost as a restriction running with the land on the parcel or parcels on which the target units will be constructed.

 

(b)    Target units shall remain restricted and be offered at affordable rents to the designated group for a period of thirty (30) years (or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program), or otherwise as provided by law.

 

(c)    In determining the maximum affordable rent or affordable sales price of target units, the following household and unit size assumptions shall be used, unless the housing development is subject to different assumptions imposed by other governmental regulations:

 

SRO (residential hotel) unit

75% of 1 person

Studio

1 person

1 bedroom

2 persons

2 bedroom

3 persons

3 bedroom

4 persons

4 bedroom

6 persons

 

(d)    An applicant shall agree that the initial occupants of the moderate-income units in the condominium project are persons and families of moderate income, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50093.

 

(e)    Upon resale, the seller of the unit and the City shall share in the equity as follows:

 

(1)    The seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller’s proportionate share of appreciation.

 

(2)    The City shall re-capture any initial subsidy and its proportionate share of appreciation, which shall then be used within five years for any of the purposes described in Health and Safety Code Section 33334.2(e) that promote homeownership.

 

(3)    For purposes of this subsection, the City’s “proportionate share of appreciation” shall be equal to the ratio of the City’s initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale.

 

(4)    For purposes of this subsection, the City’s “initial subsidy” shall be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale minus the initial sale price to the moderate-income household, plus the amount of any downpayment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of resale shall be used as the initial market value.

 

(f)    All for-sale target units shall be occupied by their purchasers; no renting or subleasing shall be permitted.

 

(g)    The owner of a rental development shall submit annually, and within thirty (30) days of occupancy of a target rental unit, a certificate of compliance, which shall include the name, address, and income of each tenant occupying the target unit.

 

(h)    The owner of a rental development shall maintain and keep on file annual sworn and notarized income statements and current tax returns for all tenants occupying the target rental units.

 

(i)     The owner of a rental development shall provide to the City any additional information required by the City to ensure the long-term affordability of the target units by eligible households.

 

(j)     The City shall have the right to inspect the owner’s project-related records at any reasonable time and shall be entitled to audit the owner’s records once a year.

 

(k)    The City may establish fees associated with the setting up and monitoring of target units. (Added by Ord. 297 § 4, 2010)

 

83.010730 Development Standards.
(a)    Target units shall be constructed concurrently with nonrestricted units unless both the City and the applicant agree within the density bonus housing agreement to an alternative schedule for development.

 

(b)    Target units shall be built on-site wherever possible and when practical, be dispersed within the housing development. Where feasible, the number of bedrooms of the target units shall be equivalent to the bedroom mix of the nontarget units of the housing development, except that the developer may include a higher proportion of target units with more bedrooms. The design and appearance of the target units shall be compatible with the design of the total housing development. All housing developments shall comply with all applicable development standards, except those standards that may be modified as provided by this article. Deviations from these provisions may only be permitted as part of an approved density bonus housing agreement.

 

(c)    Circumstances may arise in which the public interest would be served by allowing some or all of the target units associated with one housing development to be produced and operated at an alternative development site. Where the applicant and the City form an agreement, the resulting linked developments shall be considered a single housing development for purposes of this article. Under these circumstances, the applicant shall be subject to the same requirements of this article for the target units to be provided on the alternative site.

 

(d)    Special Parking Requirements. Upon request of the developer of a housing development qualifying for a density bonus pursuant to this article, the City shall permit vehicular parking ratios, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, in accordance with the following standards:

 

(1)    0 to 1 bedrooms: One on-site parking space;

 

(2)    2 to 3 bedrooms: Two on-site parking spaces;

 

(3)    4 or more bedrooms: Two and one-half parking spaces.

 

If the total number of parking spaces required for a housing development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this subsection, a housing development may provide “on-site parking” through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking. (Added by Ord. 297 § 4, 2010)

 

83.010735 Processing of Density Bonus Requests.
An application for a density bonus pursuant to this article shall be processed as part of the application for a housing development. An application for a housing development shall not be determined “complete” for purposes of Government Code Section 65920, et seq., unless and until the City Council has given preliminary approval of the form and content of a density bonus housing agreement, which complies with the provisions of this article. The process for obtaining preliminary approval of the density bonus shall be as follows:

 

(a)    Filing. An applicant proposing a housing development pursuant to this article shall submit an application for a density bonus as part of the submittal of any formal request for approval of a housing development. The application, whether a pre-application or a formal application, shall include:

 

(1)    A brief description of the proposed housing development, including the total number of units, target units, and density bonus units proposed;

 

(2)    The zoning and general plan designations and assessor’s parcel number(s) of the project site;

 

(3)    A vicinity map and preliminary site plan, drawn to scale, including building footprints, driveways and parking layout; and

 

(4)    The number and nature of the incentives requested pursuant to this article.

 

(b)    Review of Density Bonus Request.

 

(1)    Within ninety (90) days of receipt of the application for a density bonus and a housing development, the City shall provide to an applicant a letter, which identifies project issues of concern, and the procedures for compliance with this article.

 

(2)    If additional incentives are requested, the City Planner shall inform the applicant that the requested additional incentives shall or shall not be recommended for consideration with the proposed housing development, or that alternative or modified incentives shall be recommended for consideration in lieu of the requested incentives. If the City Planner recommends alternative or modified incentives, the recommendation shall establish how the alternative or modified incentives can be expected to have an equivalent affordability effect as the requested incentives.

 

(c)    The City shall approve a density bonus and requested incentives in conjunction with a discretionary planning permit or ministerial building permit for a housing development, if the application complies with the provisions of this article. The execution and recordation of the density bonus housing agreement shall be a condition of approval of the discretionary planning permit or ministerial building permit. (Added by Ord. 297 § 4, 2010)

 

83.010740 Density Bonus Housing Agreement.
(a)    The terms of the draft density bonus housing agreement (the “agreement”) shall be reviewed and revised as appropriate by the City Planner and the City Attorney who shall formulate a recommendation to the Planning Commission for review and the City Council for final approval.

 

(b) Following execution of the agreement by the applicant and the City, the completed agreement, or memorandum thereof, shall be recorded. The conditions contained in the

        agreement shall be filed and recorded on the parcel or parcels designated for the construction of target units as a condition of final map approval, or, where a map is not being processed, prior to issuance of building permits for such parcels or units. The agreement shall be binding upon all future owners and successors in interest for this property, which is the subject of the housing development application.

 

(c)    At a minimum, the agreement shall include the following:

 

(1)    The total number of units proposed within the housing development, including the number of target units;

 

(2)    A description of the household income group to be accommodated by the housing development, and the standards for determining the corresponding affordable rent or affordable sales price and housing cost;

 

(3)    The location, unit sizes (square feet) and number of bedrooms of target units;

 

(4)    Tenure of use restrictions for target units of at least thirty (30) years;

 

(5)    A schedule for completion and occupancy of target units;

 

(6)    A description of any additional incentive being provided by the city;

 

(7)    A description of remedies for breach of the agreement by either party (the City may identify tenants or qualified purchasers as third party beneficiaries under the agreement); and

 

(8)    Other provisions to ensure implementation and compliance with this article.

 

(d)    In the case of for-sale housing developments, the agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing the initial sale and use of target units during the applicable use restriction period:

 

(1)    Target units shall, upon initial sale, be sold to and occupied by eligible very low-, low-, or in the case of a condominium, moderate-income households at an affordable sales price and housing cost, or to qualified senior citizen residents (i.e., maintained as senior citizen housing).

 

(2)    The initial purchaser of each target unit shall execute an instrument or agreement, approved by the City Attorney, restricting the sale of the target unit in accordance with this article during the applicable use restriction period. Such instrument or agreement shall be recorded against the parcel containing the target unit and shall contain provisions as the City may require to ensure continued compliance with this article and the State density bonus law.

 

(e)    In the case of rental housing developments, the agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing the use of target units during the use restriction period:

 

(1)    The rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, establishing affordable rent, filling vacancies and the proper management and maintenance of target units for qualified tenants;

 

(2)    Provisions requiring owners to verify tenant incomes and maintain books and records to demonstrate compliance with this article; and

 

(3)    Provisions requiring owners to submit an annual report to the City, which includes the name, address and income of each person occupying target units, and which identifies the bedroom size and monthly rent or cost of each target unit. (Added by Ord. 297 § 4, 2010)

 

83.010745 Changes in State Density Bonus Laws.
It is the intent of the City Council that the provisions of this article shall be interpreted so as to fulfill the requirements of Government Code Section 65915 et seq., notwithstanding changes in State laws revising percentages, numerical thresholds and/or other standards applicable to the granting of density bonuses or related incentives that may occur after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article. Accordingly, it is the further intent of the City Council that any such changed percentages, numerical thresholds or other standards shall be deemed to supersede and govern any conflicting percentages, numerical thresholds or other standards contained in this article, to the maximum extent permitted by law. (Added by Ord. 297 § 4, 2010)

 

 

ARTICLE 8 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION PROCEDURES
83.010805 Purpose and Intent.
It is the purpose of this article, pursuant to Fair Housing Laws, to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in the application of the City’s rules, policies, practices and procedures, as necessary to allow disabled persons to use and enjoy a dwelling. The intent of this article is to provide a process for individuals with disabilities to make requests for, and to be provided, reasonable accommodation from the various City laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City, including land use and zoning regulations, when reasonable accommodation is warranted based upon sufficient evidence. (Added by Ord. 297 § 5, 2010)

 

83.010810 Definitions.
Whenever the following terms are used in this article, they shall have the meanings established by this section.

 

(a)    “Applicant” means a person, business, or organization making a written request to the City for reasonable accommodation in the strict application of land use or zoning provisions of the Development Code.

 

(b)    “City” means the City of Yucaipa.

 

(c)    “Code” means the Yucaipa Municipal Code.

 

(d)    “Department” means the Community Development Department.

 

(e)    “Director” means the Director of Community Development.

 

(f)    “Disabled person” or “person with a disability” means an individual who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more of that person’s major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone who has a record of having such an impairment, but not including an individual’s current, illegal use of a controlled substance.

 

(g)    “Fair Housing Laws” mean the “Federal Fair Housing Act” (42 U.S.C. Section 3601, et seq.), and the “California Fair Employment and Housing Act” (California Government Code Section 12900, et seq.), as these statutes now exist or may be amended from time to time, and each Act’s implementing regulations.

 

(h)    “Minor reasonable accommodation” means any deviation requested and/or granted from the strict application of the City’s laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City, including land use and zoning regulations of this Title, and which can be removed or terminated in ninety (90) days or less after the need for the reasonable accommodation ends.

 

(i)     “Major reasonable accommodation” means any deviation requested and/or granted from the strict application of the City’s laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City, including land use and zoning regulations of this title, resulting in a physical modification to the property which cannot be restored or terminated within ninety (90) days or less after the reasonable accommodation is terminated.

 

(j)     “Reasonable accommodation” means and includes both minor and major reasonable accommodations. (Added by Ord. 297 § 5, 2010)

 

83.010815 Notice to the Public of Availability of Accommodation Process.
The Department shall prominently display in the public areas of the Planning and Building and Safety Divisions at City Hall a notice advising those with disabilities or their representatives that they may request a reasonable accommodation in accordance with the procedures established in this article. City employees shall direct individuals to the display whenever they are requested to do so or reasonably believe that individuals with disabilities or their representatives may be entitled to a reasonable accommodation. (Added by Ord. 297 § 5, 2010)

 

83.010820 Requesting Reasonable Accommodation.
(a)    In order to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability, a disabled person or representative may request a reasonable accommodation, pursuant to this article, relating to the application of various land use, zoning, or building laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City.

 

(b)    If an individual or representative needs assistance in making a request for reasonable accommodation, or appealing a determination regarding reasonable accommodation, the Department will endeavor to provide the assistance necessary to ensure that the process is accessible to the applicant or representative. The applicant may be represented at all stages of the process by a person designated by the applicant as his or her representative.

 

(c)    A request for reasonable accommodation in laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures must be filed on an application form provided by the Department, shall be signed by the owner of the property, and shall include the following:

 

(1)    Documentation that the applicant is: (A) an individual with a disability, (B) applying on behalf of one or more individuals with a disability, or (C) a developer or provider of housing for one or more individuals with a disability;

 

(2)    The specific exception or modification to the Development Code provision, policy, or practice requested by the applicant;

 

(3)    Documentation that the requested accommodation is necessary to provide one or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy the residence;

 

(4)    If applicable, verification that the property is the primary residence of the person for whom reasonable accommodation is requested or will serve as the primary residence of persons with disabilities;

 

(5)    A filing fee in an amount as determined from time to time by resolution of the City Council, but not to exceed the reasonable estimated costs to the City in processing the application. (Added by Ord. 297 § 5, 2010)

 

83.010825 Decision on Application.
(a)    The Director shall have the authority to consider and act on any application for a minor reasonable accommodation. The Director shall issue a written determination within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of a completed application and may: (1) grant the accommodation request, (2) grant the accommodation request subject to specified nondiscriminatory conditions that comply with all Fair Housing Laws, (3) deny the request, or (4) may refer the matter to the Planning Commission, which shall render a decision on the application in the same manner as it considers an appeal. Notice of the Director’s hearing on the application shall be made in writing ten (10) days prior to the Director’s action on the application and shall be mailed first class and postage pre-paid to the applicant and adjacent property owner(s).

 

(b)    The Planning Commission shall have the authority to consider and act on any application for a major reasonable accommodation, or any minor reasonable accommodation request referred to it by the Director. The Planning Commission shall consider an application at the next reasonably available public meeting after submission of an application for reasonable accommodation, after the submission of any additional information required pursuant to this section or after referral from the Director, and shall issue a written determination within thirty (30) days after such public meeting. The Planning Commission may: (1) grant the accommodation request, (2) grant the accommodation request subject to specified nondiscriminatory conditions that comply with all Fair Housing Laws, or (3) deny the request. Notice of the Planning Commission meeting to review and act on the application shall be made in writing, ten (10) days prior to the meeting and shall be mailed first class and postage pre-paid to the applicant and adjacent property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the project boundary.

 

(c)    All written determinations shall give notice of the right to appeal in accordance with Article 6 of Chapter 1 of Division 3 of the Development Code, and the right to request reasonable accommodation on the appeals process, if necessary. The written determination and notice of right to appeal shall be sent to the applicant by first class mail.

 

(d)    If necessary to reach a determination on any request for reasonable accommodation, the Director may request further information from the applicant consistent with this article, specifying in detail what information is required. In the event a request for further information is made, the thirty (30) day period to issue a written determination shall be stayed until the applicant reasonably responds to the request.

 

(e)    If, based upon all of the evidence presented to the Director or the Planning Commission, the findings required in this article may reasonably be made, the Director, the Planning Commission or the City Council, as applicable, shall grant the requested reasonable accommodation.

 

(f)    A reasonable accommodation that is granted pursuant to this article shall not require the approval of any variance as to the reasonable accommodation.

 

(g)    The reasonable accommodation shall be subject to any reasonable conditions imposed on the approval that are consistent with the purposes of this article to further fair housing and with the purposes of Fair Housing Laws. Such conditions may generally include, but are not limited to the following restrictions:

 

(1)    That the reasonable accommodation shall only be applicable to particular individual(s);

 

(2)    That the reasonable accommodation shall only be applicable to the specific use for which application is made; and/or

 

(3)    That any change in use or circumstances which negates the basis for the granting of the approval shall render the reasonable accommodation null and void and/or revocable by the City. (Added by Ord. 297 § 5, 2010)

 

83.010830 Required Findings.
(a)    The following findings must be made in order to approve a request for reasonable accommodation:

 

(1)    The requested accommodation is requested by or on behalf of one or more individuals with a disability protected by the Fair Housing Laws.

 

(2)    The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to provide one or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy the dwelling in accordance with the Fair Housing Laws.

 

(3)    The requested reasonable accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City.

 

(4)    The requested accommodation will not require a fundamental alteration of the zoning or building laws, policies and/or procedures of the City.

 

(5)    The requested accommodation will not, under the specific facts of the case, result in a direct and significant threat to the health or safety of other individuals or substantial physical damage to the property of others.

 

(b)    The City may consider, but is not limited to, the following factors in determining whether the requested accommodation is necessary to provide one or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling:

 

(1)    Whether the requested accommodation will affirmatively enhance the quality of life of one or more individuals with a disability;

 

(2)    Whether the housing which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation will be occupied as the primary residence of one or more individual(s) protected by Fair Housing Laws;

 

(3)    Whether the individual(s) with a disability will be denied an equal opportunity to enjoy the housing type of their choice absent the accommodation;

 

(4)    In the case of a residential care facility, whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make facilities of a similar nature or operation economically viable in light of the particularities of the relevant market and market participants;

 

(5)    In the case of a residential care facility, whether the existing supply of a similar nature and operation in the community is sufficient to provide individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to live in a residential setting.

 

(c)    The City may consider, but is not limited to, the following factors in determining whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the City’s zoning program:

 

(1)    Whether the requested accommodation would fundamentally alter the character of the neighborhood;

 

(2)    Whether the accommodation would result in a substantial increase in traffic or insufficient parking;

 

(3)    Whether granting the requested accommodation would substantially undermine any express purpose of either the City’s General Plan or an applicable specific plan;

 

(4)    In the case of a residential care facility, whether the requested accommodation would create an institutionalized environment due to the number of and distance between facilities that are similar in nature or operation. (Added by Ord. 297 § 5, 2010)

 

83.010835 Waiver of Time Periods.
Notwithstanding any provisions in this article regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this article or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the City of the pending appeal. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the City, shall not constitute failure by the City to provide for prompt decisions on applications and shall not be a violation of any required time period set forth in this article. (Added by Ord. 297 § 5, 2010)

 

ARTICLE 9 INCLUSIONARY HOUSING PROCEDURES
83.010905 Purpose.
The provisions of this article establish standards and procedures that encourage the development of housing affordable to a range of households within certain income limits. The purpose of this article is to encourage the development and availability of such housing within the redevelopment project area and to alleviate deleterious impacts of the fifteen (15) percent requirement. (Added by Ord. 300 § 2, 2010)

 

83.010910 Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

 

(a)    “Adjusted for household size appropriate for the unit” means for a household of one person in the case of a studio unit, two persons in the case of a one-bedroom unit, three persons in the case of a two-bedroom unit, four persons in the case of a three-bedroom unit, and five persons in the case of a four-bedroom unit.

 

(b)    “Affordable housing cost” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 50052.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, as may be amended. With respect to rental units, “affordable housing cost” shall mean “affordable rent” as defined in Section 50053 of the California Health and Safety Code, as may be amended.

 

(c)    “Affordable housing production agreement” means a legally binding agreement between a developer and the City, in form and substance satisfactory to the director, setting forth those provisions necessary to ensure that the requirements of this article, whether through the provision of inclusionary units or through an alternative method, are satisfied and which provides for the following: (1) housing units are developed which are available to and occupied by eligible households in conformity with the designated proportions under recorded covenants enforceable by the City and the agency for the applicable required covenant period and with reporting conforming to the reporting requirements; and (2) the developer receives one or more density bonuses or concessions as provided by City pursuant to Government Code Section 65915.

 

(d)    “Designated proportions” means forty (40) percent very low-income households and sixty (60) percent low-income households or moderate-income households.

 

(e)    “Developer” means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or any entity or combination of entities, which seek City approvals for all or part of a residential development.

 

(f)    “Director” means the City’s Director of Community Development.

 

(g)    “Discretionary approval” means any entitlement or approval pursuant to Division 3 of Volume II of the Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, a use permit, variance, design approval, and subdivision map.

 

(h)    “Eligible households” mean very low-income households, low-income households and moderate-income households.

 

(i)     “Inclusionary housing plan” means the plan referenced in subsection (a) of Section 83.010935 and further described in the regulations, which sets forth the manner in which the requirements of this article will be implemented for a particular residential development.

 

(j)     “Inclusionary housing fund” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 83.010955.

 

(k)    “Inclusionary unit” means a dwelling unit that will be offered for rent or sale to a very low- or moderate-income household, at an affordable housing cost, pursuant to this article.

 

(l)     “Low-income household” means a lower income household as defined in Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, as may be amended.

 

(m)   “Low-income unit” means an inclusionary unit restricted to occupancy by a low-income household at an affordable housing cost.

 

(n)    “Market rate unit” means a unit in a residential development that is not an inclusionary unit.

 

(o)    “Moderate-income household” means a moderate income household as defined in subsection (g) of Section 50052.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, as may be amended.

 

(p)    “Moderate-income unit” means an inclusionary unit restricted to occupancy by a moderate-income household at an affordable housing cost.

 

(q)    “Redevelopment project area” means an area that has been designated and identified as a redevelopment project area in a redevelopment plan adopted pursuant to the California Community Redevelopment Law (California Health and Safety Code Section 33000 et seq.).

 

(r)    “Regulations” mean the regulations adopted by the City Council pursuant to Section 83.010950 for the implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this article.

 

(s)    “Reporting requirement” means those provisions of the CRL that provide for applicant and income qualifications and reporting, including, without limitation, Health and Safety Code Section 33418.

 

(t)     “Required covenant period” means forty-five (45) years for ownership units and fifty-five (55) years for rental units.

 

(u)    “Residential development” means the new construction of projects consisting of: (1) ten (10) or more single-family units for which a subdivision approval is required and/or obtained pursuant to this Code; or (2) ten (10) or more multi-family dwelling units.

 

(v)    “Total housing cost” means the total monthly or annual recurring expenses required of a household to obtain shelter. For a rental unit, the total housing cost includes the monthly rent payment and utilities. For an ownership unit, the total housing cost includes the mortgage payment (principal and interest), utilities, homeowner’s association dues, taxes, mortgage insurance and any other related assessments.

 

(w)   “Very low-income household” means a very low-income household as defined in Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code, as may be amended.

 

(x)    “Very low-income units” means an inclusionary unit restricted to occupancy by a very low-income household at an affordable housing cost. (Added by Ord. 300 § 2, 2010)

 

83.010915 Applicability.
This article shall only apply to a residential development located (wholly or partially) within the redevelopment project area. (Added by Ord. 300 § 2, 2010)

 

83.010920 Inclusionary Unit Requirement.
(a)    Fifteen (15) percent of all newly constructed dwelling units in a residential development shall be developed, offered to, and sold to very low- and moderate-income households, at an affordable housing cost, as follows: a minimum of six percent of all of the units shall be sold to very low-income households; the remaining nine percent shall be sold (or rented pursuant to Section 83.010920(d)) to moderate-income households.

 

(b)    In calculating the required number of inclusionary units, fractional units of .75 or above will be rounded-up to a whole unit if the residential development consists of ten (10) to twenty (20) units; fractional units of .50 or above will be rounded-up to a whole unit if the residential development consists of twenty-one (21) or more units. (Added by Ord. 300 § 2, 2010)

 

83.010925 Alternatives.
In lieu of providing the inclusionary units pursuant to Section 83.010920, the requirements of this article may be satisfied through one or more of the alternatives set forth in this section, subject to the procedures and standards set forth in the regulations.

 

(a)    In Lieu Fee. At the discretion of the developer (subject to approval of the City in the case of subsection (a)(5)), payment of a fee in lieu of all or some of the inclusionary units, as follows:

 

(1)    The amount of the fee shall be calculated using the fee schedule established by resolution of the City Council.

 

(2)    One-half of the in-lieu fee required by this subsection shall be paid (or a letter of credit posted) prior to issuance of a building permit for all or any part of the residential development. The remainder of the fee shall be paid before a certificate of occupancy is issued for any unit in the residential development.

 

(3)    The fees collected shall be deposited in the inclusionary housing fund.

 

(4)    The City Council may annually review the fee authorized by this section by resolution, and may, based on that review, adjust the fee amount. For any annual period during which the City Council does not review the fee authorized by this section, fee amounts shall be adjusted once by the Director based on the annual increase in the Construction Cost Index for the Los Angeles region.

 

(5)    In the event the developer proposes to convey land to the City to fulfill the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, such land shall be conveyed to the City (or, if so designated by the City, the agency) prior to the issuance of a building permit for all or any part of the residential development. The value of the land shall be determined by the City based upon the land as vacant, unentitled property as determined by an appraiser, selected and retained by the City for such purpose. Only land located within the redevelopment project area will be eligible. In all cases, the City shall have discretion whether or not to accept land in satisfaction of the provisions of subsection (a). The Director may consider such factors as he/she deem relevant, including without limitation, slope, soils conditions, infrastructure, condition of title, readiness of the land for development and the availability or lack of funding of the City or the agency to effect development of affordable dwelling units on such land. The City’s costs in connection with any such approval shall be borne by the developer, but the hiring of the appraiser will be undertaken by the City.

 

(b)    Development Pursuant to Certain Agreements. Upon application by the developer and at the discretion of the Director, the developer may satisfy the requirement of providing inclusionary units pursuant to Section 83.010920, in whole or in part, by entering into an affordable housing production agreement with the City and the agency. (Added by Ord. 300 § 2, 2010)

 

83.010930 Exemptions.
The following residential developments are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

 

(a)    Residential developments that obtain a variance, conditional use permit, or subdivision approval from the City prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which obtain a building permit pursuant to that discretionary approval within one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and which obtain a certificate of occupancy pursuant to that same discretionary approval.

 

(b)    Residential developments that would be exempt from this article pursuant to State law, including, but not limited to, those for which the City enters into a development agreement. (Added by Ord. 300 § 2, 2010)

 

83.010935 Procedures.
(a)    At the times, and in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in the regulations, developers shall:

 

(1)    Submit an inclusionary housing plan for approval by the Director, setting forth in detail the manner in which the provisions of this article will be implemented for the proposed residential development;

 

(2)    Execute and cause to be recorded a recordable instrument prepared by the City as part of an affordable housing production agreement (unless the developer is complying with this chapter pursuant to subsection (a) (in lieu fee) of Section 83.010920).

 

(b)    No discretionary approval shall be issued for all or any portion of a residential development subject to this article until the developer has submitted an inclusionary housing plan and such inclusionary housing plan has been approved by the City.

 

(c)    No building permit shall be issued for all or any portion of a residential development subject to this article unless the Director has approved the inclusionary housing plan, and the affordable housing production agreement executed by City, agency and developer and a recordable instrument thereunder.

 

(d)    No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for all or any portion of a residential development subject to this article unless the approved inclusionary housing plan has been fully implemented. (Added by Ord. 300 § 2, 2010)

 

83.010940 Standards.
(a)    All inclusionary units shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the residential development; shall be proportional, in number, bedroom size and location, to the market rate units; and shall be comparable with the market rate units in terms of the base design, appearance, materials and finished quality.

 

(b)    All inclusionary units in a residential development shall be constructed concurrently with or prior to the construction of the market rate units. In the event the City approves a phased project, the inclusionary units required by this article shall be provided within each phase of the residential development.

 

(c)    Inclusionary units shall be reserved for very low-, low- and moderate-income households at the ratios established pursuant to Section 83.010920, and shall be provided at the applicable affordable housing cost.

 

(1)    An inclusionary unit that is for rent shall remain reserved for the target income level group at the applicable affordable housing cost for a minimum of fifty-five (55) years.

 

(2)    An inclusionary unit that is for sale shall remain reserved for the target income level group at the applicable affordable housing cost for a minimum of forty-five (45) years.

 

(d)    Notwithstanding subsection (c)(2) of this section, inclusionary units for sale may be sold to an above moderate-income purchaser in accordance with procedures set forth in the regulations, provided that the sale shall result in a recapture by the City or its designee of a financial interest in such unit equal to: (1) the difference between the initial affordable sales price and the appraised value at the time of the initial sale; and (2) a proportionate share of any appreciation. (Added by Ord. 300 § 2, 2010)

 

83.010945 Enforcement.
(a)    The provisions of this article shall apply to all developers and their agents, successors and assigns proposing a residential development within the redevelopment project area. All inclusionary units shall be rented or sold according to the terms of this article and the regulations adopted pursuant to Section 83.010950.

 

(b)    Any individual who sells or rents an inclusionary unit in violation of the provisions of this article shall be required to forfeit all monetary amounts so obtained. Except to the extent, if any, otherwise provided under an affordable housing production agreement, recovered funds shall be deposited into the inclusionary housing fund.

 

(c)    The City may institute any appropriate legal actions or proceedings necessary to ensure compliance with this article, including, but not limited to: (1) actions to revoke, deny or suspend any permit, including a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or discretionary approval; and (2) actions for injunctive relief or damages.

 

(d)    In any action to enforce this article or an affordable housing production agreement recorded hereunder, the City shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs. (Added by Ord. 300 § 2, 2010)

 

83.010950 Regulations.
The City Council shall by resolution establish regulations for the implementation of this article. Such regulations may be amended at any time by resolution of the City Council. (Added by Ord. 300 § 2, 2010)

 

83.010955 Inclusionary Housing Fund.
There is hereby established a separate fund of the City, to be known as the inclusionary housing fund. All monies collected pursuant to subsection (a) of Section 83.010925, subsection (d) of Section 83.010940, or Section 83.010945 shall be deposited in the inclusionary housing fund. (Added by Ord. 300 § 2, 2010)

 

83.010960 Administrative Fees.
The City Council may by resolution establish reasonable fees and deposits for the administration of this article. (Added by Ord. 300 § 2, 2010)

 

83.010965 [Reserved]
(Added by Ord. 300 § 2, 2010)

 

83.010970 Taking Determination.
(a)    Commencing upon the approval or disapproval of the inclusionary housing plan by the Director pursuant to the regulations, and within ten (10) days thereafter, a developer may request a determination that the requirements of this article, taken together with the inclusionary incentives, as applied to the residential development, would legally constitute a taking of property of the residential development without just compensation under the California or Federal Constitutions. The developer has the burden of providing economic information and other evidence necessary to establish that application of the provisions of this article to the residential development would constitute a taking of the property of the proposed residential development without just compensation. The Director shall make the determination, which may be appealed in the manner and within the time set forth in Section 83.010975, except that the City Council shall serve as the review body.

 

(b)    In making the taking recommendation or determination, the decision maker shall assume each of the following:

 

(1)    Application of the inclusionary housing requirement to the residential development;

 

(2)    Application of density bonuses and other incentives available in connection with the development of affordable units within the residential development; and

 

(3)    External funding where reasonably likely to occur.

 

(c)    If it is determined that the application of the provisions of this article would be a taking, the inclusionary housing plan shall be modified to reduce the obligations in the inclusionary housing component to the extent and only to the extent necessary to avoid a taking. If it is determined no taking would occur through application of this article to the residential development, the requirements of this article remain applicable. (Added by Ord. 300 § 2, 2010)

 

83.010975 Appeal.
Within ten (10) calendar days after the date of any decision rendered pursuant to this article, an appeal may be filed pursuant to Section 83.010605 of this code. The appellant shall follow the appeal procedures set forth in Sections 83.010610 and 83.010630 of this code. (Added by Ord. 300 § 2, 2010)

 

 

 

CHAPTER 2 POLICY DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES
ARTICLE 1 GENERAL PLAN LAND USE DISTRICT CHANGES
83.020105 Procedures.
(a)    Decisions to change the classification of land from one adopted land use district to another land use district shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and acted upon by the City Council. However, a recommendation for denial by the Planning Commission shall terminate any application for a change in district classification unless it is appealed in accordance with the provisions of this Code. Amendments to land use districts constitute an amendment of the City General Plan and shall be adopted by resolution and ordinance.

 

(b)    Procedure

Public Hearing

 

(c)    Reviewing Authority

City Council with Planning Commission recommendation

 

83.020110 Findings.
Prior to approving or recommending approval of a General Plan land use district change, the Planning Agency shall find that the following are true.

 

(a)    The proposed land use district change is in the public interest, there will be a community benefit, and other existing and permitted uses will not be compromised.

 

 

(b)    The proposed land use district change is consistent with the goals and policies of the General Plan and will provide a reasonable and logical extension of the existing land use pattern in the surrounding area.

 

(c)    The proposed land use district change does not conflict with provisions of this Code or any applicable Specific Plan.

 

(d)    The proposed land use district change will not have a substantial adverse effect on surrounding property.

 

(e)    The proposed land use district change has been referred to the public water purveyor, and pursuant to Governmental Code Section 65958.1, an adequate water supply exists or is planned that will serve the proposed project.

 

ARTICLE 2 DEVELOPMENT CODE AMENDMENT
83.020205 Procedures.
(a)    Amendments to the Development Code shall be reviewed and acted upon in conformance with the laws of the State of California.

 

(b)    Decisions to adopt changes to the Development Code shall be reviewed at a Public Hearing by the Planning Commission and acted upon at a Public Hearing by the City Council.

 

(c)    Procedure

Public Hearing

 

(d)    Reviewing Authority

City Council with Planning Commission recommendation

 

83.020210 Findings.
Prior to approving or recommending approval of a Development Code Amendment, the Planning Agency shall find that the proposed ordinance is consistent with the General Plan and its policies.

 

ARTICLE 3 SPECIFIC PLAN ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT
83.020305 Procedures.
(a)    Decisions to adopt or amend a Specific Plan shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and acted upon by the City Council.

 

(b)    A Specific Plan shall be prepared, adopted, and amended in the same manner as a General Plan, except that a Specific Plan shall be adopted by ordinance and may be amended as often as deemed necessary by the City Council. A Specific Plan shall be repealed in the same manner as it is required to be amended.

 

(c)    Procedure

Public Hearing

 

(d)    Reviewing Authority

City Council with Planning Commission recommendation

 

83.020310 Findings.
Prior to taking an action to adopt or amend a Specific Plan, the Planning Agency shall find that the proposed Specific Plan or amendment satisfies all of the following conditions.

 

(a)    Is consistent with the General Plan

 

(b)    Specifies through text and/or diagrams the distribution, location, and extent of the uses of land, including open space, within the area covered by the plan

 

(c)    Specifies through text and/or diagrams the proposed distribution, location, and extent and intensity of major components of public and private transportation, sewage, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy, and other essential facilities proposed to be located within the area covered by the plan and needed to support the land uses described in the plan

 

(d)    Specifies through text and/or diagrams the standards and criteria by which development will proceed and standards for the conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources, where applicable

 

(e)    Specifies a program of implementation measures including regulations, programs, public works project, and financing measures necessary to carry out Findings (b), (c) and (d) above

 

(f)    Includes a statement of the relationship of the Specific Plan to the General Plan, Development Code, and any applicable plan

 

(g)    Addresses any other subjects which are necessary for implementation of the General Plan

 

83.020315 Consistency with the Specific Plan.
No local public works projects may be approved, no land use application may be approved, and no Specific Plan land use designation may be amended within an area covered by a Specific Plan unless it is consistent with the adopted Specific Plan.

 

83.020320 Environmental Review Requirements.
(a)    Residential development projects, including any subdivision or land use district change, that are consistent with a Specific Plan for which an Environmental Impact Report has been certified after January 1, 1980, are exempt from the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), provided they meet the criteria for exemption specified in Section 65457 of the California Government Code.

 

(b)    This subsection does not supersede, but provides an alternative procedure to Section 21080.7 of the California Public Resources Code.

 

ARTICLE 4 AGRICULTURAL PRESERVES/LAND CONSERVATION CONTRACT ACTIONS
83.020405 Procedures.
(a)    This article makes provisions to establish, expand, disestablish, or reduce an Agricultural Preserve boundary and/or establish, non-renew, or cancel a Land Conservation Contract in conformance with the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 for the preservation and management of Agricultural lands. All the activities listed above require a public hearing by both the Planning Commission and the City Council except the establishment and the non-renewal by the City of a Land Conservation Contract, which shall be heard by the Council without any hearing before the Planning Commission.

 

(b)    Procedure

Public Hearing

 

(c)    Reviewing Authority

City Council with Planning Commission recommendation

 

(d)    Prior to action on a request for cancellation of a Land Conservation Contract, the land owner must pay a cancellation fee equal to 12.5% of the cancellation value of the land, plus any deferred tax amount.

 

(e)    Prior to cancellation of a Land Conservation Contract the reviewing authority shall make one of the following findings.

 

(1)    That the cancellation is consistent with the purposes of the Williamson Act

 

(2)    That the cancellation is in the public interest

 

83.020410 Findings.
(a)    Cancellation of a contract shall be consistent with the purposes of the Williamson Act only if the City Council makes all of the following findings.

 

(1)    That the cancellation is for land on which a notice of nonrenewal has been served pursuant to Section 51245 of the California Government Code

 

 

 

(2)    That the cancellation is not likely to result in the removal of adjacent lands from agricultural use

 

(3)    That the cancellation is for an alternative use which is consistent with the applicable provisions of the City’s General Plan

 

(4)    The cancellation will not result in discontinuous patterns of urban development

 

(5)    That there is no proximate noncontracted land which is both available and suitable for the use to which it is proposed the contracted land be put, or that development of the contracted land would provide more contiguous patterns of urban development than development of proximate noncontracted land

 

(b)    Cancellation of a contract shall be in the public interest only if the City Council makes both of the following findings.

 

(1)    That other public concerns substantially outweigh the objectives of the Williamson Act

 

(2)    That there is no proximate noncontracted land which is both available and suitable for the use to which it is proposed the contracted land be put, or that development of the contracted land would provide more contiguous patterns of urban development than development of proximate noncontracted land

 

 

CHAPTER 3 LAND USE DESIGN PROCEDURES
ARTICLE 1 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
83.030105 Conditional Use Permit Review Criteria.
A Conditional Use Permit or alternate review procedure as allowed by this section shall be required for the construction, alteration, or expansion of every use that is allowed by a land use district subject to a Conditional Use Permit.

 

(a)    A Land Use Compliance Review shall be required to authorize an expansion or change of use which would require additional parking or have an occupant load or more than 30, or result in the development of four (4) or fewer multi-family units.

 

(b)    A Land Use Compliance Review shall be required to authorize the expansion, alteration, or disturbance of land associated with an existing commercial, industrial, institutional, or multiple residential use which cumulatively involves no more than 25% or 500 square feet (whichever is greater) of the ground area covered by the land use or square footage of the original permitted structure.

 

(c)    A Land Use Compliance Review shall be required when an existing publicly owned institutional structure which is less than 10,000 square feet in area is altered or expanded by no more than 5,000 square feet.

 

(d)    A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for all new development and for the expansion, alteration, or any disturbance of land associated with an existing commercial, industrial, institutional, or multiple residential use which involves at least 500 square feet and is greater than 25% of the ground area covered by the land use or square footage of the original permitted structure. Cumulative expansions which meet these criteria also require a Conditional Use Permit.

 

(e)    A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for the conversion of non-conforming structures from one primary land use classification to another (e.g., remodeling of a residential structure for retail commercial or industrial use).

 

(f)    A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for those locations that propose to install more than ten (10) mechanical play devices, or to expand an existing amusement arcade, and the proposed location shall be reviewed to insure that the use is compatible with adjacent uses and that its location at the site proposed will not be detrimental to surrounding uses.

 

(g)    A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for the establishment of any type of land use that proposes to house between two (2) to six (6) parolees. In addition, a new Conditional Use Permit shall be required for the following actions:

 

(1)    The operation of an existing parolee home (unless it was established prior to the effective date of this ordinance).

 

(2)    Any changes in the operating conditions from what was originally imposed by the City, including, but not limited to, the number of parolees or other modifications to the conditions of approval.

 

(3)    Any changes in the operating conditions of an existing parolee home that was lawfully established prior to the effective date of this ordinance.

 

(4)    The sale, transfer, or new lease agreement of a parolee home to another individual or entity.

 

(5)    The re-establishment of an existing parolee home that has not been occupied by parolees for a consecutive period of thirty (30) days. (Amended by Ord. 142 §§ 1(C), 1995: Ord. 210 § 5, 2001; Ord. 247 § 2, 2005)

 

83.030110 Types of Conditional Use Permit Authorizations.
(a)    Conditional Use Permit Review

(b)    Alterations to Nonconforming Uses

(c)    Agricultural Support Service

(d)    Surface Mining and Reclamation Plans

 

83.030115 Procedures.
Conditional Use Permits are intended to provide an opportunity to review the location, design and manner of development of land uses prior to their implementation. Uses subject to Conditional Use Permits are established through Public Hearing or Administrative Review procedures. Once established minor expansions and adjustments to uses that are subject to a Conditional Use Permit may be accommodated through the Land Use Compliance Review process.

 

83.030120 Conditional Use Permit Review.
(a)    Procedure:

Public Hearing

 

(b)    Reviewing Authority:

Planning Commission

 

(c)    Findings

Prior to approving an application for a Conditional Use Permit, the reviewing authority shall find and justify that all of the following are true.

 

(1)    The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the proposed use and all yards, open spaces, setbacks, walls and fences, parking areas, loading areas, landscaping, and other features pertaining to the application.

 

(2)    The site for the proposed use has adequate access, meaning that the site design incorporates street and highway limitations.

 

(3)    The proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on abutting property or the permitted use thereof, meaning that the use will not generate excessive noise, vibration, traffic, or other disturbance. In addition, the use will not substantially interfere with the present or future ability to use solar energy systems.

 

(4)    The proposed use is consistent with the goals, policies, standards, and maps of the General Plan and any applicable plan.

 

(5)    The lawful conditions stated in the approval are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

 

 

 

(6)    The design of the site has considered the potential for the use of solar energy systems and passive or natural heating and cooling opportunities. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 6, 2001)

 

83.030125 Alteration to Nonconforming Uses.
(a)    Procedure:

Public Hearing

 

(b)    Reviewing Authority:

Planning Commission

 

(c)    An existing nonconforming use may be altered to accommodate a new structure or accessory use, except where it is an existing nonconforming use of land with no structure thereon.

 

(d)    Findings

Before any modification in a nonconforming use may be granted, it shall be found that all of the following conditions shall exist in reference to the alteration being considered.

 

(1)    The remaining normal life of the existing nonconforming use shall be determined pursuant to provisions specified in this Code prior to consideration of the proposed alteration if in a residential district.

 

(2)    The proposed alteration shall not prolong the normal life of the existing nonconforming use.

 

(3)    The alteration of the existing nonconforming use shall not be detrimental to or prevent the attainment of objectives, policies, general land use, and programs specified in the City’s General Plan.

 

(4)    The granting of permission to alter the nonconforming use shall not be substantially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and district in which the use is located.

 

(5)    The alteration shall not change the primary use of the land or increase the intensity of that use.

 

(6)    The existing nonconforming use shall comply with all other existing City regulations including, but not limited to, those applicable to and enforced by the County Department of Environmental Health Services, Office of Building and Safety, and the County Sheriff’s Department.

 

(7)    Any alteration required by governmental or court action shall be exempt from these conditions. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 8, 2001)

 

83.030130 Design Conditional Use Permit.
Any Conditional Use Permit submittal which is determined by the Community Development Director to warrant more detailed review may be forwarded to the Development Review Committee (DRC) for review and recommendation prior to action by the reviewing authority.

 

83.030135 Agricultural Support Service.
When agricultural support services are allowed subject to a Conditional Use Permit, the following findings shall be made prior to approval of the Conditional Use Permit.

 

(a)    The proposed use is of an appropriate size and scale that will not create a conflict with existing or planned uses of adjacent properties.

 

(b)    The proposed use is incidental and subordinate to existing agricultural uses located within the general vicinity.

 

(c)    The methods of operation are compatible with existing and planned uses of adjacent properties.

 

(d)    The methods of solid waste, sewage, and wastewater disposal are safe, practical, and will not adversely affect surrounding properties and underground water supplies.

 

 

(e)    The approval of the proposed use will not serve to detract from the agricultural character of the area.

 

(f)    The proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on the service support capacity of the area’s infrastructure, including groundwater supply.

 

83.030140 Surface Mining and Reclamation.
State law required a public hearing review for the Surface Mining and Reclamation process. The Mining and Land Reclamation Plan Application combines a Conditional Use Permit and Reclamation Plan into one application.

 

83.030145 Hazardous Waste Facilities.
(a)    To apply for a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) for a Hazardous Waste Facility, a General Plan Amendment Application must be filed concurrently with the CUP, as a Hazardous Waste Overlay District must be applied to the facility site.

 

(b)    For a complete discussion of the review procedures required for a specified hazardous waste facility, refer to Section 5.3.3 and Table 5-4 of Chapter 5 of the Yucaipa Hazardous Waste Management Plan.

 

 

ARTICLE 2 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
83.030205 Purpose.
The planned development process is intended to facilitate development of properties where greater flexibility in design is desired to provide a more efficient use of land than would be possible through the strict application of land use district regulations. This process is also intended to serve as an alternative site planning process that encourages the more creative and imaginative planning of mixed use, multiphased residential, commercial, or industrial developments within the framework of a single cohesive development plan.

 

83.030210 Reviewing Authority.
The Planning Commission shall review and the City Council shall act upon all initial applications for preliminary development plans and significant revisions to previously approved preliminary development plans for planned developments. However, a recommendation for denial by the Planning Commission shall terminate any application for a planned development, unless it is appealed in accordance with the provisions of this Code. The Planning Commission shall review and act upon all applications for final development plans for planned developments. The Development Review Committee shall review all applications for preliminary or final development plans prior to their review by the Planning Commission or City Council.

 

83.030220 Findings.
Prior to approving a request for a planned development, the reviewing authority shall find that all of the following are true.

 

(a)    The proposed development is consistent with the City’s General Plan and any other applicable plan.

 

(b)    The physical characteristics of the site have been adequately assessed and the site for the proposed development is adequate in size and shape to accommodate said use and all yards, open spaces, setbacks, walls and fences, parking areas, loading areas, landscaping, and other features required.

 

(c)    The site for the proposed development has adequate access, meaning that the site design and development plan conditions consider the limitations of existing streets and highways and provide improvements to accommodate the anticipated requirements of the proposed development.

 

(d)    Adequate public services and facilities exist, or will be provided in accordance with the conditions of development plan approval, to serve the proposed development, and the approval of the proposed development will not result in a reduction of such public services to properties in the vicinity to be a detriment to public health, safety, and welfare.

 

(e)    The proposed development, as conditioned, will not have a substantial adverse effect on surrounding property or the permitted use thereof and will be compatible with the existing and planned land use character of the surrounding area.

 

(f)    The improvements required per the conditions of development plan approval and the manner of development adequately address all natural and manmade hazards associated with the proposed development and the project site including, but not limited to, flood, seismic, fire, and slope hazards.

 

(g)    The proposed development carries out the intent of the planned development provisions by providing a more efficient use of the land and an excellence of design greater than that which would be achieved through the application of conventional development standards.

 

(h)    If the development proposes to intermix residential and commercial uses, whether done in a vertical or a horizontal manner, the residential use is designed in such a way that it is buffered from the commercial use and is provided sufficient amenities to create a comfortable and healthy residential environment and to provide a positive quality of life for the residents. Such amenities may include, but are not limited to, private open space, private or separated entrances, landscaping, etc.

 

83.030225 Concurrent Subdivision Applications.
Applications for a planned development shall not constitute an application for subdivision. If a subdivision of land is proposed in conjunction with a planned development project, separate application, review, and findings shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this Code.

 

In the event a tentative subdivision map application is concurrently filed with a planned development application, expiration of an approved or conditionally approved planned development site plan shall terminate all proceedings or any associated land use application. No final subdivision map or parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within such a planned development site plan shall be filed for record without first processing a new planned development site plan.

 

83.030230 Development Plans.
A detailed site plan or development plan shall be submitted with all planned development proposals. All such proposed development plans shall contain sufficient detail to depict the manner in which the proposed development complies with the provisions of this article and that of Division 8 of this Code.

 

Planned development requests for mixed use projects or projects with more than 100 dwelling units shall be submitted in two stages. The first stage shall be referred to as a Preliminary Development Plan and the second stage shall be referred to as a Final Development Plan. Preliminary Development Plans and Final Development Plans are defined as follows.

 

(a)    Preliminary Development Plan

A Preliminary Development Plan (PDP) functions as a development suitability analysis and a comprehensive plan of the proposed development. The PDP should accomplish the following.

 

(1)    Identify and quantify the constraints and opportunities for development as follows.

 

(A)   The physical characteristics of the site

 

(B)   Available public services and facilities

 

(C)   The capacity of the existing circulation system

 

(D)   The existing and planned land use of adjacent properties

 

(2)    Establish a list of specific limits, parameters, and planning objectives to guide development based on the identified development constraints and opportunities.

 

(3)    Describe one or more potential development schemes derived from the limits, parameters, and planning objectives controlling the development. Each proposed development scheme shall describe the following.

 

(A)   Propose land uses and approximate distribution of such land uses

 

(B)   Proposed density of residential uses

 

(C)   Estimated population

 

(D)   Estimated service demands

 

(E)   The anticipated impact on the existing circulation system

 

(F)    The anticipated impact on adjacent properties

 

(G)   The relationship of the plan to the various elements of the City’s General Plan

 

(H)   The anticipated types of commercial and industrial uses

 

(4)    Set forth in the form of a written text, maps and/or diagrams, a detailed plan of development based upon the application of the established limits, parameters, and planning objectives controlling development. Said plan shall describe in detail the following.

 

(A)   Proposed land uses and building types, the functional arrangement of such uses and building types and relationship to site, site grading, circulation, lighting, paving, parking, screening, setbacks, recreation and open space areas, and adjacent properties

 

(B)   How the established limits, parameters, and planning objectives have been adhered to

 

(C)   The level of public services and facilities required by the proposed development and the program for providing, operating, and maintaining such services and facilities

 

(D)   Access and circulation requirements

 

(E)   Known manmade and natural hazards and methods for mitigation of such hazards

 

(F)    Significant natural features and areas to be retained for common open space and provisions for the preservation, conservation, utilization, and maintenance of such areas

 

(G)   How the plan conforms to the objectives of the City’s General Plan and the planned development provisions of this Code

 

 

 

(b)    Final Development Plan

The Final Development Plan is a detailed site plan which sets forth the location and dimensions of all uses and structures in sufficient detail to permit recordation and preparation of construction drawings.

 

The Final Development Plan shall comply with all approved Preliminary Development Plans. If no such Preliminary Development Plan has been approved, the Final Development Plan shall also meet the requirements for Preliminary Development Plans for the project site.

 

(c)    Application Procedures For Staged Development

 

(1)    An applicant may file the Preliminary with the Final Development Plan, with the consent of the Community Development Director.

 

(2)    An application for a Preliminary Development Plan shall encompass all the land included within the planned development. A Final Development Plan may be for a portion of the land included within the planned development or a phase thereof, provided that the following conditions are met.

 

(A)   Each phase shall function as a complete and separate development from the remaining phase.

 

(B)   Any densities proposed or open space areas provided within the subject phase shall not result from a transfer of density from adjoining phases.

 

(d)    Preapplication Conference

Prior to the formal submission of a planned development application, the applicant shall meet with the Development Review Committee in order to acquaint the applicant with the procedural requirements of the planned development provisions of this Code and to discuss the general acceptability of the plan and its compatibility with applicable policies, issues, and development regulations. The preapplication conference shall be required for mixed use, staged development plans only.

 

(e)    Conformance of Plans

Each final development plan shall substantially conform to the preliminary development plan.

 

 

ARTICLE 3 LAND USE COMPLIANCE REVIEW
83.030305 Procedures.
(a)    A Land Use Compliance Review application is required to accomplish the following:

 

(1)    A Land Use Compliance Review shall be required to authorize an expansion or change of use which would require additional parking or have an occupant load of more than thirty (30), or result in the development of four (4) or fewer multi-family units.

 

(2)    A Land Use Compliance Review shall be required to authorize the expansion, alteration, or disturbance of land associated with an existing commercial, industrial, institutional, or multiple residential use which cumulatively involves no more than twenty-five percent (25%) or five hundred (500) square feet (whichever is greater) of the ground area covered by the land use or square footage of the original permitted structure.

 

(3)    A Land Use Compliance Review shall be required when an existing publicly owned institutional structure which is less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area is altered or expanded by no more than five thousand (5,000) square feet.

 

(4)    Authorize the construction or addition of new signs.

 

(5)    Authorize the construction of a secondary dwelling unit as defined by, and subject to the standards set forth in, Section 84.0510(a)(1).

 

(6)    Authorize the construction of up to four (4) multi-family dwelling units.

 

(7)    Authorize the conversion of a residential structure from a residential land use to an office land use. (Conversion to a retail commercial land use requires a Conditional Use Permit.)

 

(8)    Authorizes the construction of multiple residential dwelling units in high density multiple residential (RM-24) districts.

 

(9)    Authorize the construction of an accessory dwelling unit as defined by, and subject to the standards set forth in, Section 84.0570.

 

(b)    The Land Use Compliance Review applies to developments that were subject to a Conditional Use Permit authorization or those uses that were legally established prior to establishment of regulations that required Conditional Use Permit authorizations or similar authorizations.

 

(c)    Procedure

Staff Review without Notice

 

(d)    Reviewing Authority

Community Development Director (Amended by Ord. 204 § 3, 2001; Ord. 210 § 9, 2001; Ord. 298 § 5, 2010; Ord. 359 §§ 3, 4, 2017)

 

 

ARTICLE 4 PLANNING USE PERMIT
83.030405 Purpose.
The purpose of the Planning Use Permit process is to provide a streamlined review mechanism for single purpose, small-scale development within the City of Yucaipa.

 

83.030410 Procedures.
(a)    The Planning Use Permit procedure may be used in lieu of a Conditional Use Permit that is otherwise required by this Code, provided that the proposal complies with the qualification criteria for Planning Use Permit review.

 

(b)    Planning Use Permit Review Criteria

 

(1)    The proposed project must be categorically exempt from California Environmental Quality Act.

 

(2)    The proposed project is adjacent to one or more abutting properties in the same land use district which are developed or is proposed to serve the needs of the travelling public or rural residents.

 

(3)    There is existing supportive infrastructure (roads, water, sewer or septic, etc.) to accommodate the proposed use that is consistent with the designated improvement level.

 

(4)    The proposed project cannot be dependent upon the concurrent filing of any other land use application.

 

(5)    The project must be planned for immediate development. Phased-development projects will not be considered for Planning Use Permit.

 

If the proposed project fails to satisfy any of the above listed criteria, it will be subject to a Conditional Use Permit.

 

 

(c)    The Planning Use Permit will provide an expedited review for small-scale development through the utilization of the review criteria and concurrent project review (plot, construction, and improvement plans) by the Offices of Planning, Building and Safety, and Engineering and the use of standardized conditions of project approval.

 

(d)    The Community Development Director may determine that a proposed project requires a Conditional Use Permit review based on a determination that the project has generated sufficient controversy or concern to require a more detailed review.

 

(e)    Procedure:

Public Hearing

 

(f)    Reviewing Authority:

Planning Commission

 

(g)    Findings

Prior to approving an application for a Planning Use Permit, the reviewing authority shall find the following.

 

(1)    The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the proposed use and all yards, open spaces, setbacks, walls and fences, parking areas, loading areas, landscaping, and other required features.

 

(2)    The site for the proposed use has adequate access, meaning that the site design incorporates street and highway limitations.

 

(3)    The proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on abutting property or the permitted use thereof, meaning that the use will not generate excessive noise, vibration, traffic, or other disturbance. In addition, the use will not substantially interfere with the present or future ability to use solar energy systems.

 

(4)    The proposed use is consistent with the goals, policies, standards, and maps of the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan.

 

(5)    The lawful conditions stated in the approval are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

 

(6)    The design of the site has considered the potential for the use of solar energy systems and passive or natural heating and cooling opportunities. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 10, 2001)

 

 

ARTICLE 5 CERTIFICATE OF LAND USE COMPLIANCE
83.030505 Procedures.
(a)    The Certificate of Land Use Compliance is used to certify the legal use of property, establish termination dates for nonconforming uses, disclose in public record conditions of operation, and any other long term conditions or restrictions that apply to the subject use or property.

 

(b)    Filing Criteria

The Planning Agency may require the filing of a Certificate of Land Use Compliance as a condition of approval of any land use application. The certificate shall reflect the information required by the Planning Agency and acknowledged by the applicant. The Planning Agency shall cause the certificate to be filed for record with the County Recorder.

 

(c)    Content

 

(1)    The certificate shall identify the real property involved.

 

(2)    The certificate shall certify that a given use is legally authorized by the City and identify any land use application that was filed to authorize the development.

 

(3)    The certificate shall list the conditions for the development and operation of a use on the site, including any required time limits for the termination of nonconforming uses or structures.

 

(d)    Procedure

Staff Review without Notice

 

(e)    Reviewing Authority

Community Development Director

 

 

ARTICLE 6 SPECIAL USE PERMIT
83.030605 Procedures.
(a)    The Community Development Director shall review and act upon requests for Special Use Permits subject to the findings and conditions for each use type as cited within the section of this Code that provides for said use.

 

(b)    Procedure

Staff Review with Notice

 

(c)    Reviewing Authority

Community Development Director

 

(d)    When necessary, the Community Development Director may hold an advertised meeting to consider evidence and take testimony prior to acting upon an application for a Special use Permit.

 

 

ARTICLE 7 TEMPORARY USE PERMIT
83.030705 Procedures.
(a)    The Community Development Director or Building Official shall review and act upon all requests for Temporary Use Permits (TUP) or extensions thereof, subject to the findings and conditions specified for each use by the section of this Code that provides for said use.

 

(b)    Temporary Use Permits shall be first issued for a period of time not to exceed twenty-four (24) months. Extensions to such permits may be granted for additional periods of time, each of which shall not exceed twenty-four (24) months. A Temporary Use Permit that is extended shall comply with the procedures, findings, and conditions specified by this Code.

 

(1)    A Temporary Use Permit shall not be extended by any reviewing authority for any period of time to exceed ten (10) years after the date the Temporary Use Permit was first issued.

 

(2)    The Community Development Director or Building Official may approve such permits or extensions of such permits for shorter periods of time and/or subject to conditions where required by this chapter or where it is determined reasonable and necessary to do so.

 

(3)    Prior to issuing a Temporary Use Permit, extension or renewal for the last allowed period of time (normally between the eighth and tenth such years), the permittee shall submit and obtain approval from the Community Development Director or Building Official of a plan of action to either remove or replace the subject temporary use with a legally established permanent use.

 

(4)    A temporary use or structure which does not have a valid and current permit is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, subject to the enforcement provisions of this Code and other applicable laws.

 

(5)    A change of ownership or operator of a use or structure subject to a Temporary Use Permit or a change of structure or modification of the structure or use allowed on a parcel subject to a Temporary Use Permit shall not affect the time periods established by this chapter to allow such temporary uses or structures.

 

(6)    When the last period of time allowed by this chapter has lapsed, the Temporary Use Permit and any extension thereof shall be considered void. A temporary use or structure that was allowed on a subject parcel previously by a Temporary Use Permit may not be reinstated by a new Temporary Use Permit for any time period beyond the final period of time that would have been allowed by the original Temporary Use Permit.

 

(c)    Procedure

Staff Review without Notice

 

(d)    Reviewing Authority

Community Development Director or Building Official

 

(e)    Cancellation of a Temporary Use Permit

Noncompliance with the conditions set forth in approving the permit shall be grounds for the reviewing authority to cancel and void any Temporary Use Permit. The reviewing authority shall give notice of such an action to the permittee. The permittee may appeal such a decision by filing an appeal as allowed and specified in this chapter. (Amended by Ord. 186 §§ 8—9, 1998; Ord. 210 § 11, 2001)

 

ARTICLE 8 SIGN LOCATION PLAN
83.030805 Procedures.
(a)    The Community Development Director shall review and act upon requests for amendments to an approved Sign Location Plan and for amendments thereof.

 

(b)    Procedure

Staff Review without Notice

 

(c)    Findings

Prior to acting upon a request for a subdivision Sign Location Plan, the reviewing authority shall find that all of the following are true.

 

(1)    Signs constructed in accordance with the proposed Sign Location Plan will be compatible with the character of the community or communities in which the sign structures are to be located.

 

(2)    The construction of sign structures in accordance with the proposed Sign Location Plan will not have an adverse affect upon properties adjoining the proposed sign location.

 

(3)    The construction of sign structures in accordance with the proposed Sign Location Plan will be consistent with the policies contained within the City’s General Plan and any other applicable plan.

 

ARTICLE 9 VARIANCE REVIEW
83.030905 Procedures.
(a)    Provisions for variances (exceptions to standards) set forth in this Code are established to insure that any property, because of special circumstances, such as size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, shall be accorded privileges commonly enjoyed by the other properties in the same vicinity.

 

(b)    The Community Development Director may approve requests for Minor Variances to modify the following requirements of this Code.

 

(1)    Parking improvements

 

(2)    Up to 30% of parking and loading space requirements, not to exceed two spaces

 

(3)    Up to 40% of front yard setback requirements, but no closer to the property line than 18 feet

 

(4)    Up to 40% of side yard setback requirements, but no closer than three feet from property line

 

(5)    Up to 30% of rear yard setback requirements, but no closer than 10 feet from property line

 

(6)    Up to 30% of area requirements, excluding lot area requirements

 

(7)    Up to 30% of height limitations, except that any height deviation not exceeding two feet in height shall also be considered a Minor Variance

 

(8)    Up to 30% of sign height and setback limitations

 

(9)    Up to 100% of sign number limitations, not to exceed four signs

 

(10)  Up to 30% of standards set forth in overlay districts

 

(11)  Sign area limitations not to exceed 10% of total sign area

 

(12)  Up to 50% of maximum gross floor area requirements

 

(13)  Up to 20% of minimum floor width of single residential design standards

 

(c)    Any request for a variance other than a Minor Variance shall be termed a Major Variance and shall be reviewed and acted upon by the Planning Commission.

 

(d)    Procedure

Staff Review with Notice

 

(e)    Reviewing Authority

Community Development Director or Planning Commission

 

(f)    When necessary, the reviewing authority may hold an advertised hearing to consider evidence and take testimony prior to acting upon a request for variance and establish any necessary conditions of approval.

 

(g)    Prior to approving a request for a variance, the reviewing authority shall find that the following are true.

 

(1)    The granting of such variance will not be materially detrimental to other properties or land uses in the area and will not substantially interfere with the present or future ability to use solar energy systems.

 

(2)    There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property or to the intended use that do not apply to other properties in the same district or vicinity.

 

(3)    The strict application of the land use district deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity or in the same land use district.

 

(4)    The granting of the variance is compatible with the objectives, policies, general land uses, and programs specified in the City’s General Plan and any other applicable plan.

 

ARTICLE 10 FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
83.0301005 Procedures.
(a)    A Flood Hazard Development Review shall be completed prior to approval of a land use application or issuance of a development permit in specified areas or where required by the Director of the Department of Community Development, or the Flood Plain Management Administrator.

 

(b)    The City Engineer shall review and act upon requests for Flood Hazard Development Reviews. The City Engineer’s recommendations from such reviews shall be incorporated into the requirements of the development permit and/or the land use application review.

 

(c)    Procedure

Staff Review without Notice

 

(d)    Reviewing Authority

City Engineer

 

(e)    Application Requirements

Application for a Flood Hazard Development Review shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Management Administrator and may include, but is not limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials; drainage facilities; and the location of all the foregoing. The following information shall be submitted with the application.

 

(1)    Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures in any flood prone area and the elevation of highest adjacent grade

 

(2)    Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed

 

(3)    All appropriate certifications stated in Subsection 82.0601(d)

 

(4)    Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development

 

(5)    A plot plan of the property proposed to be developed showing floodways and floodplains, including adjoining properties necessary to be shown for continuity

 

(6)    The accurate contour of the land at intervals of not more than two feet if the general slope of the land is less than 10% or of not more than five feet if the general slope of the land is 10% or more

 

(7)    Elevations, in relation to mean sea level, of the area to be developed, including adjoining properties necessary to be shown for continuity

 

(8)    The method by which the applicant proposes to comply with the requirements of this section, including proposed elevations of any structures or fills, flood-proofing, and any proposals to modify the existing flow of storm waters, and any other relevant information

 

(9)    After reviewing any request filed under the provisions of this section, the City shall either approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or deny the proposed land use applicant or development permit.

 

(f)    Where a Flood Hazard Development Review has been completed, the reviewing authority shall note the elevation of the first habitable floor of a proposed structure on the development permit and confirm that it is either one foot above condition (1) or (2) below.

 

(1)    The base flood elevation in any area designated as an FPI Overlay District

 

(2)    The adjacent ground level in any area designated as an FP2 Overlay District

 

(g)    In areas subject to a preconstruction flood hazard inspection, the structure shall be sited to modify or maintain the natural drainageway in a manner acceptable to and approved by the City Engineer.

 

(h)    A Flood Hazard Development Review may also authorize structural encroachments on private property into City drainage easements, offers of dedication for drainage purposes, and those building setback areas established adjacent to drainage courses.

 

ARTICLE 11 PRE-CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION
83.0301105 Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter are enacted to regulate construction of proposed structures within local flood hazard areas that are not within a designated Floodplain Safety (FP) Overlay District or Floodway (FW) Land Use District.

 

83.0301120 Inspection.
(a)    No person, except as provided in this chapter, shall commence with a disturbance of land (e.g., grading or land clearing) and/or construction activity which has the potential to affect a discernible water course without first obtaining approval to assure that said disturbance and/or construction activity will not increase the velocity or alter the direction or point of discharge of a local drainage course in such a manner that it negatively effects the proposed structure(s) or other properties downstream.

 

(b)    A Pre-Construction Flood Hazard Inspection shall be conducted by the Building Official or the City Engineer prior to approval of any development permit, except where a land use application has previously been approved authorizing such land disturbing or construction activity.

 

(c)    The reviewing authority shall determine, upon visual inspection of the site, whether there is evidence of a discernible watercourse which could effect or could be affected by the proposed improvements or land disturbing activity.

 

(1)    If the reviewing authority determines no such evidence exists, it shall be indicated in writing that the site has passed the pre-construction Flood Hazard Inspection.

 

(2)    If evidence of a discernible watercourse exists, the reviewing authority shall require a Flood Hazard Development Review by the City Engineer which will provide further review of the site and the proposed improvements.

 

(d)    All Pre-Construction Flood Hazard Inspections referred to the City Engineer shall be subject to the provisions of the Flood Hazard Development Review prior to issuance of any development permit or approval of a land disturbing activity.

 

ARTICLE 12 SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE
83.0301201 Legislative Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually-oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301205 Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this article are in addition to the words and phrases defined in Division 12 (Definitions) and shall have the meaning and significance attached to them in this article, unless otherwise clearly apparent from the context:

 

(a)    “Applicant” means a person who is required to file an application for a license under this Article, including an individual owner, manager, employee, or agent of a sexually-oriented business or an entertainer of a sexually-oriented business.

 

(b)    “City Manager” means the city manger of the city or the city manager’s authorized representative.

 

(c)    “Independent Contractor” means any person or individual who works, dances, entertains and/or provides any services in association with the activity of, or for, a sexually-oriented business establishment permitted in the city that is not an employee of such an establishment.

 

(d)    “Licensee” means the person to whom a sexually-oriented business license or sexually oriented business entertainer’s license is issued.

 

(e)    “Notice Address” means the address designated by the licensee for the mailing of all notices, legal mail, and other written communications from the city to the licensee.

 

(f)    “Person” means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust or combination of individuals or persons.

 

(g)    “Police Chief’ means the police chief of the city or the authorized representatives thereof.

 

(h)    “Sexually-Oriented Business Operator” or “Operator” means a person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of sexually-oriented business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof. (Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301210 Exceptions to Article.
This article shall not apply to:

 

(a)    Any treatment administered in good faith in the course of the practice of any healing art or profession by any person holding a valid license or certificate issued by the State of California to practice any such art or profession under the provisions of the Business and Professions Code of California or of any other law of this State.

 

(b)    Massage administered at a massage parlor or by a massage practitioner holding a valid current license issued pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.04.030(A) of the Yucaipa Municipal Code. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301215 Zoning Requirements.
In addition to the requirements of this article, all sexually-oriented businesses subject to this article shall comply with the requirements set forth in Chapter 7 (Sexually-Oriented Businesses) of Volume II (Land Use and Development) of the Municipal Code. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301220 License Required.
(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, the activities of a regulated sexually-oriented business without a valid license issued for the specific activity pursuant to the provisions of this article for each and every such regulated sexually-oriented business.

 

(b)    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or participate in any live performance depicting, describing or relating to, specified anatomical areas and/or involving specified sexual activities in, sexually-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues in force and effect a sexually-oriented business entertainer license from the city as herein required. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301225 License Required for Each Location; Display of License.
A separate sexually-oriented business license is required for each location within the boundaries of the city at which a regulated, sexually-oriented business is to be established. The requirements of this article for a sexually-oriented business license are separate and in addition to a business license required under Section 5.04.030(A) of the Yucaipa Municipal Code. Every regulated sexually-oriented business shall display its sexually-oriented business license prominently in an area open to the public at each such location at all times when the location is open for business. Every regulated sexually-oriented business and every person subject to the licensing requirements of this article shall make available upon request by the city the sexually-oriented business entertainer license required by Section 83.0301260 for each regulated employee of the sexually-oriented business. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301230 Transfer of Ownership or Control.
Upon the transfer of ownership or control of a sexually-oriented business, the sexually-oriented business license shall immediately be null and void. In order for the sexually-oriented business to continue operating, a new application and license is required. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301235 Change of Location or Name.
(a)    Upon the change of location of the premises where a sexually-oriented business is conducted, the sexually-oriented business license shall immediately be null and void. In order for the sexually-oriented business to continue operating, a new application and license is required.

 

(b)    No licensee shall operate a regulated sexually-oriented business under any name or designation not specified in the license. Upon a change of name of the sexually-oriented business, the sexually-oriented business license shall immediately be null and void. In order for the sexually oriented business to continue operating, a new application and license is required. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301240 Term and Expiration of Sexually-Oriented Business License.
An approved sexually-oriented business license shall be valid for one year, and shall be renewed on an annual basis on the anniversary date of the original application. Application for renewal of an unrevoked sexually-oriented business license shall be made pursuant to Section 83.0301245, at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of the current, valid license. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301245 Application for Sexually-Oriented Business License.
(a)    An applicant requesting issuance or renewal of a sexually-oriented business license shall file a written, signed and verified application or renewal application in a form provided by the police chief. Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee for filing or renewal in an amount determined by resolution of the city council, which fees will be used to defray the costs of investigation, inspection and processing of such application. Such fee shall not exceed the reasonable cost of investigation, inspection and processing of such application. License fees required under this article shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter or title of the city’s Municipal Code.

 

(b)    An application for a sexually-oriented business license shall contain the following information:

 

(1)    If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least eighteen (18) years of age.

 

(2)    If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, dates of birth, and all aliases used by all of the partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

 

(3)    If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete corporate name, the date and state of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the legal names, dates of birth, all aliases used, and the capacity of all officers and directors and principal stockholders (i.e., all stockholders with ten percent (10%) or more of all outstanding shares of stock), and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.

 

(c)    The application must list whether, preceding the date of application, the applicant or any of the individual listed pursuant to the prior subparagraph (b) has:

 

(1)    Had a previous permit under this article revoked, as well as the date of such revocation;

 

(2)    Whether the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose permit under this article has been revoked, as well as the date of the revocation; and

 

(3)    Whether the applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers or general partners, if a corporation or partnership, have been found guilty or pleaded non contendere within the past four (4) years of a misdemeanor or a felony classified by the State as a sex or sex-related offense, and if so the date and place of the conviction.

 

(4)    Whether the applicant has had a license pursuant to this article or other similar regulations of another city or county denied, suspended, or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually-oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended, or revoked as well as the date of the denial, suspension, revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to this section has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this Section whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually-oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation.

 

(5)    Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to this section holds any other permits and/or licenses under this ordinance or other similar sexually-oriented business ordinance in another city or county and if so, the names and location of such other permitted and/or licensed business(es) and the permitting jurisdiction.

 

(6)    A recent photograph of the applicant, and the applicant’s driver’s license number, Social Security Number, and/or his/her/its State or Federally issued tax identification number.

 

(d)    The application shall include the applicant’s mailing address, name and phone number of the person who is responsible for providing access to the proposed use for inspection purposes, and the notice address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed (if different).

 

(e)    If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the business entity shall sign the application. If the application is signed by the property owner’s agent, proof of status is required.

 

(f)    If the applicant intends to operate the sexually-oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the sexually-oriented business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name.

 

(g)    A detailed description of the type of sexually-oriented business and proposed use for which the license is requested, including reference to definitions in this Article and Volume II of the Municipal Code, and the proposed address and assessor’s parcel number of the site where the sexually-oriented business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the sexually-oriented business site.

 

(h)    The names of all employees, independent contractors, and other persons who will perform at the sexually-oriented business, who are required by Section 83.0301260 to obtain a sexually-oriented business entertainer license.

 

(i)     Applicants for a license under this Article shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this Section in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within thirty (30) days from the date of such change, by supplementing the application on file with the police chief shall be grounds for suspension of a license.

 

(j)     A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the sexually-oriented business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.

 

(k)    A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the sexually-oriented business, and: (a) the property line of any other sexually-oriented business within one hundred (100) feet of the primary entrance of the sexually-oriented business for which a license is requested; and (b) the property lines of any religious institution, school, public park, residential zone or sensitive use within one hundred (100) feet of the primary entrance of the sexually-oriented business.

 

(l)     A blueline print showing all four elevations of any proposed structures and signage and listing proposed exterior building materials. Elevation prints shall be colored or a materials board shall be submitted. In the case of existing buildings where a change of use is proposed and no structural changes or exterior modifications are proposed, photographs may be accepted in lieu of elevation drawings if they show a front and rear elevation of the structure.

 

(m)   A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries of the sexually-oriented business showing the location of the lighting system required by Section 83.030 1280.

 

(n)    The city manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for the granting, denying, revoking renewing, suspending, and canceling sexually-oriented business licenses for proposed or existing sexually-oriented businesses. The city manager, or his/her designee, shall also be responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually-oriented business for which a license is being considered complies with all applicable zoning laws and/or regulations. In connection with this review and determination, if the city manager determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the city manager shall, within ten (10) days of the filing of the application, notify the applicant of such fact, and, on request of the applicant, grant the applicant an extension of time often (10) days or less to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed ten (10) days, of the time for the city manager to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a license shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time.

 

(o)    In the event that the city manager or his/her designee determines or learns, prior to issuing the permit or while the application for a permit is pending, that the applicant has improperly completed the application for a proposed sexually-oriented business, he/she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten (10) days to properly complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application.

 

(p)    The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining a sexually-oriented business license as set forth herein.

 

(q)    The applicant for the license must be qualified according to the provisions of this article and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with health, fire and building codes, regulations and laws.

 

(r)    Prior to obtaining a permit and license to operate any sexually-oriented business defined in this article, and as part of any application for a permit under this section, the applicant shall obtain from the city or its designee, a certificate that the proposed location of such business complies with the location requirements of Chapter 7 of Division 8 of this Code.

 

(s)    By applying for a license under this section, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article, and to the exercise of their authority by the city manager, or his/her designee, the police chief and all other city employees and agencies charged with enforcing the laws, ordinances, and codes applicable in the city of their respective responsibilities. (Amended by Ord. 196 §7, 2000)

 

83.0301250 Investigation and Application.
(a)    Upon receipt of an application properly filed and upon payment of the non-refundable application fee, the city manager shall immediately stamp the application received and shall immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application to the police chief and any other city departments or other agencies responsible for enforcement of health, fire and building codes and laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed sexually-oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set forth in this ordinance. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, and, in the event it disapproved, state the reasons therefor.

 

(b)    A department or agency shall disapprove an application, if it finds that the proposed sexually-oriented business will be in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the city. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each department or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the city manager.

 

(c)    Within twenty (20) business days of receipt of the completed application, the city manager shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows:

 

(1)    The city manager shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

 

(2)    If the application is denied, the city manager shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

 

(3)    If the application is granted, the city manager shall attach to the application a sexually-oriented business license.

 

(4)    The application as granted or denied and the license, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the notice address stated in the application.

 

(d)    The city manager shall grant the application and issue the sexually-oriented business license upon findings that the proposed business meets the locational criteria of Chapter 7 of Division 8 (Sexually-Oriented Businesses) of the Municipal Code; and that the applicant has met all of the development and performance standards and requirements of this article, unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in Section 83.0301255 herein.

 

(e)    The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually-oriented business. The license shall also indicate that the sexually-oriented business is subject to prohibitions against public nudity and indecency pursuant to the United States Supreme Court decision in Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc. (1991) 501 U.S. 560 and any applicable local, state or federal law. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually-oriented business establishment so that it can be easily read at any time.

 

(f)    If the city manager neither grants nor denies the application within twenty (20) business days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in Section 83.0301245(15)), the application shall be forwarded to the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting for consideration in strict conformance with the provisions of this Section 83.0301250(d).

 

(g)    If the city manager denies renewal of the license, the applicant shall not be issued a license pursuant to this chapter for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the city manager finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the permit has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the denial became final.

 

(h)    After any final denial of a license authorized by this chapter, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such decision in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure  Section 1094.5 et seq., and pursuant to the expedited judicial review set forth in California code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301255 Denial of Application for Sexually-Oriented Business License.
The city manager shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

 

(a)    That the building, structure, equipment and/or location used by the business for which a license is required herein does not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the state of California and of the city.

 

(b)    An applicant or the applicant’s sexually-oriented business is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of the Yucaipa Municipal Code related to the establishment or maintenance of an sexually-oriented business.

 

(c)    That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a license or in any report or record required to be filed with the city in connection with the application.

 

(d)    That the applicant has had any type of sexually-oriented business license suspended or revoked by any public entity within two years of the date of the application.

 

(e)    Within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application for a license under this chapter, the applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor which offense is classified by the state as an offense involving sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, kidnapping, distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering, including, but not necessarily limited to, the violation of any crime requiring registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or any violation of Penal Code Sections 243.4, 261, 261.5, 264.1, 266, 266a through 266k, inclusive, 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 311 through 311.10, inclusive, 314, 316, or 647. The fact that a conviction is being appealed will have no effect on disqualification of the applicant.

 

(f)    That on the date that business, for which a license is required, herein commences, and thereafter, there will be no responsible adult on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open.

 

(g)    That an applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.

 

 

 

(h)    That an applicant, manager or any agent or employee of the applicant or manager has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime in conjunction with or as a result of the operation of a sexually-oriented business prior to the filing of the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed will have no effect on disqualification of the applicant.

 

(i)     The required application or license fees have not been paid.

 

(j)     The granting of the license would violate a statute, ordinance, or court order. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301260 Sexually-Oriented Business Entertainer License.
(a)    No person shall engage in or participate in any live performance involving, depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or involving specified sexual activities in a sexually-oriented business, without a valid sexually-oriented business entertainer license issued by the city. All persons who have been issued a sexually-oriented business license shall promptly supplement the information provided as part of the application for the license required by Section 83.0301245, with the names of all entertainers required to obtain a sexually-oriented business entertainer license, within thirty (30) days of any change in the information originally submitted. Failure to submit such changes shall be grounds for suspension of the sexually-oriented business license.

 

(b)    The police chief shall grant, deny and renew sexually-oriented business entertainer licenses.

 

(c)    The application for a license shall be made on a form provided by the police chief. An original and two copies of the completed and sworn license application shall be filed with the police chief.

 

(d)    The completed application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents:

 

(1)    The applicant’s legal name and any other names (including “stage names” and aliases) used by the applicant;

 

(2)    Age, date and place of birth;

 

(3)    Height, weight, hair and eye color, tattoo descriptions and locations;

 

(4)    Present residence address and telephone number;

 

(5)    Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of:

 

(i)     Any of the offenses set forth in Section 315, 316, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266i, 647(b) and 647(d) of the California Penal Code as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered.

 

(ii)    The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the State of California.

 

(6)    Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in this subsection has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so licensed, registered or authorized to engage in prostitution;

 

(7)    State driver’s license, social security number or identification number;

 

(8)    Satisfactory written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;

 

(9)    The applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the police department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant’s face, taken within the last six months of the date of the permit application. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant; and

 

(10)  If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license, the applicant shall attach a copy of the license to be renewed.

 

(e)    The completed application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee. The amount of the application fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.

 

(f)    Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application fees, the police chief shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the application.

 

(g)    If the police chief determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, or that the application is otherwise invalid, the police chief shall, within ten (10) days of the filing of the application, notify the applicant of such fact and grant the applicant an extension of time of not more than ten (10) days to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed ten (10) days, of the time for the police chief to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a license shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301265 Investigation and Action on Sexually-Oriented Business Entertainer License Application.
(a)    Within five days after receipt of the properly completed application, the police chief shall grant or deny the application and so notify the applicant as follows:

 

(1)    The police chief shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation,

 

(2)    If the application is denied, the police chief shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

 

(3)    If the application is granted, the police chief shall attach to the application a sexually-oriented business entertainer license.

 

(4)    The application as granted or denied and the license, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the residence address stated in the application.

 

(b)    The police chief shall grant the application and issue the license unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in subsection (d) of this section.

 

(c)    If the police chief neither grants nor denies the application within five days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in Section 83.0301260(g)), the application shall be forwarded to the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting for consideration in strict conformance with the provisions of this article.

 

(d)    The police chief, or in the case of the police chief not acting within the time period under this section, the city council shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

 

(1)    The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license or in any report or document required to be filed with the application.

 

(2)    The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.

 

(3)    The sexually-oriented business entertainer license is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by state or city law.

 

(4)    The applicant has been registered or licensed in any state as a prostitute.

 

(5)    The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in Section 83.0301260(d)(5) or convicted of an offense outside the state of California that would have constituted any of the described offenses if committed within the state of California. A license may be issued to any person convicted of the described crimes if the conviction occurred more than five years prior to the date of the application.

 

(e)    Each sexually-oriented business entertainer license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the police chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the application fee and a copy of the license to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the license. When made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for applications for licenses.

 

(f)    The city deems confidential license applications required pursuant to this section and all information contained therein. Absent an order from a court of competent jurisdiction, the city shall not disclose for public review the applications or the information contained therein. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301270 Suspension or Revocation of Sexually-Oriented Business Licenses and Sexually-Oriented Business Entertainer Licenses.
A sexually-oriented business license or sexually-oriented business entertainer license may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section.

 

(a)    On determining that grounds for license revocation exist, the police chief shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the licensee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent code sections and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last know address of the licensee, or shall be delivered to the licensee personally, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the police chief, but at a minimum shall include the following:

 

(1)    All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. The police chief’s decision may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Section 83.0301275.

 

(b)    A licensee may be subject to suspension or revocation of his/her/its license, or be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the licensee, or an employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder or manager of a sexually-oriented business:

 

(1)    The licensee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city.

 

(2)    The licensee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder or manager of a sexually-oriented business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the sexually-oriented business, or in the case of a sexually-oriented business entertainer, the licensee has engaged in one of the activities described below while on the premises of a sexually-oriented business:

 

(i)     Giving false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant’s opportunity for obtaining a sexually-oriented business license or sexually-oriented business entertainer license.

 

(ii)    Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation.

 

(iii)   Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitation for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation occur.

 

(iv)   Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code.

 

(v)    The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, 318 or subdivision (b) of Section 547 of the California Penal Code.

 

(vi)   Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including but not limited to Sections 311 through 313.4.

 

(vii)  Refused to allow an inspection of sexually-oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter.

 

(viii) An employee or permittee who allowed or knew or should have known of gambling by any person on the sexually-oriented business premises.

 

(ix)   An employee or permittee who allowed or knew or should have known of such activity, has allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises.

 

(x)    Operated the sexually-oriented business in violation of a building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal, state or local, said determination being based on investigation by the division, department or agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In the event of such statute, violation, the police chief shall promptly notify the permittee of the violation and shall allow seven consecutive day period in which to correct the violation. If the permittee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the seven day period, the police chief shall forthwith suspend the permit and shall notify the permittee of the suspension.

 

(xi)   Operated the sexually-oriented business in violation of the hours of operation as set forth in Chapter 7 of Division 8 of this code.

 

(xii)  Been convicted of an act for which initial denial of a license would have been required pursuant to this article.

 

(xiii) Any conduct prohibited by this article.

 

(3)    Failure to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed by an appropriate city official.

 

(c)    After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the police chief finds and determines that there are grounds for disciplinary action, based upon the severity of the violation, the police chief shall impose one of the following:

 

(1)    A warning;

 

(2)    Suspension of the license for a specified period not to exceed six months; or

 

(3)    Revocation of the license.

 

(d)    When the city revokes a sexually-oriented business license, the revocation shall continue for one year from the date of revocation and the permittee shall not be issued a sexually-oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective.

 

(e)    If the sexually-oriented business license was revoked under this section for reasons that the establishment is in noncompliance with the requirements of Chapter 7 (Sexually-Oriented Businesses) of Division 8 of Volume II (Land Use and Development), and if the police chief finds that the basis for revocation under this section has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date revocation became effective.

 

(f)    If the sexually-oriented business entertainer license issued to an individual and/or employee was revoked under this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the number of years required under this section have elapsed. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301275 Appeal of Denial, Revocation or Suspension of License.
(a)    Appeal of denial of initial license.

 

(1)    Any decision of the police chief to issue or deny a license may be appealed to the city council. Any appeal shall be filed in writing within ten (10) days following notice of issuance or denial, and shall state the grounds upon which review is sought. The appeal hearing will be scheduled for hearing and the city council will render a decision all within fifteen (15) days of the filing of the appeal with the city clerk. At the hearing, all parties shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and other tangible evidence on the issues; may be represented by legal counsel; and shall have the right to examine and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious matters may be admitted.

 

(2)    All decisions made by the city council regarding the issuance or denial of a license subject to this article shall become final five calendar days after mailing of the notice of determination. After any final denial of a license authorized by this article, the applicant, licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such decision in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq., and pursuant to the expedited judicial review set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8.

 

(b)    Appeal of Renewal, Suspension or Revocation of License.

 

(1)    Any decision of the police chief to renew or to deny renewal, to suspend or revoke a license may be appealed to the city council. Any appeal shall be filed in writing within ten (10) business days following notice of renewal, non-renewal, suspension or revocation of a license, and shall state the grounds upon which review is sought. The appeal hearing will be scheduled for hearing and the city council will render a decision all within fifteen (15) days of the filing of the appeal with the city clerk. At the hearing, all parties shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and other tangible evidence on the issues; may be represented by legal counsel; and shall have the right to examine and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious matters may be admitted.

 

(2)    If the police chief denies the renewal of a license, or if a license has been suspended or revoked, and the aggrieved applicant/licensee timely commences an appeal to review the validity of the denial, suspension or revocation, upon written request of the applicant/licensee, the city shall issue a temporary permit pending the final determination on the appeal. The temporary permit shall remain in effect throughout the administrative appeal process and for ninety (90) calendar days following the date the administrative determination is final. In the event the applicant/licensee fails or refuses to seek judicial review within such ninety (90) calendar days, the temporary permit shall thereon expire without further notice and the applicant/licensee shall cease all operations thereunder. Any temporary permit issued pursuant to this section shall not grant any vested rights to the holder of the temporary permit.

 

(3)    All decisions made by the city council regarding the renewal, non-renewal, suspension or revocation of a license subject to this article shall become formal five calendar days after mailing of the notice of determination. After any formal denial of a license authorized by this article, the applicant/licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such decision in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq., and pursuant to the expedited judicial review set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301280 Sexually-Oriented Business Development and Performance Standards.
The following development and performance standards shall be satisfied by a sexually-oriented business and included in any approved sexually-oriented business license:

 

(a)    The establishment of a sexually-oriented business shall comply with all applicable city site development standards of the zone, district, or area in which the sexually-oriented business is located, the building and construction codes, maximum occupancy loads, fire codes, and the health and safety regulations in effect in the city.

 

(b)    A sexually-oriented business shall comply with the applicable city permit and inspection procedures.

 

(c)    Each sexually-oriented business shall have a business entrance separate from any other non-adult business located in the same building.

 

(d)    No sexually-oriented business shall be operated in any mariner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas or instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.

 

(e)    All building openings, entries, and windows shall be located, covered, or screened to prevent viewing of the interior from any exterior area.

 

(f)    All exterior areas of sexually-oriented businesses, including buildings, landscaping, and parking areas, shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner free of trash, weeds, and debris.

 

(g)    Parking lot lighting shall be provided to illuminate all off-street parking areas serving such use for the purpose of increasing the personal safety of patrons and employees and reducing the incidents of vandalism and theft. The lighting shall provide a level of illumination not less than four foot-candle, measured at the surface of the pavement, at all areas of the parking lot. The lighting shall be shown on the required plot plans and shall be reviewed and approved by the building and safety division.

 

(h)    A parking plan shall be submitted to the city planner for review and approval providing for adequate contiguous on-site parking.

 

(i)     Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, fire lanes and fire suppression equipment shall regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the regulations and standards of the fire department and the city’s building standards.

 

(j)     The premises within which the sexually-oriented business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or              other separate unit within the same building. No loudspeaker or sound equipment audible to persons in any public exterior area shall be used in connection with a sexually-oriented business, and the business shall be so conducted that sounds associated with the business are not emitted into any public exterior area.

 

(k)    A sexually-oriented business shall be open or operating for business only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. of any particular day. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article to cause a sexually-oriented business to be operated or to allow such business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee and/or independent contractor to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale or solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. of any particular day.

 

(l)     The building entrance to a sexually-oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under eighteen (18) years of age are precluded from entering the premises. Said notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the community development director. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted within the premises at any time. It shall be unlawful for any employee, owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee of an adult business to allow any person below the age of eighteen (18) years upon the premises or within the confines of any sexually-oriented business if no liquor is served, or under the age of twenty-one (21) if liquor is served.

 

(m)   Each sexually-oriented business shall be provided with a manager’s station for the purpose of monitoring and supervising activities within the business. A manager shall be on duty on the premises during all times that the sexually-oriented business is open to the public. All indoor areas of the sexually-oriented business within which patrons are permitted, or within which viewing is permitted by patrons or the public except rest rooms, shall be open to view by the manager at all times.

 

(n)    An on-site security program shall be prepared and implemented including the following items:

 

(1)    All interior areas of the sexually-oriented business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level:

 

Area

Foot Candles

Adult Bookstores, Video Stores and Novelty Stores

20

Adult Theaters and Cabarets

5 (except during performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 foot-candles)

Adult Motion Picture Theaters

7.5

Adult Motels/Hotels

20 (in public areas)

Nude Modeling Studios

20

 

(2)    All off-street parking areas and building entries serving the sexually-oriented business shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting system designed to provide an average maintained horizontal illumination of four foot-candles of light on the parking surface and/or walkway. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually-oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and theft. A lighting plan, prepared by a licensed lighting engineer, shall be shown on the required site or plot plan and shall be subject to review by the building official and the police department.

 

(3)    Sexually-oriented businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards:

 

(i)     Sexually-oriented businesses such as adult motion picture theaters, adult video stores, nude modeling studios, sexual encounter establishments, adult theaters and adult cabarets, or any sexually-oriented business which features entertainment (live or motion picture viewed from booths) whose dominant or predominant character and theme is the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons, shall provide at least one guard for every fifty (50) occupants permitted by the city’s building code and in no case shall there be less than two guards. One guard shall be stationed outside during all business hours. For businesses where the maximum building fire capacity is fifty (50) or less, video monitoring of the parking lot may be approved by the police chief, subject to the submission and approval of a video security monitoring plan.

 

(ii)    Security guards for other sexually-oriented businesses may be required if it is determined by the police chief that their presence is necessary in order to prevent any of the conduct listed in Section 83.0301270(2)(b).

 

(iii)   Security guards shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of these regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed by the state as security guards. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person or sole occupant of the manager’s station while acting as a security guard.

 

(4)    A video camera surveillance system shall be installed and operational during business hours, providing continuous coverage and recordation of both the interior of the building and the parking lot areas. Location of the surveillance cameras shall be approved by the police chief.

 

(5)    An annual review for adequacy of security will be conducted to ascertain if there has been an increase in calls for emergency services.

 

(o)    It is unlawful to sell, serve or permit the consumption of alcohol in any portion of a structure occupied by a sexually-oriented business unless a license has been issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (“ABC”) for such sale, service and consumption.

 

(p)    The sexually-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate rest room facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the rest room(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the rest room(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the rest room facilities. The rest rooms shall be free from any material depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities (“adult material”). Rest rooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to a sexually-oriented business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult materials which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide rest room facilities to its patrons or the general public.

 

(q)    Every sexually-oriented business shall display at all times during business hours the license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article for such sexually-oriented business in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the sexually-oriented business.

 

(r)    A sexually-oriented business entertainer shall have his/her license available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the sexually-oriented business.

 

Failure to comply with each and all of the foregoing development and performance standards shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the sexually-oriented business license and/or sexually-oriented entertainer’s license. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301285 Development and performance standards specific to Adult Motion Picture Theaters or establishments which include video viewing booths or rooms which feature Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas for observation by patrons.
In addition to the performance standards set forth in Section 83.0301280, the following development and performance standards shall apply to any sexually-oriented business which is also an adult motion picture theater or which includes video viewing booths which feature specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons:

 

(a)    The application for the sexually-oriented business license shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof and specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons shall not be permitted.

 

(b)    The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager’s station.

 

(c)    No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station shall be made without the prior written approval of the community development director.

 

(d)    It shall be the duty of the permittee and/or licensee and any employees present on the premises to insure that the view area remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times and to insure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons shall not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this article. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted and maintained in prominent places in and near video booths.

 

(e)    The following additional requirements shall apply to adult motion picture theaters:

 

(1)    If the theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall comply with each of the following provisions:

 

(i)     Have individual, separate seats (not couches, benches or the like) to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area;

 

(ii)    Have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating area(s) in order that each person seated in the hall or auditorium area shall be visible from the aisle at all times; and

 

(iii)   Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance to the hall or auditorium area which lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area.

 

(2)    If the theater is designed to permit outdoor viewing by patrons seated in automobiles, it shall have the motion picture screen so situated, or the perimeter of the establishment so fenced, that the material to be seen by those patrons may not be seen from any public right-of-way, child day care facility, public park, school, or religious institution or any residentially zoned property occupied with a residence.

 

(f)    The following additional requirements shall apply to adult motion picture theaters and sexually-oriented businesses where motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which feature specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons in video viewing booths or viewing rooms:

 

(1)    Video viewing booths/viewing rooms shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, furniture or fixtures, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times. No patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.

 

(2)    No video viewing booth/viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one time.

 

(3)    The walls or partitions between video viewing booths/viewing rooms shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two such rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth or room into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such booths or rooms.

 

(4)    Customers, patrons or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such viewing room/booth, or to remain in the common area of such business, other than the rest rooms, who are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the viewing rooms/booths.

 

(5)    The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video viewing booths/rooms shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booths or rooms shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; repeated instances of such conditions may justify suspension or revocation of the sexually-oriented business license.

 

(g)    This section shall also apply to any sexually-oriented business, other than an adult motel or hotel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room or booth of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

 

(h)    The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access and an illumination of not less than seven and one-half foot-candle power as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the owners, operators, their agents and employees present on the premises to insure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times any patron is present on the premises. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301290 Development and Performance Standards Specific to Sexually-Oriented Businesses Providing Live Entertainment.
In addition to the performance standards set forth in Section 83.0301280, the following development and performance standards shall apply to sexually-oriented businesses providing live entertainment involving, depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or involving specified sexual activities:

 

(a)    No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of a sexually-oriented business except upon a stage at least eighteen (18) inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten (10) feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons and surrounded with a stationary rail, or at least six feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons and surrounded by a solid barrier, which rail or barrier must be at least thirty (30) inches in height, establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons. No patron shall be permitted within the area of the stage established by the barrier (ten (10) feet with a rail or six feet with a solid barrier) while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. “Live entertainment” means the performance of every form of live entertainment, including, but not limited to, a performance accompanied by music, band or orchestra, act, play, burlesque, revue, pantomime, scene, song or dance participated in by one or more persons. “Entertainer” or “live entertainer” shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the sexually-oriented business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of a sexually-oriented business.

 

(b)    If the sexually-oriented business is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, the licensee shall abide by the rules and regulations established by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (“ABC”) and the regulations provided in this article, unless any regulation of this article is preempted by the ABC, in which case the ABC’s regulations shall apply.

 

(c)    For live entertainment involving specified sexual activities, the following provisions shall apply:

 

(1)    No live entertainer, either before, during or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or after performances by such entertainer. In addition, while on the premises, no entertainer shall have physical contact with a patron and no patron shall have physical contact with an entertainer, which physical contact involves the touching of the clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, cleft of the buttocks, perineum, anal region, or female breast with any part or area of any other person’s body either before or after any adult live entertainment by such entertainer. When patrons are present at the establishment, they shall not be allowed to, and shall not, directly touch, fondle or caress (as those terms are defined in Key, Inc. v. Kitsap County (9th Cir., 1986) 793 F.2d 1053) the entertainers while they are performing. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the sexually-oriented business. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching. Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by signs placed on the barrier between entertainers and patrons, and if necessary by employees of the establishment.

 

(2)    Live entertainers shall be restricted to performing in accordance with subparagraph (a) of this section.

 

(3)    Each live entertainer for a sexually-oriented business shall be required to obtain a sexually-oriented entertainer license pursuant to this article.

 

(d)    The sexually-oriented business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers’ use. No patron is permitted access to the dressing room facilities. The dressing room facilities shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment.

 

(e)    The sexually-oriented business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the sexually-oriented business shall provide a minimum three foot wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers.

 

(f)    No patron shall directly or indirectly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit or accept any pay or gratuity from any patron. Patrons shall not throw tips to entertainers, hand tips directly or indirectly to entertainers or place tips in the entertainers’ costumes.

 

(g)    No owner or other person with managerial control over a sexually-oriented business shall permit any person on the premises of the sexually-oriented business to engage in exposure of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the nipple or areola and/or covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical part required to be covered.

 

(h)    No operator, entertainer or employee of a sexually-oriented business shall encourage or permit a patron upon the premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any entertainer or employee of the sexually-oriented business. The sexually-oriented business shall not conduct any massage, acupuncture, body wrapping, tattooing, acupressure or escort services on the premises.

 

(i)     Every licensee of a sexually-oriented business which provides live entertainment depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the premises and their license numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any police officer or health officer of the city.

 

(j)     The sexually-oriented business shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors all parking lot areas, at all times that the business is open and occupied for business.

 

(k)    User parking areas and doorways of a sexually-oriented business shall be unobstructed so as to allow visibility of these areas from the public right-of-way. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.0301295 Display of License and Identification Cards.
(a)    Every sexually-oriented business shall display at all times during business hours the license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article for such sexually-oriented business in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the sexually-oriented business.

 

(b)    The police chief shall provide each sexually-oriented business entertainer required to have a license pursuant to this article, with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph and license number of such entertainer.

 

(c)    A sexually-oriented business entertainer shall have such card available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the sexually-oriented business. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.03012100 Prohibitions Regarding Minors.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to operate, or cause to be operated a sexually-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this section, and knowingly, or with reasonable cause to know, permits, suffers, or allows:

 

(a)    Admittance of a person under eighteen (18) years of age to the business premises;

 

(b)    A person under eighteen (18) years of age to remain at the business premises;

 

(c)    A person under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase goods or services at the business premises; or

 

(d)    A person who is under eighteen (18) years of age to work at the sexually-oriented business premises as an employee, or an independent contractor; or

 

(e)    The interior of the premises to be visible to a minor, wherein any matter harmful to minors is displayed or visible, unless all such materials so visible to minors are covered or obscured as required by Ordinance No. 51 (Display of Materials Harmful to Minors) of the city of Yucaipa.

 

(f)    A sign shall be conspicuously posted on all entrances restricting entrance of minors. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.03012105 Inspection.
An applicant for an establishment or licensee shall permit authorized representatives of the community development department, the county health department, the police department, the fire department, or other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually-oriented business or the premises at which a licensee is permitted to work, for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law and the development and performance standards applicable to sexually-oriented businesses, at any time it is occupied or open for business. A person who operates a sexually-oriented business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this section if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. Such inspections shall be conducted in a reasonable manner. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.03012110 Regulations Nonexclusive.
The provisions of this article regulating sexually-oriented businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the city. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.03012115 Employment of Persons Without Permits Unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or licensee in charge of or in control of a sexually-oriented business which provides live entertainment depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or involving specified sexual activities to allow any person to perform such entertainment who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked sexually-oriented business entertainer license. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.03012120 Violations/Penalties.
Any person, whether as principal, employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or trustee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any violation of the provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

83.03012125 Public Nuisance.
In addition to the penalties set forth above, any sexually-oriented business which is operating in violation of this article or any provision thereof is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation. All costs to abate such public nuisance, including attorneys’ fees and court costs, shall be paid by the licensee of the sexually-oriented business, or the property owner of record, pursuant to Section 8.16.250 of the Municipal Code. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 7(part), 2000)

 

 

ARTICLE 13 REGULATIONS ESTABLISHING PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSIDERATION OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
DIVISION 1 APPLICATIONS
 

Sections:

83.0301305       Authority for Adoption

83.0301310          Forms and Information

83.0301315       Fees

83.0301320       Qualification of an Applicant

83.0301325       Proposed Form of Agreement

83.0301330       Review of Application

 

83.0301305 Authority for Adoption.
These regulations are adopted under the authority of Government Code Sections 65864-65869.5. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301310 Forms and Information.
(a)    The Director of Planning Services shall prescribe the form for each application, notice and documents provided for or required under these regulations for the preparation and implementation of development agreements.

 

(b)    The Director of Planning Services may require an applicant to submit such information and supporting data as the Director considers necessary to process the application. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301315 Fees.
The City Council shall by separate resolution fix the schedule of fees and charges imposed for the filing and processing of each application and document provided for or required under these regulations. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301320 Qualification of an Applicant.
Only a qualified applicant may file an application to enter into a development agreement. A qualified applicant is a person who has legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of the development agreement. Applicant includes authorized agent. The Director of Planning Services may require an applicant to submit proof of his interest in the real property and of the authority of the agent to act for the applicant. Before processing the application, the Director of Planning Services shall obtain the opinion of the City Attorney as to the sufficiency of the applicant’s interest in the real property to enter into the agreement. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301325 Proposed Form of Agreement.
Each application shall be accompanied by the form of development agreement proposed by the applicant. This requirement may be met by designating the City’s standard form of development agreement and including specific proposals for changes in or additions to the language of the standard form. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301330 Review of Application.
The Director of Planning Services shall endorse on the application the date it is received. He shall review the application and may reject it if it is incomplete or inaccurate for processing. If he finds that the application is complete, he shall accept it for filing. The Director shall review the application and determine the additional requirements necessary to complete the agreement. After receiving the required information, he shall prepare a staff report and recommendation and shall state whether or not the agreement proposed or in an amended form would be consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

DIVISION 2 NOTICES AND HEARING
 

Sections:

83.0301335       Duty to Give Notice

83.0301340       Requirements for Form and Time of Notice of Intention to Consider Adoption of Development Agreement

83.0301345       Failure to Receive Notice

83.0301350       Rules Governing Conduct of Hearing

83.0301355       Irregularity in Proceedings

 

83.0301335 Duty to Give Notice.
The Director of Planning Services shall give notice of intention to consider adoption of development agreement and of any other public hearing required by law or these rules. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301340 Requirements for Form and Time of Notice of Intention to Consider Adoption of Development Agreement.
(a)    Form of Notice. The form of the notice of intention to consider adoption of development agreement shall contain:

 

(1)    the time and place of the hearing;

 

(2)    a general explanation of the matter to be considered including a general description of the area affected; and

 

(3)    other information required by specific provision of these regulations or which the Director of Planning Services considers necessary or desirable.

 

(b)    Time and Manner of Notice. The time and manner of giving notice is by:

 

(1)    Publication or Posting. Publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the City or if there is none, posting in at least 3 public places in the City.

 

(2)    Mailing. Mailing of the notice to all persons shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within 300 feet of the property which is the subject of the proposed development agreement. If the number of owners to whom notice is to be mailed is greater than 1,000, the Director of Planning Services may as an alternative provide notice in the manner set forth in Section 65091(a)(3) of the Government Code.

 

(c)    Additional Notice. The Planning Commission or the City Council as the case may be, may direct that notice of the public hearing to be held before it shall be given in a manner that exceeds the notice requirements prescribed by State law.

 

(d)    Declaration of Existing Law. The notice requirements referred to in subsections (a) and (b) are declaratory of existing law (Govt. Code Section 65867 and Sections 65854, 65854.5 and 765856 as incorporated by reference.) If State law prescribes a different notice requirement, notice shall be given in that manner. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301345 Failure to Receive Notice.
The failure of any person entitled to notice required by law or these regulations does not affect the authority of the City to enter into a development agreement. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301350 Rules Governing Conduct of Hearing.
The public hearing shall be conducted as nearly as may be in accordance with the procedural standards adopted under Government Code Section 65804 for the conduct of zoning hearings. Each person interested in the matter shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The applicant has the burden of proof at the public hearing on the proposed development agreement. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301355 Irregularity in Proceedings.
No action, inaction, or recommendation regarding the proposed development agreement shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by a court by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect or omission (“error”) as to any matter pertaining to petition, application, notice, finding, record, hearing, report, recommendation, or any matters of procedure whatever unless after an examination of the entire case, including the evidence, the court is of the opinion that the error complained of was prejudicial and that by reason of the error the complaining party sustained and suffered substantial injury, and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. There is not presumption that error is prejudicial or that injury was done if error is shown. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

DIVISION 3 STANDARDS OF REVIEW, FINDINGS, AND DECISION
 

Sections:

83.0301360       Determination by Planning Commission

83.0301365       Decision by City Council

83.0301370       Approval of Development Agreement

 

83.0301360 Determination by Planning Commission.
After the hearing by the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall make its recommendation in writing to the City Council. The recommendation shall include the Planning Commission’s determination whether or not the development agreement proposed:

 

(1)    is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the general plan and any applicable specific plan;

 

(2)    is compatible with the uses authorized in, and the regulations prescribed for, the land use district in which the real property is located;

 

(3)    is in conformity with public convenience, general welfare, and good land use practice,

 

(4)    will be detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare,

 

(5)    will adversely affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of property value.

 

The recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendations. (Ord. 67 § 1(part), 1991)

 

83.0301365 Decision by City Council.
(a)    After the City Council completes the public hearing, it may accept, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the Planning Commission. It may, but need not, refer matters not previously considered by the Planning Commission during its hearing back to the Planning Commission for report and recommendation. The Planning Commission may, but need not, hold a public hearing on matters referred back to it by the City Council.

 

(b)    The City Council may not approve the development agreement unless it finds that the provisions of the agreement are consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301370 Approval of Development Agreement.
If the City Council approves the development agreement, it shall do so by the adoption of an ordinance.

 

After the ordinance approving the development agreements takes effect, the City may enter into the agreement. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

DIVISION 4 AMENDMENT AND CANCELLATION OF AGREEMENT BY MUTUAL CONSENT
 

Sections:

83.0301375       Initiation of Amendment or Cancellation by Mutual Consent

83.0301380       Procedure

 

83.0301375 Initiation of Amendment or Cancellation by Mutual Consent.
Either party may propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement previously entered into. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301380 Procedure.
The procedure for proposing and adoption of an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement is the same as the procedure for entering into an agreement in the first instance (Divisions 1 through 3).

 

However, where the City initiates the proposed amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement, it shall first give notice to the property owner of its intention to initiate such proceedings at least 15 days in advance of the giving of notice of intention to consider the amendment or cancellation required by Section 83.0301340. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

DIVISION 5 RECORDATION
 

Sections:

83.0301385       Recordation of Development Agreement, Amendment or Cancellation

 

83.0301385 Recordation of Development Agreement, Amendment or Cancellation.
(a)    Within 10 days after the City enters into the development agreement, the City Clerk shall have the agreement recorded with the County Recorder.

 

(b)    If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the agreement as provided in Government Code Section 65868, or if the City terminates or modifies the agreement as provided in Government Code Section 65865.1 for failure of the applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement the City Clerk shall have notice of such action recorded with the County Recorder. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

DIVISION 6 PERIODIC REVIEW
 

Sections:

83.0301390       Time For and Initiation of Review

83.0301391       Notice of Periodic Review

83.0301392       Delegation or Referral to Planning Commission

83.0301393       Public Hearing

83.0301394       Findings Upon Public Hearing

83.0301395       Procedure Upon Findings

 

83.0301390 Time For and Initiation of Review.
The City shall review the development agreement every 12 months from the date the agreement is entered into.

 

The time for review may be modified either by agreement between the parties or by initiation in one or more of the following ways:

 

(1)    Recommendation of the planning staff;

 

(2)    Affirmative vote of at least 4 members of the Planning Commission

 

(3)    Affirmative vote of at least 3 members of the City Council (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301391 Notice of Periodic Review.
The Director of Planning Services shall begin the review proceeding by giving notice that the City intends to undertake a periodic review of the development agreement to the property owner. He shall give the notice at least 30 days in advance of the time at which the matter will be considered by the City Council. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301392 Delegation or Referral to Planning Commission.
The City Council may refer the matter to the Planning Commission for further proceedings or for report and recommendations. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301393 Public Hearing.
The City Council shall conduct a public hearing at which the property owner must demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. The burden of proof on this issue is upon the property owner. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301394 Findings Upon Public Hearing.
The City Council shall determine upon the basis of substantial evidence whether or not the property owner has, for the period under review, complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301395 Procedure Upon Findings.
(a)    If the City finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the property owner has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the review for that period is concluded.

 

(b)    If the City finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the property owner has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the City may terminate the agreement, or with the concurrence of the applicant, may modify the agreement. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

DIVISION 7 MODIFICATION OR TERMINATION
 

Sections:

83.0301397       Proceedings Upon Modification or Termination

83.0301398       Hearing on Modification or Termination

 

83.0301397 Proceedings Upon Modification or Termination.
If, upon a finding under Section 606(b), the City Council determines to proceed with modification or termination of the agreement, the City Council shall give notice to the property owner of its intention to do so. The notice shall contain:

 

(1)    The time and place of the hearing;

 

(2)    A statement as to whether or not the City proposes to terminate or to modify the development agreement;

 

(3)    Other information which the City considers necessary to inform the property owner of the nature of the proceeding. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

83.0301398 Hearing on Modification or Termination.
At the time and place set for the hearing on modification or termination, the property owner shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The City Council may refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further proceedings or for report and recommendation. The City Council may impose those conditions to the action it takes as it considers necessary to protect the interests of the City. The decision of the City Council is final. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1991)

 

 

ARTICLE 14 AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROJECTS REVIEW
83.0301405 Findings for Disapproving or Conditioning Affordable Housing Projects.
(a)    The City shall not disapprove a housing development project, as that term is defined in subsection (c) herein and including farmworker housing as defined in subdivision (d) of 50199.50 of the Health and Safety Code, for very low-, low-, or moderate-income households, or condition approval in a manner that renders the housing development project infeasible for development for the use of very low-, low-, or moderate-income households, including through the use of design review standards, unless it makes written findings, based upon substantial evidence in the record, as to one of the following:

 

(1)    The City has adopted a housing element pursuant to Article 10.6 of Chapter 3 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code (Article 10.6) that has been revised in accordance with Government Code Section 65588, is in substantial compliance with Article 10.6, and the City has met or exceeded its share of the regional housing need allocation pursuant to Government Code Section 65584 for the planning period for the income category proposed for the housing development project, provided that any disapproval or conditional approval shall not be based on any of the reasons prohibited by Government Code Section 65008. If the housing development project includes a mix of income categories, and the City has not met or exceeded its share of the regional housing need for one or more of those categories, then this subsection shall not be used to disapprove or conditionally approve the project. The share of the regional housing need met by the City shall be calculated consistently with the forms and definitions that may be adopted by the Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Government Code Section 65400.

 

(2) The housing development project as proposed would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households. As used in this subsection, a “specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. Inconsistency with the zoning ordinance or general plan land use

        designation shall not constitute a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety.

 

(3)    The denial of the project or imposition of conditions is required in order to comply with specific State or Federal law, and there is no feasible method to comply without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households.

 

(4)    The housing development project is proposed on land zoned for agriculture or resource preservation that is surrounded on at least two sides by land being used for agricultural or resource preservation purposes, or which does not have adequate water or wastewater facilities to serve the project.

 

(5)    The housing development project is inconsistent with both the City’s zoning ordinance and general plan land use designation as specified in any element of the general plan as it existed on the date the application was deemed complete, and the City has adopted a revised housing element in accordance with Government Code Section 65588 that is in substantial compliance with State law.

 

A.    Subsection (a)(5) herein cannot be utilized to disapprove or conditionally approve a housing development project if the development project is proposed on a site that is identified as suitable or available for very low-, low-, or moderate-income households in the City’s Housing Element, and is consistent with the density specified in the Housing Element, even though it is inconsistent with both the City’s Zoning Ordinance and General Plan land use designation.

 

B.     If the City has failed to identify in the inventory of land in its Housing Element sites that can be developed for housing within the planning period and that are sufficient to provide for the City’s share of the regional housing need for all income levels pursuant to Government Code Section 65584, then subsection (a)(5) herein shall not be utilized to disapprove or conditionally approve a housing development project proposed for a site designated in any element of the General Plan for residential uses, or designated in any element of the General Plan for commercial uses if residential uses are permitted or conditionally permitted within commercial designations.

 

(b)    When a proposed housing development project complies with applicable, objective general plan and zoning standards and criteria, including design review standards, in effect at the time that the housing development project’s application is determined to be complete, but the City proposes to disapprove the project or to approve it upon the condition that the project be developed at a lower density, the City shall base its decision regarding the proposed housing development project upon written findings supported by substantial evidence on the record that both of the following conditions exist:

 

(1)    The housing development project would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety unless the project is disapproved or approved upon the condition that the project be developed at a lower density. As used in this subsection, a “specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

 

(2)    There is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse impact identified pursuant to subsection (1), other than the disapproval of the housing development project or the approval of the project upon the condition that it be developed at a lower density.

 

(c)    For the purposes of this section, “housing development project” shall have the meaning set forth below, or as otherwise amended by Government Code Section 65589.5(h):

 

(1)    Residential units only;

 

(2)    Mixed-use developments consisting of residential and nonresidential uses in which nonresidential uses are limited to neighborhood commercial uses and to the first floor of buildings that are two or more stories. As used in this subsection, “neighborhood commercial” means small-scale general or specialty stores that furnish goods and services primarily to residents of the neighborhood;

 

(3)    Transitional housing or supportive housing. (Added by Ord. 296 § 4, 2010)

 

 

CHAPTER 4 DIVISION OF LAND PROCEDURES
ARTICLE 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
83.040105 General Provisions.
The provisions defining and regulating the review and approval of tentative, final, and parcel maps; lot line adjustments; lot mergers; reversions to acreage; certificates of subdivision compliance; and official maps shall be governed by this division, except as otherwise indicated by this section.

 

(a)    Authority for Local Regulations.

Pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code, Title 7, Division 2, referred to herein as the Subdivision Map Act, and in addition to any regulations otherwise provided by law, the regulations contained in this division shall apply to all subdivisions, parts of subdivisions, lot line adjustments, lot mergers, reversions to acreage, certificates of compliance, and official maps hereafter made entirely or partially within the incorporated territory of the city of Yucaipa.

 

 

(b)    The designation, establishment, duties, and meeting dates of the reviewing authorities, including the planning agency and the development review committee, shall be as specified by Division 2 of this code.

 

(c)    Review procedures and findings for approval shall be as specified by this division.

 

(d)    Terms used within this Division are defined as specified in Division 12 of this code.

 

83.040110 Review Procedures.
(a)    Tentative Tract Map and Vesting Tentative Map Procedures

 

(1)    Procedure:

Public Hearing

 

(2)    Reviewing Authority:

Planning Commission

 

(A)   Where there has been substantial public opposition to the proposal

 

(B)   Where the proposal is filed concurrently with an application subject to public hearing review procedures

 

(C)   Where any member of the Development Review Committee objects to the proposal

 

(b)    Tentative Parcel Map/Minor Subdivision Procedures

 

(1)    Procedure

Staff Review with Notice procedures shall be used, except that Development Review procedures shall also be used when the project is of the type described in California Government Code Section 66426 (a) (b) (c) or (d).

 

(2)    Reviewing Authority

The community development director shall be the decision-making authority except when, in the opinion of the community development director, the proposal is controversial or when the proposal is filed concurrently with an application subject to public hearing procedures, at which time the proposal shall be referred to the planning commission and the public hearing procedures shall be followed.

 

(c)    Findings

Prior to approving an application for a tentative map or a vesting tentative map, a parcel map or a minor subdivision plot plan, the planning agency shall find the following to be true.

 

(1)    The proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvements, is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan.

 

(2)    The site is physically suitable for the type and proposed density of development.

 

(3)    The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are not likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially or avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.

 

(4)    The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements are not likely to cause serious public health problems.

 

(5)    The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not conflict with easements acquired by the public at large for access through or the use of property within the proposed subdivision.

 

(6)    The design of the subdivision provides, to the extent feasible, passive or natural heating and cooling opportunities.

 

(7)    The proposed subdivision, its design, density, and type of development and improvements conform to the regulations of the Development Code and the regulations of any public agency having jurisdiction by law.

 

(8)    If the proposed subdivision is a conversion of residential real property into a condominium project, a community apartment project, or a stock cooperative project, the Planning Agency must make the additional finding that the proposed subdivision shall comply with the requirements of California Government Code Sections 66427.1 (a) and 66452.10 prior to approving the proposed subdivision.

 

(9)    In the event that the land within a proposed subdivision is subject to a contract entered into pursuant to the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 (commencing with Section 51200 of Chapter 7 of Division 1 of Title 5 of the California Government Code), and the lot areas are less than that required in Subsection 83.040220 (a) (2) (C), the planning agency must make one of the following additional findings in order to approve the subdivision.

 

(A)   The lots created can sustain an agricultural use permitted under the contract, or are subject to a written agreement for joint management pursuant to California Government Code Section 51230.1, and the parcels which are jointly managed total at least 10 acres in size, in the case of prime agricultural land, or 40 acres in size, in the case of land which is not prime agricultural land.

 

(B)   One of the parcels contains a residence and is subject to Section 428 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code; the residence has existed on the property for at least five years; the landowner has owned the parcels for at least 10 years; and the remaining parcels shown on the map are at least 10 acres in size, if the land is prime agricultural land; or at least 40 acres in size, if the land is not prime agricultural land.

 

(10)  Land Project Determination

 

(A)   The proposed subdivision is not a land project; or

 

(B)   The proposed subdivision is a land project; a specific plan covering the area proposed to be included within the project has been adopted by the board of supervisors; and the proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, are consistent with the adopted specific plan.

 

(d)    Notwithstanding Subsection 83.040110 (c) (3), the planning agency may approve a tentative map, or a parcel map for which a tentative map was not required, if an Environmental Impact Report was prepared with respect to the project and a finding is made pursuant to Subdivision (c) of Section 21081 of the California Public Resources Code that specific economic, social, or other considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures or project alternatives identified in the Environmental Impact Report. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 12, 2001)

 

ARTICLE 2 TENTATIVE AND FINAL MAP
83.040201 Filing Criteria for Tentative and Final Maps.
The provisions of this section and the Subdivision Map Act shall govern the necessity for Tentative and Final Maps.

 

(a)    Tentative and Final Maps shall be required for all subdivisions creating five or more parcels, five or more condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the California Civil Code, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a multiple dwelling containing five or more dwelling units to a stock cooperative except where any of the following conditions exist.

 

(1)    A condominium is constructed or an existing structure is converted to a condominium on a single parcel shown on a Final Map or Parcel Map recorded after January 1, 1960, provided, however, that the City Planner may require a Tentative and Final Map for the purposes of obtaining improvements, additional easements and dedications, or for other circumstances which warrant the filing of a new map.

 

(2)    The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway, and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body.

 

(3)    Each lot created by the division has a gross area of 20 acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway.

 

(4)    The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land with a land use district which allows for industrial or commercial development and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths.

 

(5)    Each lot created by the division has a gross area of 40 acres or more, or each of which is a quarter of a quarter section or larger.

 

(b)    A Parcel Map shall be required for those subdivisions described in this Division as being exempt from the requirement for Tentative and Final Maps.

 

(c)    Should the subdivider wish to file multiple Final Maps for a development project that will be phased, then one of the following shall be completed.

 

(1)    The subdivider, at the time the Tentative Map is filed, shall inform the Planning Agency of the subdivider’s intention to file multiple Final Maps on such Tentative Map.

 

(2)    After the filing of the Tentative Map, the Planning Agency and the subdivider concur in the filing of multiple Final Maps.

 

(3)    A subdivider filing multiple Final Maps shall show the boundary limits of each phase and designate the sequence of filing to the satisfaction of the Development Review Committee.

 

(d)    A Final Map shall be required for a cemetery and shall be recorded only with the approval of the City Engineer, subject to the requirements imposed by Division 3, Chapter 4 of this Code and Division 8 of the State of California Health and Safety Code.

 

(e)    Notices of intention to convert residential real property into a condominium project, a community apartment project, or a stock cooperative project shall be made as required by California Government Code Sections 66427.1, 66452.8, and 66452.9 prior to the filing of such map.

 

(f)    At the time of filing a map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of a mobilehome park to another use, the subdivider shall also file a report on the impact of the mobilehome park conversion pursuant to California Government Code Section 66427.4. At least 30 days prior to public hearing for such a conversion, the City shall inform the applicant in writing of the provisions of Section 798.56 of the California Civil Code and all applicable local requirements which impose upon the applicant a duty to notify residents and mobilehome owners of the mobilehome park of the proposed change in use.

 

(g)    At the time of filing a map for the conversion of a stock cooperative or a community apartment project to a condominium, the subdivider shall submit documents showing that the requirements of California Government Code Section 66452.10 have been met.

 

83.040205 Tentative Map Format.
The content and form of Tentative Maps shall be governed by the provisions of this section.

 

(a)    Standards and Preparation

The Tentative Map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered Civil Engineer licensed to practice surveying or licensed Land Surveyor in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act, the Yucaipa City Code, and any other City ordinance, statute or law, or any amendments thereto, pertaining to the use, sale or lease of land. The Tentative Map shall be prepared in compliance with the officially adopted General Plan, and any applicable Specific Plan, or any amendments thereto adopted pursuant to the State Planning and Zoning Law and in accordance with the Standard Streets and Highways Plan adopted by the City Council, as amended. The Tentative Map shall show the location of streets and property lines bounding the property and shall conform to all of the following provisions and the standards found on record as prescribed by the Office of Planning.

 

(1)    Each Tentative Map shall be drawn to an engineer’s scale and shall clearly show the details of the plan thereon. Wherever practicable, such scale shall be one inch to 100 feet or less, and in no case shall the scale be smaller than one inch to 200 feet.

 

(2)    The tentative maps shall show or be accompanied by the following information.

 

(A)   Development proposed on the subdivision (lot sale or building program).

 

(B)   Source, name of supplier, quality, and an estimate of available quantity of water, or, if to be served by an established mutual water company or an established public utility, a letter shall be furnished to indicate that satisfactory arrangements have been made or can be made for water supply.

 

(C)   Type of street improvements, utilities, and street lights which are proposed to be installed; pursuant to California Government Code Section 66473.3 and this Code, this information shall include the type of cable television systems to be installed, if any cable television system is available.

 

(D)   Proposed method of sewage disposal.

 

If utilizing sewers, the applicant must furnish a letter from an authorized representative of the entity or agency which will provide such sanitary sewer service assuring that such entity or agency can and will accept for disposal sewage generated on the land under consideration after its improvement. The Office of Planning shall give written notice to the entity or agency which owns the related sewage treatment plant prior to issuance of the written determination of filing of the proposed subdivision. This filing requirement need not be met when, within 14 days from the date of providing the above requirement notice, the entity or agency which owns the related sewage treatment plant has submitted an independently certified engineering report to the Office of Planning which demonstrates that adequate sewage treatment plan capacity is not available.

 

(E)   The drainage area tributary to the subdivision and a statement setting forth in detail the manner in which storm runoff will enter the subdivisions, the manner in which it will be carried through the subdivision, and the manner in which disposal beyond the subdivision boundaries will be accomplished.

 

(F)    Topographical and contour data shall be shown pursuant to adopted City standards.

 

(G)   The widths and locations of all recorded easements which are to remain.

 

(H)   Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of utilities, school districts, fire protection agencies, and cable television services serving the tract.

 

(I)    Remainder parcels shall be indicated as a “remainder parcel” and shall be subject to review for design access, water, and sewer availability and other such improvements as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare that are consistent with the intent of this Division. Waiver of improvements may be granted for remainder parcels where the size exceeds five acres.

 

(J)    When any change is made by the subdivider in the statement given in pursuance of this section, such change or changes shall be submitted in writing to the Planning Agency and approved prior to the recording of the Final Map.

 

(K)   In the case of a subdivision to convert a mobilehome park to another use, the subdivider shall file a report on the impact of the conversion upon the displaced residents of the mobilehome park to be converted. The report shall discuss availability of adequate replacement space in mobilehome parks in determining the impact of the conversion on displaced mobilehome park residents. The subdivider shall make a copy of the report available to each resident of the mobilehome park 15 days prior to the date of the hearing on which the Planning Agency is to take action upon the Tentative Map. Except as provided herein, the report and all applicable procedures shall be governed by Article 3.5 (Conversion of Mobilehome Park to Other Issues) of this chapter.

 

(L)   In the case of a Vesting Tentative Map, at the time it is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.”

 

(3)    Tract Number

Prior to filing a Tentative Map of a subdivision or Reversion to Acreage, a licensed engineer or surveyor shall obtain a tract number or numbers from the County Recorder. When a number has been assigned by the County Recorder for the subdivision of a particular parcel of land, the subdivider shall place this same number upon each Tentative Map of the subdivision, and the number issued shall not thereafter be changed or altered in any manner upon the Tentative Map of the subdivision unless and until a new number shall have been assigned by the County Recorder. (Amended by Ord. 344 § 1, 2016)

 

83.040210 Final Map Format.
The content and form of Final Maps shall be governed by the provisions of this subsection.

 

(a)    Standards and Preparation

The Final Map shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, a registered Civil Engineer licensed to practice land surveying or licensed Land Surveyor; shall be based upon a survey; and shall conform to all of the following provisions, the California Subdivision Map Act and the County Surveyor’s standards as adopted by the City Council.

 

(1)    It shall be legibly drawn, printed, or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester-base film. Certificates, affidavits, and acknowledgements may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on a polyester-base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility.

 

(2)    The size of each sheet shall be 18″ x 26″. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be large enough to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown.

 

(3)    All survey and mathematical information and data necessary to locate all monuments and to locate and retrace any and all interior and exterior boundary lines appearing thereon shall be shown, including bearings and distances of straight lines, and radii and area length or chord bearings and length of all curves, and such information as may be necessary to determine the location of the centers of curves and ties to existing monuments used to establish the subdivision boundaries.

 

(4)    Each lot shall be numbered. Each street shall be named.

 

(5)    The exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by an opaque ink line three times as wide as the widest line on the map, excluding the border line. The map shall show the definite location of the subdivision, and particularly its relation to surrounding surveys.

 

(6)    If the map includes a remainder parcel, and the gross area of the remainder parcel or similar named parcel is five acres or less, it shall be surveyed and mapped. If the remainder parcel or similar named parcel is more than five gross acres, that parcel shall show record information and parcel size only.

 

(7)    Proposed public areas and drainage easements shall be shown.

 

(8)    Additional notes which do not affect record title interests shall not be shown on the Final Map. Where a Composite Development Plan has been required, a prominent note shall be placed below the Surveyor’s Notes on the final map in one-quarter (1/4) inch high, bolded, block letters, stating the following.

 

COMPOSITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN NOTE

 

A Composite Development Plan (C.D.P.) affecting this map is on file in the City of Yucaipa, Office of

 

Building and Safety.

 

(b)    Title Sheets

Prior to filing, those certificates and acknowledgements set forth in this Division shall appear on the title sheet of the Final Map and may be combined where appropriate. The title sheet shall also contain a certificate, signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interests in real property subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the Final Map, and is required except as provided by the Subdivision Map Act. Each sheet of the Final Map shall also contain a title, consisting of the number of the subdivision, and a subtitle, consisting of a description of all property being subdivided by reference to such map or maps of the property shown thereon, as shall have been previously recorded or filed with the City Clerk pursuant to a final judgment in any action in partition, or shall have been previously filed in the Office of the City or County Recorder, or by reference to the plat of any United States Survey. The title sheet shall also show, in a form acceptable to the City Engineer, such appropriate certificates and acknowledgements as required in the Subdivision Map Act, or any additional certificates as required by the City Engineer or City standards.

 

(c)    Certificates on Final Maps

The certificates on Final Maps shall be governed by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the Final and Parcel Map standards established by the City Engineering Department as adopted by the City Council.

 

(1)    Dedications of or offers to dedicate interests in real property for specified public purposes shall be made by a certificate on the title page of the Final Map, signed and acknowledged by those parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided, subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act.

 

In the event that any street shown on a subdivision map is not offered for dedication, the certificate may contain a statement to this effect. If such statement appears on the map and if the map is approved by the City Council the use of any such street or streets by the public shall be permissive only.

 

Any offer of dedication of real property for street or public utility easement purposes shall be deemed not to include any public utility facilities located on or under such real property unless an intent to dedicate such facilities is expressly stated in the certificate, and then only to the extent so stated.

 

Any dedication or agreements required within the remainder parcel of a Final Map shall be executed by the legal owners of record and any holder in a beneficial interest in a trust deed.

 

(2)    The Final Map shall contain a certificate for execution by the City Clerk stating that the City Council approved the map and accepted, subject to improvement, or rejected on behalf of the public, any real property offered for dedication or public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication.

 

(3)    A certificate is required indicating the engineer or surveyor responsible for the survey and Final Map. This certificate shall give the date of the survey, state that the survey and Final Map were made by the engineer or surveyor, and indicate that the survey is true and complete as shown.

 

The certificate shall also state that all the monuments are of the character and occupy the positions indicated, or that they will be set in such positions on or before a specified later date. The certificate shall also state that the monuments are, or will be, sufficient to enable the survey to be retraced.

 

At least one exterior boundary line of the land being subdivided shall be adequately monumented or referenced before the map may be recorded.

 

(4)    The County Surveyor shall issue a certificate if all of the following requirements have been met.

 

(A)   The Surveyor has examined the map.

 

(B)   The subdivision as shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the Tentative Map and any approved alterations thereof.

 

(C)   All provisions of this article and any local ordinances applicable at the time of approval of the Tentative Map have been complied with.

 

(D)   The County Surveyor is satisfied that the map is technically correct.

 

(5)    The County Surveyor shall complete and file, with the City Clerk, the certificate as required by this section within 20 days from the time the Final Map is submitted to the County Surveyor by the subdivider for approval.

 

(6)    At the time the subdivider presents the Final Map, there shall be presented releases executed by the various public utilities, including cable television services as to location of their facilities and that satisfactory arrangements have been made for the establishment of any easements required for such facilities. The failure of any said public utility to notify the County Surveyor of the need for such easements within 20 days of receipt of the advance copy of the Final Map shall be deemed notice that said provisions and arrangements have been made and no further release shall be required.

 

83.040220 Tentative Map.
The following provisions shall govern the review of Tentative and Vesting Tentative Maps.

 

(a)    Action on Tentative Map

 

(1)    The Planning Agency shall approve, conditionally approve, extend, or disapprove the map or maps of the proposed subdivision within 50 days after an application for a Tentative Map has been filed, deemed completed and accepted for filing, except as otherwise provided by the Subdivision Map Act. An official copy of the Planning Agency’s action shall be filed with the Tentative Map and be reported directly to the subdivider and to the Real Estate Commission of the State of California. If no action is taken upon a Tentative Map by the Planning Agency within the time limits specified in this division or any authorized extension thereof, the Tentative Map as filed shall be deemed to be approved insofar as it complies with other applicable requirements of this division, other applicable ordinances of the City of Yucaipa, and all applicable State laws, and it shall be the duty of the City Clerk and the Planning Commission Secretary to certify such approval. This section shall be inapplicable to extensions of time which are reasonable and required in order to comply with any provision of State law, including the requirements for compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970. Provided, however, if an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) is prepared, the 50-day period specified in this section shall not be applicable, and the Planning Agency shall take action upon the Tentative Map within 45 days after certification of the EIR. Any revised Tentative Map or portion thereof filed with the Planning Agency shall comply with the requirements in effect at the time such revised map is considered by the Planning Agency.

 

(2)    A Tentative Map shall not be approved in the following cases.

 

(A)   In the case of a conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock cooperative, the Planning Agency shall not approve the Tentative Map unless evidence is provided by the subdivider, as required by Section 66452.9 of the California Government Code, that proper notification has been given to each of the tenants of the proposed conversion notifying of the subdivider’s intent to convert.

 

(B)   In the case of a conversion of a stock cooperative or a community apartment project to a condominium, the Planning Agency shall not approve a Tentative Map unless evidence is provided by the subdivider, as required by Section 66452.10 of the California Government Code, that the required number of owners in the cooperative or project, as specified in the bylaws or other organizational documents, have voted in favor of such conversion.

 

(C)   The Planning Agency shall not approve a Tentative Map, or a Parcel Map for which a Tentative Map was not required, if it finds that the land is subject to a contract entered into pursuant to the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 (California Government Code Section 51296) and that the resulting parcels following a subdivision of that land would be too small to sustain their agricultural use. For purposes of this section, land shall be presumed to be in parcels too small to sustain their agricultural use if the land is less than 10 acres in size in the case of prime agricultural land, or less than 40 acres in size in the case of land which is not prime agriculture land. For purposes of this section, agricultural land shall be presumed to be in parcels large enough to sustain their agricultural use if the land is at least 10 acres in size in the case of prime agricultural land, or at least 40 acres in size in the case of land which is not prime agricultural. The Planning Agency may approve a subdivision with parcels smaller than those listed above if the findings in Subsections 83.040115 (c) (8) (B) (i) and (ii), along with the other applicable findings listed in Section 83.040115, are made, or the land within the subdivision is subject to a contract when one of the following has occurred.

 

(I)    The Local Agency Formation Commission has approved the annexation of the land to a City, and the City will not succeed to the contract as provided in California Government Code Sections 51243 and 51243.5.

 

(II)   Written notice of nonrenewal of the contract has been served prior to March 7, 1985, as provided in California Government Code Section 51245.

 

(III)  Written notice of nonrenewal of the contract has been served on or after March 7, 1985, as provided in California Government Code Section 51245, and, as a result of that notice, there are no more than three years remaining in the term of the contract.

 

(IV)  The Council has granted tentative approval for cancellation of the contract as provided in California Government Code Section 51282.

 

(3)    The approval or conditional approval by the Advisory Agency of any revised or new Tentative Map shall annul all previous designs and approvals thereof.

 

(4)    When modifications in design are conditions of approval of a Tentative Map, the subdivider shall, at least 30 days prior to the submission of Final Maps, submit the 10 copies of the Tentative Map as modified to the Planning Agency for distribution to the Development Review Committee representatives.

 

(b)    Community Development Director Referral

When acting as the Planning Agency for subdivisions where a Tentative and Final Map are required, the Community Development Director shall determine, prior to taking an action to approve, conditionally approve, extend, or deny the application, that the project is noncontroversial. For the purpose of this section, “noncontroversial” shall mean that no member of the Development Review Committee objects to the project or any portion thereof, that no specific written request has been received requesting public hearing review of the project from person(s) notified in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 83.010330 (b), and that in the opinion of the Community Development Director, there has been no substantial objection to the proposed project from members of the public. If the Community Development Director determines the project to be controversial, the project may be referred by the Community Development Director to the Planning Commission for action.

 

(c)    Review of Tentative Maps by Other Agencies

When a Tentative Map has been properly filed and the subdivider has furnished the required number of copies, the Office of Planning shall, within three City business days of the filing and review cycle deadlines (Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays excluded), forward a copy or copies thereof to the following.

 

(1)    County Fire Warden

 

(2)    Building Official

 

(3)    Director of the Department of Community Development

 

(4)    City Engineer

 

(5)    District Engineer of the California Department of Transportation, if a Federal or State highway is involved

 

(6)    Any municipality entitled thereto

 

(7)    Other public agencies or officers who, as determined by the Planning Agency, have an interest in the proposed subdivision

 

(8)    Any appropriate public utilities and cable television system

 

(d)    Reports on Tentative Map

Any report or recommendation on a Tentative Map by the staff of the Planning Agency or the Development Review Committee to the Planning Agency shall be in writing and a copy thereof sent to the subdivider or any tenant of the subject property in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock cooperative project, at least three days prior to any hearing or action on such map by such Planning Agency. In the event of the failure of any officer, department, municipality, district, or agency to report to the Planning Agency in writing within 20 days after the filing deadline of the Tentative Map, it shall be deemed that said officer, department, municipality, district, or agency has no objections to the proposed map.

 

Wherever possible, the reports and recommendations of City departments shall be uniform in content and form and shall be presented to the Planning Agency by the Chairperson of the Development Review Committee or designee.

 

(1)    Required Action in the Case of Waste Discharge Violations

The Development Review Committee shall report to the Planning Agency as to whether the discharge of waste from the proposed subdivision into an existing community sewer system will result in the violation of existing requirements prescribed by a California Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to Division 7 (commencing with Section 13000) of the California Water Code. In the event that the Planning Agency finds that the proposed waste discharge would result in or add to violation of the requirements of such Board, it may disapprove the Tentative Map or maps of the subdivision or take such other action as may be permitted by the policies of the City Council

 

(e)    Expiration of Approval

The initial approval period of an approved or conditionally approved Tentative Map and any associated development application shall expire 36 months after its approval or conditional approval unless an extension is granted as hereinafter provided or as otherwise provided by the Development Code. The expiration of the approved or conditionally approved Tentative Map shall terminate all proceedings, and no Final or Parcel Map of all or any portion of the real property included within such Tentative Map shall be filed without first processing a new Tentative Map.

 

This initial approval period may be extended in the following circumstances.

 

(1)    If the subdivider is subject to a requirement of $125,000 or more to construct or improve or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the boundaries of the Tentative Map in order to obtain a Final Map, each filing of a Final Map that is part of a series of multiple Final Maps authorized by Subsection 83.040201 (c) of this Code and California Government Code Section 66456.1 shall extend the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved Tentative Map and any associated development project by 36 months from the date of its expiration as provided in this section, or the date of the previously filed Final Map, whichever is later. Such extensions shall not extend the Tentative Map more than 10 years from its approval or conditional approval. However, a Tentative Map on property subject to a development agreement authorized by Article 2.5 (commencing with Section 65864) of Article 4 of Division 1 of the California Government Code may be extended for the period of time provided for in the agreement, but not beyond the duration of the agreement. The number of phased Final Maps which may be filed shall be determined by the Planning Agency at the time of the approval or conditional approval of the Tentative Map. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to notify the Office of Planning of the filing of the Final Map so that appropriate arrangements may be made to document such extension.

 

“Public improvements,” as used in this section, include traffic controls, streets, roads, highways, bridges, overcrossings, street interchanges, flood control or storm drain facilities, sewer facilities, water facilities, and lighting facilities.

 

(2)    This period of time shall not include any period of time during which a moratorium, imposed after approval of the tentative map, is in existence, provided, however, that the length of the moratorium does not exceed five years.

 

Once a moratorium is terminated, the map shall be valid for the same period of time as that which remained of the map approval period at the time that the moratorium was imposed. However, if the remaining time is less than 120 days, the map shall be valid for 120 days following the termination of the moratorium.

 

(3)    In addition, this period of time, including any extension granted pursuant to subsection (f), shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map if a stay of the time period is approved by the city pursuant to this section. Within 10 days of the service of the initial petition or complaint in the lawsuit upon the city, the subdivider may apply to the city for a stay pursuant to the city’s adopted procedures. Within 40 days after receiving the application, the city shall either stay the time period for up to five years or deny the requested stay.

 

(f)    Time Extensions on Approved Tentative Maps and/or Any Related Development Applications.

The community development director may approve extensions of time for a period or periods not exceeding a total of 36 months, unless otherwise provided by the development code. Additional extensions of time, for a period or periods not exceeding a total of twenty-four (24) months, may be approved by the city council. Any application of a subdivider for such extension of time shall be made in writing to the community development director not less than 30 days prior to the expiration date. Such extension of time is subject to an extension fee as found in the city schedule of fees. If the final map is not recorded within the approved extension, then the subdivision must be refiled in accordance with all provisions of this Division.

 

(g)    Withdrawal of Tentative Maps.

Any subdivider or record owner of property upon which a tentative map has been filed may withdraw such map at any time until the recordation of the appropriate final map. Notice of such withdrawal shall be made in writing to the planning agency. Refund in filing fees for any such map withdrawn shall be made in accordance with the city schedule of fees.

 

(h)    Appeal by Subdivider.

The subdivider, or any tenant of the subject property in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock cooperative project, may appeal any action of the planning agency with respect to a tentative map. Any such appeal shall be filed with the office of planning for an action taken by the community development director, or with the city clerk for an action taken by the planning commission. Such appeals shall be filed within 10 days after the action of the planning agency to deny a request for extension of time for an approved or conditionally approved tentative map.

 

After the filing of an appeal, the appeal body shall set the matter for public hearing. Such hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date of a request filed by the subdivider or the appellant. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided. Within 10 days following the conclusion of the hearing, the appeal hearing body shall render its decision. The decision of the appeal hearing body shall comply with the provisions of this division and shall include all findings required by this division. If the appeal hearing body fails to act upon an appeal within the time limit specified in this division, the action of the planning agency shall be deemed to be upheld, and it shall be the duty of the secretary of the planning commission or the city clerk, whichever body has heard the appeal, to certify such action. The fee for filing of an appeal shall be established in the city schedule of fees.

 

(i)     Complaint by Interested Person.

Any interested person adversely affected by a decision of the planning agency may file a complaint with the appropriate appeal body concerning any decision of the planning agency. Any such complaint shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission or city clerk, depending upon the reviewing authority taking action. Such appeals shall be filed within 10 days after the action of the planning agency which is the subject of the complaint. Upon the filing of the complaint, the appeal hearing body shall set the matter for public hearing. Such hearing shall be held within 30 days after the filing of the complaint. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided.

 

Upon conclusion of the hearing, the appeal body shall within 10 days declare its findings based upon the testimony and documents produced before it, or sustain, modify, reject, or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the planning agency and make such findings as are consistent with the provisions of this division.

 

The fee for filing of a complaint shall be the same as that required for an appeal of a subdivision. (Ord. 186 §12, 1998)

 

83.040225 Final Map.
The following provisions shall govern the filing and recording of the Final Map.

 

(a)    Filing the Advance Copy of the Final Map

After receipt of the report of the Planning Agency approving or conditionally approving the tentative map, and at least 50 days prior to the expiration of the approval or conditional approval or any approved extension of time as provided by this Division, the subdivider may cause the real property included within the map, or any part thereof, to be surveyed and a Final Map thereof prepared in accordance with the approved or conditionally approved Tentative Map, and an advance copy of the Final Map to be submitted to the County Surveyor. The advance copy of the Final Map shall be accompanied by the following information.

 

(1)    Traverse sheets showing closures with allowable limits of exterior boundary and of irregular blocks and lots in subdivision

 

(2)    Preliminary title report

 

(3)    Fees for examining Final Map in the amount specified in the City Schedule of Fees adopted by the City Council.

 

(4)    In the case of the conversion of residential property to a condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative, evidence shall be submitted that the notices of intention to convert to prospective tenants, as required by California Government Code Section 66427.1, have been given.

 

(5)    Composite Development Plan as subject to the provisions of Article 5 of this division

 

(6)    Any additional information as may be required by the Planning Agency or City standards shall be submitted to the appropriate City department.

 

(b)    The Community Development Director shall be the primary coordinator in seeing that the conditions of approval of the Tentative Map have been fulfilled. The Community Development Director shall transmit maps to and request written reports from the City departments and public utilities, including any cable television systems, which have submitted recommendations on the Tentative Map. Within 20 days after receipt of such an advance copy of the Final Map, said Department or utility shall issue a preliminary written report as to the compliance or noncompliance of the advance Final Map as to the matters under its jurisdiction.

 

(c)    Filing Official Copy of the Final Map

If the advance copy of the Final Map has been found satisfactory by the County Surveyor, the subdivider shall cause the Final Map to be officially filed with the City Engineer at least 20 days prior to expiration of the approval or conditional approval or any approved extension of time as provided by this division. The Final Map shall not be officially filed until the engineer or surveyor has received notification from the City Engineer that all provisions of the Tentative Map approval, the Subdivision Map Act, City Code and City standards have been complied with. The official filing of the Final Map with the City Engineer will constitute the Final Map filing date.

 

(d)    Checking and Reports to the City Council

After the issuance of a receipt for the official filing of the Final Map, the City Engineer shall examine it as to sufficiency of affidavits and acknowledgements, correctness of surveying data, mathematical data and computations, and other matters which may require checking to insure compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this division.

 

If the Final Map is found to be in substantial compliance with the Tentative Map and is in correct form and the matters shown thereon are sufficient and the Community Development Director is satisfied that all of the conditions of approval have been met, the City Engineer shall endorse approval thereon. The City Engineer shall combine with the Final Map the agreements, easements, and securities as required by this Division. Such material shall be transmitted by the Public Works Department to the City Council for its consideration of the Final Map.

 

(e)    Approval of Final Map by the City Council

 

(1)    The City Council shall, within a period of 10 days after the filing of the Final Map for approval or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, whichever is later, approve the map if it conforms to all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this division applicable at the time of approval or conditional approval of the Tentative Map and any rulings made thereunder or, if it does not so conform, disapprove the map.

 

(2)    If the Council does not approve or disapprove the map within the prescribed time, or any authorized extension thereof, and the map conforms to all said requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved, and the City Clerk shall certify its approval thereon.

 

(f)    Time Limit for Filing Final Map

If the subdivider fails to file the Final Map with the County Recorder and the required accompanying data with the appropriate City departments within 36 months after the date of first approval by the Planning Agency or within any authorized extension of time, the Tentative Map approval or conditional approval shall become void. In such a case, a new filing fee shall be paid, and a new Tentative Map approval shall be obtained.

 

(g)    Improvement Agreement

If at the time of approval of the Final Map by the City Council, any improvements required by local ordinance or as a condition of the approval of the Tentative Map have not been completed in accordance with City standards applicable at the time of the approval or conditional approval of the Tentative Map, the City Council, as a condition precedent to approval of the Final Map, shall require the subdivider to enter into an agreement with the City Council upon mutually agreeable terms to thereafter complete such improvements at the subdivider’s expense. The City Council shall require that performance of such agreement is guaranteed by appropriate securities.

 

(h)    If 60 days prior to the submittal of a Final or Parcel Map, the subdivider has failed to comply with the Tentative Map or minor subdivision plot plan conditions which require the subdivider to construct or install off-site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the City has sufficient title or interest, including an easement or license, then at the time the Parcel or Final Map is filed with the local agency, to permit the improvements to be made, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the City to pay all costs of the City in acquiring such property. The City shall have 120 days from the filing of the Final Map or Parcel Map, pursuant to Section 66457 of the Subdivision Map Act, to obtain interest in the land to permit the improvement(s) to be made by negotiation or proceedings pursuant to Title 7 (commencing with Section 1230.010) of Part 3 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, including proceedings for immediate possession of the property under Article 3 (commencing with Section 1255.410)  of Article 6 of such Title. In the event the City fails to meet the 120-day time limitation, the condition for construction of off-site improvements shall be conclusively deemed to be waived. Prior to approval of the Final Map, the City may require the subdivider to enter into an agreement to complete the improvements, pursuant to subsection (6) above at such time as the City acquires an interest in the land which will permit the improvements to be made.

 

“Off-site improvements,” as used in this subsection, do not include improvements which are necessary to assure replacement or construction of housing for persons and families of low or moderate income, as defined in Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

83.040230 Conditions of Map Approval.
The conditions of map approval shall be as follows.

 

(a)    Subdivisions for which a Tentative and Final Map are Required

 

As a condition of approval of a map of five or more parcels, the Planning Agency may require such dedications and improvements as are necessary to insure that the lots to be created are provided with adequate public services and utilities, possibly including any appropriate cable television services, to meet the needs of future residents or users; are of adequate design in all respects; act to mitigate any potential environmental impacts identified in the Environmental Impact Report or by other means; and provide for proper grading and erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property. All improvements shall be in accordance with adopted City standards.

 

(b)    Access

 

(1)    Except as provided below, lots created by a subdivision of land shall abut upon a recorded dedicated public right-of-way of a width as established by the City Master Plan of Highways or City Highway Right-of-Way Standards, or shall be assured of access to the City road system by an approved access which connects a lot or lots to a maintained public street or state highway.

 

(2)    The Planning Agency may waive the requirements for approved access to subdivisions having lot sizes of 40 gross acres or more when all of the following findings are made.

 

(A)   The applicant is or will be subject to severe hardship unless the waiver is approved.

 

(B)   There is an existing traveled roadway which has been in existence for at least five years, which roadway is at least 20 feet in width at all points.

 

(C)   The roadway has capability for normal passenger car use to each lot in the subdivision.

 

(3)    Private road easements may be approved for access to each lot if it is determined that public street access cannot be provided due to certain title limitations or topographical conditions.

 

(4)    Road easements of record established prior to the effective date of this article shall be recognized as legal access to each lot of the subdivision.

 

(5)    Existing traveled roads for which a court has determined that a prescriptive right by users exists for public use shall be recognized as legal access to each lot of the subdivision.

 

(c)    In determining whether to approve or disapprove an application for a Tentative Map, the City shall apply only those ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the date the proposal for the subdivision was accepted as complete, as provided in California Government Code Section 66474.2.

 

ARTICLE 3 PARCEL MAP AND MINOR SUBDIVISION PLOT PLAN
83.040301 Filing Criteria for Tentative and Parcel Maps, and Minor Subdivision Plot Plans.
(a)    The provisions of this section and the Subdivision Map Act shall govern the necessity for Parcel Maps and Minor Subdivisions.

 

(1)    A Tentative Map may be required and a Parcel Map shall be required for subdivisions where a Final Map is not otherwise required by this division, unless waived pursuant to this division. A Parcel Map shall not be required for subdivisions created, pursuant to California Government Code 66428, by short-term leases of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the California Public Utilities Code, or land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, common carrier, public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way. A Parcel Map may be required if a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates such a Parcel Map.

 

(2)    A Parcel Map shall not be required for the construction of a condominium project or for the conversion of an existing structure to a condominium on a single parcel shown on a Final Map or Parcel Map recorded after January 1, 1960, provided, however, the Community Development Director may require that a Parcel Map be filed for the purposes of obtaining improvements, additional easements and dedications, or other circumstances which warrant the filing of a new map.

 

(3)    The Director of the Department of Community Development, except as otherwise provided, may waive the requirement for a Parcel Map where two, three, or four parcels and any remainder parcel are involved, and the smallest parcel created is 2.5 gross acres or a 2.5-acre aliquot part of a section or greater, provided said Director has made a finding that the proposed division of land complies with the requirements as to the following.

 

(A)   Area

 

(B)   Improvement and design

 

(C)   Flood water drainage control

 

(D)   Appropriate improved public roads

 

(E)   Sanitary disposal facilities

 

(F)    Potable water supply availability

 

(G)   Environmental protection

 

(H)   Other requirements of this division

 

(I)    The Subdivision Map Act

 

(J)    Other applicable ordinances of the City of Yucaipa

 

(K)   Adequate survey data exists to identify the property as determined by the County Surveyor; a record of surveys recorded after January 1, 1983, shall not constitute adequate survey data to permit a waiver of the requirement for a Parcel Map; said finding shall be based upon evidence, information, and recommendations of the Development Review Committee or individual Development Review Committee member acting within the departmental area of expertise

 

(4)    The Director of the Department of Community Development shall not waive a Parcel Map as a condition of approval of a Vesting Tentative Parcel Map.

 

(5)    Where the requirement for a Parcel Map is waived pursuant to provisions of this section, a Tentative Map may be required by the City Planner. The Community Development Director may establish application procedures for subdivisions which are not subject to the requirement for Tentative and Final Maps.

 

(6)    When a Parcel Map rather than a Final Map is required by this division, the subdivider has the option of submitting a Tentative Map.

 

(7)    The subdivider shall submit a Tentative Map in place of a minor subdivision plot plan to obtain the rights conferred by the Subdivision Map Act and this division for a Vesting Tentative Map.

 

(8)    The requirements of Subsection 83.040201 (e), (f), and (g) shall apply to the filing of Parcel Maps for the conversion of residential real property to another use.

 

83.040305 Subdivision Plot Plan Content.
The content and form of the Minor Subdivision Plot Plan and applications shall be prepared in conformance with the Subdivision Map Act and any procedures established by the Community Development Department.

 

83.040310 Parcel Map Content.
The content and form of Parcel Maps shall be governed by the provisions of this section.

 

(a)    Standards and Preparation

The Parcel Map shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, a registered Civil Engineer licensed to practice land surveying or a licensed Land Surveyor; shall show the location of streets and property lines bounding the property; and shall conform to all of the following provisions and adopted City standards.

 

(1)    The Parcel Map shall be legibly drawn, printed, or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester-based film. Certificates, affidavits, and acknowledgements shall be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester based film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility.

 

(2)    The size of each sheet shall be 18″ x 26″. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be large enough to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown.

 

(3)    Each lot shall be numbered, and each street shall be named.

 

(4)    The exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated as an opaque ink line three times as wide as the widest line on the map, excluding the border line. The map shall show the location of each parcel and its relation to surrounding surveys.

 

(5)    If the map includes a remainder parcel and the gross area of the remainder parcel or similar named parcel is five acres or less, it shall be surveyed and mapped. If the remainder parcel or similar named parcel is more than five acres, that parcel shall show record information and parcel size only.

 

(6)    Existing natural drainage courses and proposed drainage easements, as necessary, shall be shown on the Parcel Map.

 

(7)    Additional notes which do not affect record title interests shall not be shown on the Parcel Map. Where a Composite Development Plan has been required, a prominent note shall be placed below the Surveyor’s Notes on the parcel map in one-quarter (1/4) inch high, bold, block letters, stating the following.

 

COMPOSITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN NOTE

 

A Composite Development Plan (C.D.P.) affecting this map is on file in the City of Yucaipa Office of Building and Safety.

 

(8)    In the case of a Vesting Tentative Map for a Parcel Map, at the time it is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face “Vesting Tentative Parcel Map.”

 

(b)    Parcel Number

Prior to filing a Parcel Map, a licensed engineer or surveyor shall obtain a number or numbers from the County Recorder.

 

(c)    Certificates on Parcel Maps

The statements on Parcel Maps shall be as required by the City Engineer’s standards and adopted by the City Council.

 

(1)    Subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, a statement, signed and acknowledged by the legal owner of record in the real property subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the Parcel Map is required.

 

(2)    Offers to dedicate interest in real property for specified public purposes shall be made by a statement on the Parcel Map, signed and acknowledged by the legal owner of record in the real property being subdivided, subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. The signature of either the holder of beneficial interests under trust deeds or the trustee under such trust deeds, but not both, may be omitted. The signature of either shall constitute a full and complete subordination of the lien of the Deed of Trust to the map and any interest created by the map.

 

However, with respect to a division of land into four or fewer parcels, where dedications or offers of dedications are not required, the statement shall be signed and acknowledged by the legal owner of record only

 

(3)    In all cases where a Parcel Map is required, such map shall be based upon a field survey made in conformance with the Land Surveyors Act, except in the case of Reversion to Acreage.

 

(4)    The Parcel Map shall contain a certificate for execution by the City Engineer, stating that the Engineer approved the map and accepted, subject to improvement, or rejected on behalf of the public, any real property offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication. The City Engineer is hereby empowered to accept such dedications on behalf of the City Council.

 

83.040320 Minor Subdivision Procedures.
The provisions for the review of minor subdivision, plot plans, Tentative and Parcel Maps shall be as required in Section 83.040220 of this Code, unless otherwise indicated in that section.

 

83.040325 Parcel Map Procedures.
This section shall govern the procedures for the processing, approval, conditional approval, and disapproval of an application to subdivide land into four lots or less, with or without a remainder parcel, or more when a Parcel Map has been required in lieu of a Final Map and filing Parcel Maps.

 

(a)    Filing Advance Copy of Parcel Map

Where the filing of a Parcel Map is required pursuant to this division after the approval or conditional approval of the Tentative Parcel Map or minor subdivision plot plan application as provided by this division, the subdivider may cause the real property included within the map to be surveyed, and a Parcel Map thereof shall be prepared in accordance with the approved Tentative Parcel Map or minor subdivision plot plan application. An advance copy of said Parcel Map shall be filed with the County Surveyor.

 

The advance copy of the Parcel Map shall be accompanied by the following information.

 

(1)    Preliminary title report

 

(2)    Fees in the amount specified in the City Schedule of Fees

 

(3)    Composite Development Plan

 

(4)    Such additional information as required by the Planning Agency or approved City standards

 

(b)    Filing Official Copy of Parcel Map

The Parcel Map shall not be officially filed until the engineer or surveyor has received notification that all provisions of the Tentative Parcel Map or minor subdivision plot plan approval, the Subdivision Map Act, and City standards have been complied with and an advance copy of the Parcel Map has been approved by the County Surveyor in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

 

(c)    The filing and recording of a Parcel Map shall be subject to the requirements of Subsection 83.040225(g).

 

ARTICLE 4 VESTING TENTATIVE MAP
83.040401 Filing Criteria for Vesting Tentative Maps.
(a)    Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this Division, requires the filing of a Tentative Map or a Tentative Parcel Map for a residential development, a Vesting Tentative Map may instead be filed in accordance with the provisions hereof.

 

(b)    If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a Vesting Tentative Map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision permit for construction or work preparatory to construction.

 

(c)    Except as otherwise set forth, the provisions of this Division shall apply to Vesting Tentative Maps.

 

83.040405 Content.
The content and form of Vesting Tentative Maps shall be governed by the provisions of this section.

 

(a)    At the time a Vesting Tentative Map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.”

 

(b)    A Vesting Tentative Map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data, and reports as set forth in this division for a Tentative Map except as hereinafter provided.

 

83.040410 Procedures.
The following provisions shall govern the filing, processing, and review of Vesting Tentative Maps.

 

(a)    A Vesting Tentative Map shall be processed and reviewed in the same manner as set forth in this Division for a Tentative Map, except as hereinafter provided.

 

(1)    Prior to filing a Vesting Tentative Map, the subdivider shall have a preapplication conference with the Development Review Committee to determine if any additional information should be filed with the Vesting Tentative Map application. The applicant shall submit to the Development Review Committee prior to the preapplication conference all information that is required of a Tentative Map application. This information will be reviewed by the Committee, and additional information may be required by the Committee to be submitted with the Vesting Tentative Map application. Preliminary Environmental Review of the proposed project shall be completed prior to the preapplication conference.

 

The minutes of the preapplication conference shall dictate the filing requirements for the Vesting Tentative Map, and shall accompany the filing of said map. The information required by the Development Review Committee for formal submission of the proposed project may include, but is not limited to, the following.

 

(A)   Drainage plan for control of both on-site and off-site storm runoff, water courses, channels, existing culverts, and drainpipes including existing and proposed facilities for control of storm waters, data as to the amount of runoff and the approximate grade, and dimension of proposed facilities for control of storm waters

 

(B)   Building envelopes

 

(C)   Proposed land use and types of structures

 

(D)   Detailed circulation information (existing and proposed); this information may include area-wide traffic data sufficient for the City to determine future needs

 

(E)   Detailed grading plans

 

(F)    Geological studies

 

(G)   Any information required by the Development Review Committee shall be clearly detailed and listed with an anticipated review period so that it can be acted upon within reasonable time. The department/office which requires any additional information shall approve the acceptability of this information from the applicant prior to the filing of the Vesting Tentative Map.

 

(H)   The Development Review Committee may require the filing and concurrent review of other related development applications where it is necessary for the review and implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map.

 

(2)    An approving action on a Vesting Tentative Map shall not occur prior to the effective data of approval of the associated discretionary permit or action.

 

(3)    Upon filing a Vesting Tentative Map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required as established in the City Schedule of Fees for the filing and processing of a Vesting Tentative Map.

 

(4)    The approval or conditional approval of a Vesting Tentative Map shall expire at the end of the same time period and shall be subject to the same extensions established by this division for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a Tentative Map.

 

(5)    Any time prior to the expiration of a Vesting Tentative Map, the subdivider or assignee may apply for an amendment to the Vesting Tentative Map. No application for amendment shall be required when the reviewing authority finds that such amendment is a minor modification that is in substantial compliance with the original approval, and no new conditions of approval are required.

 

(6)    For a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the land use district or Specific Plan in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The Planning Agency may deny such a Vesting Tentative Map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the land use district or Specific Plan to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the pertinent ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved Vesting Tentative Map shall confer the right to proceed with the development as approved.

 

(7)    Fees for development permits (e.g., building and grading permits) filed per an approved Vesting Tentative Map or a recorded Vesting Final/Parcel Map shall be the fees in effect at the time of issuance of such permit.

 

83.040415 Development Rights.
(a)    When the designated Planning Agency approves or conditionally approves a Vesting Tentative Map, that approval shall confer a vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the date the application for the subdivision has been determined to be complete and pursuant to California Government Code Section 66474.2. If Section 66474.2 is repealed, that approval shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the Vesting Tentative Map is approved or conditionally approved.

 

(b)    Notwithstanding subsection (a), the Planning Agency may condition or deny a permit, approval, extension, entitlement, or require an amendment to the map if it determines any of the following.

 

(1)    A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both.

 

(2)    The condition or denial is required in order to comply with State or Federal law.

 

(c)    The Planning Agency may alter any condition of a Vesting Tentative Map through an amendment pursuant to Subsections 83.041105 (a) (5) and (6) in order to protect against conditions dangerous to public health and safety or to comply with State or Federal law.

 

(d)    The rights conferred by this section shall expire if a Final or Parcel Map is not recorded prior to the expiration of the Vesting Tentative Map as provided in Subsection 83.040410 (a) (4). If the Final or Parcel Map is recorded, these rights shall last for the following periods of time.

 

(1)    These rights shall last for an initial time period of one year. Where several Final Maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single Vesting Tentative Map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the Final Map for that phase is recorded.

 

(2)    The initial time period set forth in this Code shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, processing exceeds 30 days from the date a complete application is filed.

 

(3)    A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in Subsection 83.040415 (d) (1) expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the City Council within 15 days.

 

(4)    If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in this section, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit.

 

ARTICLE 5 COMPOSITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN
83.040501 Filing Criteria for Composite Development Plans.
(a)    The planning agency may require the filing of a Composite Development Plan at the time a final or parcel map is accepted for recordation. These maps will reflect the information required by the Planning Agency and shall be filed with the Office of Building and Safety concurrent with the recordation of the final or parcel map.

 

(b)    Wherever a Composite Development Plan is required, these plans shall be submitted prior to recordation of the final or parcel map.

 

83.040505 Content.
The content and form of Composite Development Plans shall be governed by the provisions of this section and Composite Development Plan Standards established by the city engineer and adopted by the city council.

 

(a)    Standards and Preparation

A reproduction shall be made on linen or mylar of the map sheets of the Final or Parcel Map which shall conform to the following provisions and adopted city standards.

 

(1)    In the top margin of all the map sheets, there shall be prominently labeled “Composite Development Plan.” Advance copies shall be submitted for approval by the city planner prior to submittal of the linen or mylar of the final or parcel map.

 

(2)    Notes on Composite Development Plans

 

(A)   The plan shall contain a section titled “Composite Development Plan Notes.” The city may list here any conditions or mitigating measures stipulated for the development of the subject property. Any explanatory notes related to criteria delineated on the map shall also be listed within this section. In addition, any related reports regarding development criteria shall be listed, including the following information.

 

(I)    Title and date of the report

 

(II)   Name and credentials of person or firm preparing report

 

(III)  Location where reports are on file

 

(B)   The plan may delineate and note applicable criteria to the development of the subject property. These criteria are limited to the following.

 

(I)    Building Criteria (e.g., Building Setback Lines)

Any yard setback lines that are delineated on Composite Development Plans shall be the street and yard setback distances required on the property within said Composite Development Plan.

 

(II)   Geological, Paleontological, and Seismic Criteria

 

(III)  Grading Criteria

 

(IV)  Flood Control Criteria (e.g., setbacks)

 

(V)   Environmental Criteria

 

(VI)  Incorporation of Special Map Requirements referenced in Article 11 beginning at Subsection 83.041115 (b) of this Division

 

(VII) All easements of record shall be delineated on the plan. Where the only information to be detailed by the Composite Development Plan is the minimum yard setback established by a land use district, then a Composite Development Plan may not be required.

 

(C)   The following statement shall be prominently displayed on each map sheet.

 

COMPOSITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN

 

NOTES ON THIS PLAN ARE FOR INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES, TO INDICATE CONDITIONS AND CRITERIA THAT EXIST ON THIS PROPERTY THAT WERE KNOWN AND IDENTIFIED AS OF THE DATE THIS PLAN WAS FILED. THIS INFORMATION IS DERIVED FROM PUBLIC RECORDS OR REPORTS AND IS NOT INTENDED TO AFFECT RECORD TITLE INTEREST. (Amended by Ord. 210 §§ 13-14, 2001)

 

83.040510 Procedures.
This subsection shall govern the procedures for the processing, approval, or disapproval of a Composite Development Plan.

 

(a)    Filing Advance Copy

At least three weeks prior to the recordation of the final or parcel map, the Composite Development Plan shall be submitted for coordination of review to the community development director.

 

(b)    Filing Official Copy of Composite Development Plan

Concurrent with the filing for recordation of the final or parcel map, the Composite Development Plan, as approved by the Office of Planning and County Surveyor in accordance with the provisions of this division, shall be filed with the Office of Planning. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 15, 2001)

 

83.040515 Amendment to Composite Development Plan.
(a)    Should an error be made on the final or parcel map which affects the Composite Development Plan as authorized by Section 83.041105 (a) (5) and (6) of this division, the Final Map and the Composite Development Plan may be amended as approved by the Office of Planning. A minor variance is required for all other changes to the Composite Development Plan.

 

The Community Development Director is authorized to approve amended maps when they do not adversely impact the conditions of other departments and the amendment is in substantial compliance with the conditions of approval of the Tentative or Parcel Map.

 

(b)    Any request to modify or deviate from the standards that are shown on a Composite Development Plan shall be made in accordance with the provisions for variances except as otherwise provided by this section. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 16, 2001)

 

ARTICLE 6 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT
83.040601 Filing Criteria.
(a)    Lot line adjustment refers to the adjustment of a lot line between two or more adjacent parcels where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where no additional parcels are thereby created or the number of parcels reduced.

 

(b)    Filing criteria shall be as established by the planning agency.

 

83.040605 Procedures.
(a)    The community development director or designee may approve lot line adjustments as herein provided. A current preliminary title report shall be required to accompany a lot line adjustment request. This report is required in order to ensure that the properties or portions thereof are not encumbered with liens, delinquent taxes, trust deeds, and/or utility easements on the property which would conflict with the requested lot line adjustment. The community development director shall require that such a conflict be eliminated. In addition, if any of the lots are improved, the community development director shall refer the proposed lot line adjustment to the city engineer for review of possible encroachments.

 

(b)    The community development director or designee shall make the following findings prior to approval of a lot line adjustment.

 

(1)    The proposed lot line adjustment is consistent with the Yucaipa General Plan, Development Code, and Specific Plans.

 

(2)    The proposed lot line adjustment will not adversely affect public health and safety.

 

83.040610 Conditions of Approval.
(a)    No tentative map, parcel map, or final map shall be required as a condition to the approval of a lot line adjustment.

 

(b)    A record of survey may be required to facilitate the preparation of the legal description to ensure the accuracy of the description or the elimination of the encroachments.

 

(c)    A recorded conditional Certificate of Compliance shall be required of all lot line adjustments. Any conditional Certificate of Compliance with parcels that are tax delinquent shall not be recorded. The lot line adjustments will be voided if the following are not completed within 180 days after the recordation of the conditional Certificate of Compliance.

 

(1)    Grant Deeds which describe the new boundaries of the parcels shall be recorded.

 

(2)    Appropriate Trust Deeds or partial reconveyance documents which describe the new boundaries shall be recorded.

 

ARTICLE 7 LOT MERGER
83.040701 Mandatory Merger of Substandard Lots.
(a)    A mandatory merger of substandard lots may be initiated by the City. A lot may be merged with a contiguous lot held by the same owner. If any one of the contiguous lots or units held by the same owner does not conform to the standards for minimum lot size or dimension specified by the applicable land use district, the following requirements shall be satisfied.

 

(1)    At least one of the affected lots is not developed with any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous lot involved in the proposed merger.

 

(2)    At least one of the affected lots must have one or more of the following conditions.

 

(A)   The lot comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger.

 

(B)   The lot was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation.

 

(C)   The lot does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and/or domestic water supply.

 

(D)   The lot does not meet slope stability and/or density standards, as specified by this Code, Specific Plan or the General Plan.

 

(E)   The lot has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and emergency equipment access and maneuverability.

 

(F)    The development of the lot would create health or safety hazards.

 

(G)   The lot is inconsistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.

 

For purposes of determining whether contiguous lots are held by the same owner, the ownership of record shall be determined as of the date that the Notice of Intention to Determine Status is recorded. Ownership of record shall be determined by the verification of the property ownership as recorded with the County Recorder in the official County records.

 

(b)    A lot merger becomes effective when the City causes to be filed for record with the County Recorder a Notice of Merger specifying the names of the record owners and a description of the real property to be merged. This notice shall be transmitted to the County Recorder with any certificates for taxes as referenced in this Code.

 

(c)    When a Notice of Merger has been recorded, the resultant parcel so merged shall be developed as a single unit of land.

 

(d)    When the City initiates a merger of substandard lots, noticing shall be done in compliance with the following provisions.

 

(1)    Until January 1, 1990, for lots which are 4,000 square feet or less and which were deemed by the City to be merged prior to January 1, 1984, the noticing procedures shall be as follows. At least 30 days prior to recording a notice of merger, the City shall advise the owner of record of the affected lots, in writing, of the intention to record the notice, and specify a time, date, and place at which the owner may present evidence to the Planning Agency as to why such notice should not be recorded.

 

(2)    Unless otherwise specified in Section 83.040705, for all other lots proposed to be merged which do not meet the criteria of subsection (d) (1) of this section, above, the City shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the current record owner of the property a Notice of Intention to Determine Status, notifying the owner that the affected lots may be merged pursuant to provisions and standards specified by this section, and advising the owner of the opportunity to request a Determination of Status hearing and to present evidence at the hearing that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. This hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the Staff Review without Notice procedures by the Office of Planning. The Notice of Intention to Determine Status shall be filed for record with the Recorder of the County of San Bernardino on the date that notice is mailed to the property owner.

 

(e)    At any time within 30 days after recording of the Notice of Intention to Determine Status, the owner of the affected property may file with the Office of Planning a request for a Determination of Status hearing.

 

(f)    Upon receiving a request for a Determination of Status hearing from the owner of the affected property pursuant to Subsection 83.040701 (e), the Community Development Director shall fix a time, date, and place to conduct a hearing and shall notify the property owner of the time, date, and place of the hearing by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted not more than 60 days following the City’s receipt of the property owner’s request for a hearing, but may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the City and the property owner.

 

(g)    At a Determination of Status hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the standards for merger specified in this section and Section 83.040705. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Office of Planning shall make a determination that the affected lots are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall so notify the owner of this determination. A determination of merger shall be recorded within 30 days after conclusion of the hearing.

 

(h)    If within the 30-day period specified in Subsection 83.040701 (e) the owner does not file a request for hearing in accordance with Subsection 83.040701 (f), the Office of Planning may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the affected lots are to be merged or are not to be merged. A Notice of Merger shall be recorded as provided in Subsection 83.040701 (b) herein no later than 90 days following the mailing of notice required by Subsection 83.040701 (e) herein.

 

(i)     If, in accordance with Subsection 83.040701 (g) or 83.040701 (h) herein, the Office of Planning determines that the subject property shall not be merged, it shall cause to be recorded in the manner specified in Subsection 83.040701 (b) herein a Release of the Notice of Intention to Determine Status, recorded pursuant to Subsection 83.040701 (d) (2) and shall mail a clearance letter to the current owner of record.

 

(j)     Any decisions made by the Community Development Director in accordance with this section may be appealed prior to recordation of the Notice of Merger in accordance with the provisions of this Code.

 

83.040705 Voluntary Merger of Contiguous Lots.
(a)    Description and Purpose

It is the purpose of this section to allow property owners to request a voluntary merger of contiguous lots that are under the same ownership.

 

(b)    Process

The property owner shall file an application for a lot merger. The reviewing authority shall be the Community Development Director, and review of the application shall be subject to the provisions for Staff Review without Notice. The merger of the subject lots becomes effective when the Community Development Director causes a Notice of Merger specifying the names of the record owners and a description of the real property to be filed for record with the County Recorder.

 

(c)    Requirements

A voluntary merger of lots may be requested by an applicant. A lot may be merged with one or more contiguous lots held by the same owner if any one of the contiguous lots held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum lot size or dimension specified by the applicable land use district or if at least one such lot meets one or more of the requirements specified in Section 83.040701 (a) (2).

 

83.040710 Findings.
The Planning Agency shall find and justify the following to be true, prior to recording any Notice of Merger.

 

(a)    The lots to be merged at the time of merger are under common ownership.

 

(b)    The lots as merged will be consistent with or be more closely compatible with the applicable land use district regulations and any other planning policies relating to the subject property and lot configuration.

 

(c)    The lot as merged will not be deprived of legal access as a result of the merger and access to the adjoining lots will not be restricted by the merger.

 

(d)    All current and any delinquent taxes have been paid on all affected lots.

 

ARTICLE 8 REVERSION TO ACREAGE
83.040801 Filing Criteria.
(a)    Requirement for Reversion to Acreage

Reversions to acreage may be required as a condition of approval for a land use application or allowed upon review and approval of a subdivider’s request pursuant to the provisions of this Article.

 

83.040805 Reversion to Acreage by Final Map or Parcel Map.
Subdivided real property may be reverted to acreage by a Final Map or Parcel Map pursuant to the provisions of this section.

 

(a)    Initiation of Proceedings

 

(1)    Proceedings shall be initiated by petition by the owner of the property. The petition shall be on a form prescribed by the Office of Planning and shall be accompanied by the following.

 

(A)   Evidence of ownership

 

(B)   Evidence of nonuse or lack of necessity of any streets or easements to be vacated or abandoned

 

(C)   Submittal of a Tentative Map or other application procedure which may be established by the Community Development Director which delineates any streets or easements which are to be left in effect, provided, however, that the City Planner may require a Tentative Map prepared to the standards prescribed in this Article

 

(D)   Such other information as required by the Office of Planning

 

(2)    The Council, at the request of any person or on its own motion, may by resolution initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage. The Council shall direct the Office of Planning to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings.

 

(b)    Previously subdivided land consisting of four or less contiguous parcels under the same ownership may be reverted to acreage by Parcel Map; previously subdivided land consisting of five or more parcels under the same ownership shall be reverted to acreage by Final Map.

 

83.040810 Data for Reversion to Acreage by Final Map or Parcel Map.
Petitioners shall file the following.

 

(a)    Evidence of title to the real property; and

 

(b)    Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of interest(s) in the property; or

 

(c)    Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the Final Map or Parcel Map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or

 

(d)    Evidence that no lots shown on the Final or Parcel Map have been sold within five years from the date such Final or Parcel Map was filed for record

 

(e)    A minor subdivision plot plan or Tentative Map in the form prescribed by this Division

 

(f)    A Parcel Map or a Final Map in the form prescribed by this Division; the Parcel Map or Final Map shall delineate dedications which will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion

 

83.040815 Fee.
The petition shall be accompanied by a fee as required by the City Schedule of Fees.

 

83.040820 Proceedings.
(a)    The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on all petitions for, and Council initiations of, Reversions to Acreage.

 

(b)    In the case of a Reversion to Acreage by Parcel Map, the Planning Commission may approve the Reversion to Acreage only if it finds and records in writing the findings required by this section.

 

(c)    For a Reversion to Acreage by Final Map, the Planning Commission shall render its decision in the form of a written recommendation to the City Council. Such recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation and shall be transmitted to the City Council. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given in the same time and manner provided for the giving of notice of the hearing by the Planning Commission. The City Council may approve a Reversion to Acreage only if it finds and records in writing the findings required by this section.

 

(d)    Findings

Prior to approval, the Reviewing Authority shall find and justify the following to be true.

 

(1)    Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the Reversion to Acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and

 

(2)    Either:

 

(A)   All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion;

 

(B)   None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the Final or Parcel Map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for the completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or

 

(C)   No lots shown on the Final or Parcel Map have been sold within five years from the date such map was filed for record.

 

83.040825 Conditions for Reversion to Acreage by Final Map.
The Council may require as conditions for the Reversion to Acreage the following.

 

(a)    The owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets or easements.

 

(b)    The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits, or improvement security, if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this division.

 

(c)    The retention of drainage easements for drainage and flood control.

 

83.040830 Conditions for Reversion to Acreage by Parcel Map.
After approval of the petition, a Parcel Map shall be prepared in accordance with this Division provided, however, that said Parcel Map may be compiled from recorded data if all the following conditions exist.

 

(a)    New division lines are not created.

 

(b)    The complete parcel boundary has been monumented and shown on a recorded subdivision map or Parcel Map.

 

(c)    At least one of these boundary lines can be established from an existing monumented line.

 

The Parcel Map shall contain those statements as required by Division 3, Chapter 4, of this Code.

 

83.040835 Return of Deposits and Release of Securities.
Except as provided in this Article, upon filing of the Final Map for Reversion to Acreage with the County Recorder, deposits shall be returned to the subdivider, and all improvement securities shall be released by the City Council.

 

83.040840 Delivery of Final Map or Parcel Map.
After the hearing before the City Council and approval of the reversion, the Final Map or Parcel Map shall be delivered to the City Engineer.

 

83.040845 Effect of Filing Reversion Map with the County Recorder.
Reversion shall be effective upon the Parcel Map or Final Map being filed for record by the County Recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the Parcel Map or Final Map for reversion shall be of no further force or effect.

 

ARTICLE 9 CERTIFICATE OF SUBDIVISION COMPLIANCE
83.040901 Filing Criteria.
(a)    A recorded Certificate of Subdivision Compliance may be requested by any person owning real property to have the Community Development Director determine whether such property complies with the provisions of this Code.

 

(b)    A Certificate of Subdivision Compliance may be required by the Office of Planning prior to recordation of a merger.

 

(c)    A recorded Certificate of Subdivision Compliance shall be required of all lot line adjustments.

 

(d)    When contiguous deeds or surveys have ambiguities in which the property boundary cannot be ascertained as determined by the County Surveyor and an agreement is reached to establish the line by all parties, a Certificate of Compliance should be recorded.

 

(e)    When determined by the County Surveyor, a Certificate of Subdivision Compliance may be required for the remainder parcels on Final/Parcel Maps.

 

83.040905 Content and Form.
The content and form of an application for a Certificate of Subdivision Compliance shall be as required by City policy.

 

83.040910 Procedures.
Upon making a determination that real property complies with this Division, the Community Development Director shall cause a Certificate of Subdivision Compliance to be filed for record with the County Recorder. The Certificate of Subdivision Compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division thereof complies with applicable provisions of this Division and the Subdivision Map Act.

 

83.040915 Conditions of Approval.
(a)    When granting a Certificate of Subdivision Compliance for the purpose of determining whether real property is in compliance with this Code the following shall apply.

 

(1)    The requirements or conditions for the granting of a Certificate of Subdivision Compliance shall be limited to dedications of flood control and road or street right-of-way easement for lots created before March 4, 1972.

 

(2)    When a Certificate of Subdivision Compliance is requested for a parcel of land created on or after March 4, 1972, the following shall apply.

 

(A)   If the parcel is less than five acres in size, access, improvement, and map requirements consistent with land division requirements at the time the parcel was created shall be required.

 

(B)   If the parcel is five acres or greater in size, no Parcel or Record of Survey Map shall be required, unless the City Planner finds that, due to topographical, geologic, or drainage concerns, delineation of such areas is necessary to assure adequate building sites. Access shall be provided pursuant to subsection (A) above.

 

(C)   Access requirements across lands not in the ownership of the applicant may be deferred until development is requested on the applicant’s property. A statement of disclosure relating to such lack of access shall be placed on the conditional Certificate of Subdivision Compliance advising of this requirement to future buyers of the parcel.

 

(3)    If the Community Development Director determines that such real property does not comply with the provisions of this Division, the Community Development Director shall impose all the access requirements of this Division before issuing a Certificate of Subdivision Compliance. The Community Development Director may, as a condition of approval for a Certificate of Subdivision Compliance, impose those additional improvement requirements and Tentative or Parcel Map requirements provided in this Division. Such conditions may be fulfilled and implemented by the property owner who has applied for a Certificate of Subdivision Compliance pursuant to this section, or by a grantee of such property owner. If such conditions are not fulfilled or implemented by the applicant, property owner, or the grantee, the Certificate of Subdivision Compliance shall have no force or effect upon any subsequent transfer of the property and any subsequent transferee or assignee shall make a new application for a Certificate of Subdivision Compliance pursuant to this Article, and the Community Development Director may impose such conditions as would have been applicable at the time such assignee or transferee acquired the property.

 

(b)    All Certificates of Subdivision Compliance shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer prior to recordation. A record of survey may be required by the City Engineer in order to facilitate the preparation of new legal descriptions or to ensure the elimination of any encroachment.

 

(c)    A Certificate of Subdivision Compliance shall be issued for any real property which has been approved for development.

 

(d)    A recorded final subdivision map or Parcel Map or recorded lot merger shall constitute a Certificate of Subdivision Compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein.

 

(e)    An official map prepared pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 66499.52 of the California Government Code and Article 10 of Chapter 4 of Division 3 of this Code shall constitute a Certificate of Subdivision Compliance or a conditional Certificate of Subdivision Compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein and may be filed for the record, whether or not the parcels are contiguous, so long  as the parcels are within the same section or, with the approval of the City Engineer, within contiguous sections of land.

 

 

 

ARTICLE 10 OFFICIAL MAP
83.041001 Filing Criteria.
(a)    Whenever any subdivision of land is platted or divided into lots or blocks, and whenever any addition to any subdivision is laid out into lots or blocks for the purpose of sale or transfer, the City Engineer, under the direction and with the approval of the City Council, may make an Official Map of the Subdivision, giving to each block on the map a number, and to each lot or subdivision in the block a separate number or letter, and giving names to such streets, avenues, lanes, courts, commons, or parks as may be delineated on the Official Map.

 

(b)    Any surveyor or engineer under the review of the City Engineer may prepare an Official Map to be filed for record as a Certificate of Compliance, pursuant to Subdivisions (d) and (e) of the California Government Code Section 66499.35 and Subsection 84.030915 (e) of this Code. The map shall be prepared in accordance with the map format specifications of Subdivisions (a) to (f), inclusive, of Section 66434 of the Subdivision Map Act and 83.040210 of this Code except where noted otherwise in this Article.

 

83.041005 Procedure.
(a)    A Tentative Map Application shall be filed with the City. Filing, map form, and content, and procedure requirements for review and approval of Official Maps shall be as required by City Engineer standards as adopted by the City Council. This Tentative Map may be approved if it is consistent with the General Plan and land use district subject to the following requirements.

 

(1)    Submit proof of approved access.

 

(2)    Engineer or surveyor shall prepare and file an Official Map under the review of the City Engineer. The map shall contain the following.

 

(A)   Private road easements or grants of easement to each lot by separate instrument, or a note placed on the map that dedication will be required prior to building permits

 

(B)   Locate and delineate the natural drainage courses (the City Engineer may require a drainage study).

 

(C)   Ground height for building pads to preclude flooding

 

(D)   Surveyed, mapped, and monumented per County Surveyor’s standards

 

(E)   Legal description for each lot

 

(F)    City Council certificate

 

(G)   Engineer or surveyor’s statement

 

(H)   County Surveyor’s certificate

 

(I)    City Engineer Official Map checking deposit based upon current Final Map Fee Schedule

 

(J)    Improvements and improvement plans on future roads may be deferred if not needed at this time for access to developed properties.

 

(K)   Any additional information as required by City Engineer standards

 

(b)    Each and every map made and adopted under this division shall be presented to the City Council by the City Engineer and be certified under the hands of a majority of the members of the City Council, the presiding officer, secretary, and official seal of the City Council. The certificate shall set forth in full the resolution adopting the map, with the date of adoption.

 

(c)    Fees established for the processing of official maps shall be as required in the City Schedule of Fees.

 

83.041015 Recording Requirements.
(a)    The certified map shall be filed in the Office of the County Recorder. The recorder shall immediately securely fasten and bind each map so filed in one of a series of firmly bound books to be provided, together with the proper indexes thereof, and appropriately marked for the reception of maps provided for in this Division. Official Maps shall be filed and processed in accordance with provisions for Final Maps in Article 11 of this Code, unless otherwise indicated in City Engineer standards for Official Maps.

 

(b)    The map shall become an Official Map for the purposes of this division when certified, filed, and bound, but not before.

 

(c)    Whenever the City Council adopts an Official Map, it shall be lawful and sufficient to describe the lots or blocks in any deeds, conveyances, contracts, or obligations affecting any of the lots or blocks as designated on the Official Map.

 

ARTICLE 11 GENERAL REGULATIONS
83.041101 Filing Criteria.
(a)    Maps of Condominium or Community Apartment Projects

A map of a condominium project, a community apartment project, or of the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units into a stock cooperative project need not show the buildings or the manner in which the buildings or the airspace above the property shown on the map are to be divided, nor will the City refuse approval of a Parcel, Tentative, or Final Map of such a project on account of design or location of buildings on the property shown on the map. However, the City may regulate the design and location of a condominium project or a community apartment project through the provisions of its General Plan, Development Code, or other provisions of the Yucaipa Code. The City may refuse approval of such a project if the design and locations of buildings violate provisions of the City General Plan, Development Code or other provisions of the Yucaipa Code.

 

(b)    Filing Maps with County Recorder

Of the maps required by this Division and the Subdivision Map Act, only Final and Parcel Maps may be filed for record in the Office of the County Recorder.

 

(1)    No Final Map required by this Article and the Subdivision Map Act which creates a subdivision shall be filed with the City without the written consent of all parties having any record title interest in the real property proposed to be subdivided, except as otherwise provided in this division.

 

(2)    No Parcel Map required by this Division and the Subdivision Map Act which creates a subdivision shall be filed with the City without the consent of the legal owner of record in the real property proposed to be subdivided, except as otherwise provided in this division.

 

83.041105 Map Procedures.
(a)    The procedures set forth in this section shall govern the filing, processing, approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of Tentative, Final, and Parcel Maps, and the modification thereof, in addition to the requirements in previous provisions.

 

(1)    Extension of Time Limits

The time limits specified in this division for reporting and acting on maps may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Planning Agency or the City Council for a time not to exceed the time limits specified in this Code.

 

(2)    Fees for Processing

Fees for the processing of Tentative, Vesting Tentative, Minor subdivision plot plan, Final, and Parcel Maps, lot line adjustments, lot mergers, Reversion to Acreage, Certificates of Subdivision Compliance and Official Maps, and for other procedures required or authorized by this Division shall be established in the City Schedule of Fees.

 

(3)    The Community Development Director may grant approval for the creation of two, three, or four lots and a remainder parcel as shown on an approved Tentative Subdivision Map for the purpose of obtaining building permits for model homes or units. As a condition of this approval, a Parcel Map may be required. Prior to the issuance of building permits for said model homes, a surety bond or cash deposit shall be posted with the Community Development Department for the street improvements abutting said lots as required for the approved tentative subdivision.

 

(4)    Filing Maps with County Recorder

After the approval by the City of a Final or Parcel Map of a subdivision within the unincorporated territory, the map shall be transmitted ultimately to the County Recorder.

 

(A)   Certificate of Taxes for Final Maps or Parcel Maps by the City Clerk

When the subdivider files with the City Clerk a certificate prepared by the appropriate state or local official giving his or her estimate of those taxes or assessments, and when all security required under the provisions of this section to secure the payment of taxes and assessments which are a lien on a subdivision but which are not due and payable, have been deposited with and approved by the City, the City Clerk shall ratify that such deposits have been made and shall transmit the Final Map to the County Recorder.

 

(B)   Evidence of Record Title Interest

The subdivider shall present to the County Recorder evidence that, at the time of filing the map in the Office of the County Recorder, the parties consenting to such filing are all of the parties having a record title interest in the case of a Final Map and legal owner of record in the case of a Parcel Map, in the real property being subdivided as shown by the records in the Office of the County Recorder, whose signatures are required by this division, otherwise the map shall not be filed.

 

(C)   Action by County Recorder

The County Recorder shall have not more than 10 days within which to examine a Final or Parcel Map, and either accept or reject it for filing.

 

(I)    If the County Recorder accepts the map, such acceptance shall be certified on the face thereof. The map shall be securely fastened in a book of subdivision maps, in a book of Parcel Maps, or in such other manner as will assure that such maps will be kept together. The map shall become a part of the official records of the County Recorder upon its acceptance by the  Recorder for filing. The fee for filing and indexing such map is as prescribed in Section 27372 of the California Government Code.

 

(II)   The original map shall be stored for safekeeping in a reproducible condition. The County Recorder may maintain for public reference a set of counter maps that are prints of the original maps and produce the original maps for comparison upon demand.

 

(III)  This section shall not prevent filing in the Office of the County Recorder of a Final or Parcel Map of a subdivision for which a Final or Parcel Map is not required, provided such map meets the requirements of this division and any local ordinance.

 

(IV)  The filing for record of a Final or Parcel Map by the County Recorder shall automatically and finally determine the validity of such map and when recorded shall impart constructive notice thereof.

 

(5)    Correction and Amendment to Maps

The purpose of this subsection is to provide a means to correct errors which may be found in Final or Parcel Maps.

 

(A)   Amendment to a Final or Parcel Map

After a Final Map or Parcel Map is filed in the Office of the County Recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map in the following circumstances.

 

(I)    To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon

 

(II)   To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom

 

(III)  To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map

 

(IV)  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with the responsibilities for setting monuments

 

(V)   To show the proper location or character of any monument which has been changed in location or character or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character

 

(VI)  To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the City Engineer which does not affect any property right; such errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent record maps

 

(B)   Preparation of Amending Map

The amending map or Certificate of Correction shall be prepared by a registered Civil Engineer licensed to practice land surveying or a licensed Land Surveyor. An amending map shall conform to the requirements of the Article governing Final Map form and content, if a Final Map, or the Article governing Parcel Map form and content, if a Parcel Map. The amending map or Certificate of Correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction or omission.

 

(C)   Map Amendment Examined by City Engineer

The City Engineer shall examine the amending map or Certificate of Correction, and if the only changes made are those set forth in this subsection, the City Engineer shall certify to this fact on the amending map or Certificate of Correction.

 

(D)   Filing of Map Amendment with County Recorder

The amending map or Certificate of Correction certified by the City Engineer shall be filed in the Office of the County Recorder in which the original map was filed. Upon such filing, the County Recorder shall index the names of the fee owners and the appropriate tract designation shown on the amending map or Certificate of Correction in the general index and map index respectively. Thereupon, the original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively so corrected, and thereafter shall impart constructive notice of all such corrections in the same manner as though set forth upon the original map.

 

(E)   Upon recordation of an amending map or Certificate of Correction, the County Recorder shall within 60 days of recording transmit a certified copy to the City Engineer who shall maintain an index of recorded Certificates of Correction. The amending map shall contain a Certificate of Preparation that is signed by the registered civil engineer licensed to practice land surveying or the licensed land surveyor who prepared the map and a prominently displayed note on the map which briefly lists the changes to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.

 

(6)    Further Modifications of Final Maps

In addition to the amendments authorized by Subsection 83.041105 (a) (5), after a Final Map or Parcel Map is filed in the Office of the County Recorder, such a recorded Final Map may be modified by a Certificate of Correction or an amending map if the City Council makes each of the following findings.

 

(A)   That there are changes in circumstances which make one or all of the conditions of such a map no longer appropriate or necessary

 

(B)   That the modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property

 

(C)   That the present fee owner of the property has consented in writing to the modifications

 

(D)   That the modifications do not alter any right, title, or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map

 

(E)   That the map, as modified, conforms with each of the findings required for map approval

 

Any such modification shall be set for public hearing. The City Council shall confine the hearing to consideration of and action on the proposed modification. These map amendments shall also be subject to the preparation, review, and recordation requirements of subsection 83.041105 (a) (5) where applicable.

 

83.041115 General Requirements.
The procedures set forth in this section shall govern the requirements for Soils Report, Special Map Requirement, Environmental Review, Dedications, Monument, and Improvement requirements.

 

(a)    Soils Report Requirement

The requirements set forth in this subsection shall apply to the Soils Report.

 

(1)    A preliminary soils report may be required as part of the Tentative Map approval, providing the City Planner makes a finding, based upon existing knowledge of soil qualities, that a preliminary analysis is necessary. Said findings shall be based upon evidence, information, and recommendations of the Development Review Committee or Development Review Committee member acting within the departmental area of expertise.

 

(2)    If the City has knowledge of, or the preliminary Soils Report indicates, the present of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required. Such soils investigation shall be done by a Civil Engineer registered in this State who shall recommend the corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area where such soil problems exist.

 

If the Planning Agency has knowledge of areas of districts which are characterized by such expansive soils or other soils problems, upon the recommendation of the Community Development Director, Development Review Committee, or Environmental Review Committee, the Planning Agency may require that a soils investigation be prepared for each lot of any subdivision proposed within said areas or districts.

 

(3)    The Planning Agency may approve the subdivision or portion thereof where such soils problems exist if it determines that the Development Review Committee’s recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed. As a condition for the issuance of any building permit, it shall be required that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each structure.

 

(4)    Each report shall be kept on file at the Office of Building and Safety for public inspection. The location of these reports shall be referenced on the Composite Development Plan.

 

(b)    Special Map Requirement

Prior to Tentative or Parcel Map approval, the City Planner may require that the following information be reflected on the Tentative Map or minor subdivision plot plan.

 

(1)    Submittal of a map showing any or all existing easements and locations of rock outcrops, high groundwater, and spring discharge

 

(2)    Delineation of the portions of lots allocated for the subsurface disposal of sewage effluent

 

(3)    The approximate size of irregularly shaped lots where it is deemed necessary in order to accomplish the objectives of this Article and of the General Plan

 

(4)    A plan may be required where watercourses, significant drainage channels, or bodies of water traverse or adjoin a lot, showing how sewage disposal systems will be installed and maintained.

 

Lines depicting the required setbacks from such watercourses, drainage channels, or bodies of water shall be indicated on a copy of the Tentative Map. Said map shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee, and recommendations shall be forwarded to the Planning Agency. When subsurface waste-disposal systems are proposed, a preliminary soils report shall be provided by the subdivider which shall ascertain the acceptability of subsurface sewage-disposal systems where such will be the method for waste disposal.

 

This information shall be incorporated into the Composite Development Plan to be filed with the Office of Building and Safety. The location of any special maps shall be referenced on the Composite Development Plan.

 

(c)    Dedications

 

(1)    Streets, Highways, and Flood Control Rights-of-Way

As a condition of approval of a map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for the following.

 

(A)   Streets

 

(B)   Alleys

 

(C)   Access rights and abutters’ rights

 

(D)   Drainage easement

 

(E)   Public utility easements

 

(F)    Other public easements

 

In addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public easements. The subdivider may also be required to dedicate such additional land as may be necessary and feasible to provide bicycle paths for the use and safety of residents of the subdivision.

 

(2)    Drainage Rights-of-Way

When, in the opinion of the Planning Agency, drainage rights-of-way are necessary, the subdivider shall offer to dedicate upon the Final Map of the subdivision the necessary rights-of-way for such drainage facilities.

 

(3)    Flood Control Dedication

Where dedication is offered for Flood Control District rights-of-way, such rights-of-way shall be shown as lots lettered alphabetically on the Final Map. Such offer of dedication shall be made by an appropriate certificate on the title sheet of the Final Map, and, in addition, an executed deed conveying fee title to said right-of-way to the Flood Control District shall be delivered to said District.

 

(4)    Certification of Board Action

At the time the City Council approves a Final Map, it shall also accept, subject to improvement, or reject any offer of dedication. The City Clerk shall certify on the map the action of the City Council.

 

(5)    Resolution of Acceptance

The City Clerk shall cause a resolution of acceptance of dedications by the City Council to be filed with the County Recorder.

 

(6)    If at the time the Final Map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys, public utility easements, or rights-of-way for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads, and similar items, which directly benefit the residents of a subdivision, or storm drainage easements are rejected, subject to Section 771.010 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the City Council may by resolution at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open the streets, paths, alleys, rights-of-way for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads, and similar items, which directly benefit the residents of a subdivision, or storm drainage easements for public use. Such acceptance shall be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder.

 

(d)    Monuments

The provisions of this subsection shall govern the placement of monuments for a subdivision.

 

(1)    Boundary Monuments

At the time of making the survey for the Parcel Map or the Final Map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the County Surveyor’s standards and standards described in Section 8771 of the California Business and Professions Code so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. The Parcel Map or the Final Map shall show said monuments found or set at or near each boundary corner and at intermediate points approximately 1,000 feet apart or at such lesser distances as may be made necessary by topography or contour to insure accuracy in reestablishment of any point or line without unreasonable difficulty. The precise position and character of each monument shall be shown on the Final Map, together with the relative heights of the top of each such monument with respect to the surface of the ground.

 

(2)    Deferment, Final Map, or Parcel Map Monuments

Interior monuments need not be set at the time the Final Map is filed if the engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments will be set on or before a specified later date. All monuments so deferred and the furnishing of notes thereon as required in County Surveyor’s standards, shall be agreed to be set and furnished by the subdivider. Such agreement shall be included and guaranteed in the “agreement in lieu of improvements” as provided by this division and accompanied by a cash deposit.

 

(3)    Monument Inspection

All monuments shall be subject to inspection and approval by the County Surveyor.

 

(4)    Centerline Monuments

Durable monuments as described in County Surveyor’s standards shall be set.

 

(e)    Improvement Plans

 

(1)    Submission of Improvement Plans

All improvement plans shall be submitted to the appropriate City agency or department, checked, and approved prior to presentation of the Final Map to the City Council for acceptance.

 

(2)    Preparation of Plans and Specifications

All plans and specifications in connection with improvements shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer.

 

(3)    Street and Drainage Plans and Profiles

Plans, profiles, and specifications of proposed street and drainage improvements shall be submitted to the Public Works Department, checked, and approved prior to presentation of the Final Map to the City Council for acceptance. These plans and profiles shall show full details of the proposed improvements which shall be according to the standards of the City of Yucaipa.

 

(4)    Water Systems Plans

Plans, specifications, and all necessary details of the proposed water system to be installed shall be submitted to the entity providing service for review, provided that the supplier has certified that it is willing and able to supply water upon request.

 

(5)    Sanitary Sewer Plans

Plans, profiles, specifications, and all necessary details of the sanitary sewers to be installed shall be submitted to the utility providing service for review, provided, however, that prior to submitting such plans, they shall have been approved by the governmental jurisdiction by which the subdivision is to be served, or if a private sewage disposal company is to service the tract, the plans shall have been approved by the City Engineer.

 

83.041120 Subdivision Design and Improvement Standards.
The Design and Improvement Standards found in this section shall be considered as requirements for map approval.

 

(a)    Land-Use Standards

The land-use standards in this subsection shall be applied as requirements for map approval.

 

The minimum areas and dimensions of lots shall be as required for the particular land use district classification in which the property is classified by the Yucaipa Development Code, provided, however, that the following conditions have been met.

 

(1)    Lot or parcel side lines shall be approximately normal to street lines.

 

(2)    Each lot or parcel on a dead-end street where the side lines thereof are converging from front to the rear of such lot or parcel shall have an average width of not less than 60 feet, or that width required by the Development Code, whichever is greater, measured along the front building setback line.

 

(3)    Each lot or parcel on a curved street where the side lines thereof are converging from the front to the rear of such lot or parcel shall have an average width of not less than 60 feet, or that width required by the Development Code, whichever is greater.

 

(4)    Double frontage lots shall be discouraged, except where essential to provide separation of residential developments from major or secondary highways or due to topographical conditions. When double frontage lots are permitted, vehicular access rights shall be dedicated to the City along the street designated by the Planning Agency.

 

(5)    The Planning Agency may require lots larger than the above minimum sizes specified in multiple-residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions. When lots or parcels twice or more the required area or width are shown as part of a subdivision of land, the Planning Agency may require such lots or parcels to be so established as to make practical a further division into allowable building sites, without injury to adjoining property.

 

(6)    In hilly or mountainous lands, the Planning Agency may require lots larger than required minimums. Larger lots shall be required if it is deemed necessary in order to conform to the Land Use Element of the City’s General Plan.

 

(7)    Modification of the Lot Design Standards may be allowed under the following circumstances.

 

(A)   Pursuant to the Lot Area Regulations of Division 7, Chapter 4, of this Code

 

(B)   Pursuant to the Planned Development Regulations of Division 8, Chapter 5, of this Code

 

(8)    This subsection does not apply to any lot or parcel which the subdivider offers to dedicate to the City or any public agency or district.

 

(9) When a land use district classification line divides a lot or parcel, the area and frontage requirements for such lot or parcel shall be those of the land use district that requires the greater or most restrictive standards between the two districts involved. For exam-

 

ple, if the line between a Neighborhood Commercial (CN) District and a Single Residential (RS) District divides a parcel, the applicable area and frontage requirements would be those for the CN, as they are greater than those for the RS District.

 

(b)    Circulation Standard

        The circulation standards in this subsection shall be applied as requirements for map approval.

 

(1)    If the general plan designates a general location of a proposed highway and any portion thereof may be wholly or partially within any proposed subdivision or may be affected by a proposed subdivision prior to the approval of the proposed subdivision, a specific alignment plan shall be prepared and adopted. Each such roadway shall conform in width and alignment with that shown or indicated on the general or specific plan or any standards adopted pursuant thereto. As a condition of approval of said subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to make dedications and construct such reasonable improvements as required by the specific alignment plan. Such requirements may be waived by the planning agency upon recommendation of the Public Works Department, if the proposed highway is located upon a section line or its precise alignment can be otherwise determined.

 

(2)    The following provisions shall apply as standards governing circulation design and shall be required for map approval.

 

(A)   The circulation design of all subdivisions shall be compatible and coordinate with the city’s general plan and the existing street and land use pattern in the surrounding area.

 

(B)   Any part-width highway lying along and adjacent to any boundary of a subdivision shall have such a part-width and alignment as will conform to the route lines shown on the Master Plan of Highways covering the same portion of such subdivision.

 

(C)   Each street intended to be extended into adjoining property shall be terminated by a one foot parcel of land extending across the end of the street and, in the case of a part-width street, a one foot parcel of land shall extend along the entire side of the street. Said parcels shall be designated alphabetically as a lot, labeled as a future street, and offered for dedication by appropriate certificate on the final or parcel map. The offer of dedication of said future street shall include a restriction against the use of the same for access purposes until such time as it is accepted as a public street. Where it is determined by the planning agency that to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare, it is necessary to extend a street beyond the boundaries of the subdivision for adequate traffic needs, the subdivider shall provide separate deeds for the necessary easements or rights-of-way to accommodate such traffic facilities. Such rights-of-way shall be improved in accordance with city standards or as required by the planning agency.

 

(D)   Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 600 feet in length, except as provided below, and shall terminate with a turn-around as specified in the adopted city road standards. The planning agency may approved a cul-de-sac which exceeds 600 feet if the planning agency finds that said cul-de-sac will not be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare.

 

(E)   Road grades shall not exceed 12% unless it can be demonstrated that in order to accomplish the objectives of the General Plan a road grade in excess of 12% is necessary. In such circumstances, the Planning Agency may approve a road grade not to exceed 14% grade for a distance not to exceed 500 feet if a finding is made, based upon the recommendations of the City Engineer and the County Fire Warden, that said roadway will not create an unacceptable hazardous risk to the public health, safety, or welfare.

 

(F)    Access to a Subdivision

        The subdivision and each phase thereof shall have two points of vehicular ingress and egress from existing and surrounding streets, one of which may be emergency only. Where providing such access is physically impossible or a cul-de-sac is proposed, this requirement may be waived or modified.

 

(c)    Public Services and Facilities

        The public services and facilities standards in this subsection shall be applied as requirements for map approval.

 

(1)    These standards shall regulate the placement of utilities within the subdivision.

 

(A)   Utility lines, including, but not limited to, electric, telephone, communications, street lighting, and cable television, within or directly serving each subdivision, and/or overhead distribution lines on the perimeter of all subdivisions where such undergrounding would result in the removal of four (4) or more utility poles on the same street, shall be placed underground. In addition, an infill project, which for purposes of this section consists of a site no more than 15 acres, completely surrounded by existing development with lot sizes that, on average, are close to the minimum lot size that is permitted within the subject land use district, and where poles along the surrounding frontage have not been undergrounded, is exempt from underground utility requirements for existing poles along the frontage. The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this subsection without expense to the City, and he or she shall make all necessary arrangements with the utility company for the installation of such facilities. Appurtenances and associated equipment such as boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed above ground. Waiver of the requirements for underground utilities shall be made through the Public Utilities Commission. Aerial route still in existence at the time the subdivision is completed may be reinforced from time to time as conditions dictate; however, all provisions of this subsection shall be subject to the requirements of any underground district created pursuant to Yucaipa Municipal Code Chapter13.08 in existence prior to the subdivision of the land or created subsequent thereto.

 

(B)   Overhead utility lines, where permitted, shall be located at the rear of lots or parcels where practical, and along the sides of lots or parcels where necessary.

 

(C)   If a local cable television system is available to serve the project, any subdivision for which a tentative map is required shall be designed to provide the appropriate cable television system an opportunity to construct, install, and maintain on land as reserved for cable television service or by separate instrument, any equipment necessary to extend cable television services to each residential parcel in the subdivision. “Appropriate cable television systems,” as used in this subsection, means those franchised or licensed to serve the geographical area in which the subdivision is located.

 

        This subsection shall not apply to the conversion of existing dwelling units to condominiums, community apartments, or stock cooperatives.

 

(D)   Whenever the City imposes as a condition of its approval of a tentative map or a parcel map a requirement that necessitates replacing, undergrounding, or permanently or temporarily relocating existing facilities of a telephone corporation or cable television system, common carrier or other public utility, the developer or subdivider shall reimburse the appropriate facility provider for all costs for the replacement, undergrounding, or relocation. All these costs shall be billed after they are incurred, and shall include a credit for any required advance payments and for the salvage value of any facilities replaced. Under no circumstances shall the telephone corporation or cable television system be reimbursed for costs incurred in excess of the cost to replace the facilities with substantially similar facilities.

 

(2)    Public Services and Facilities Fees

The fee requirements of Division 1 of this code shall be imposed as conditions of all map approvals, including parcel maps.

 

(d)    The standards herein shall be related to public safety.

 

(1)    The standards herein shall govern drainage works.

 

(A)   When a subdivision lies in the path of existing watercourses or overflows therefrom or natural drainage from upstream properties, it shall not be approved unless adequate dedicated rights-of-way or improvements are provided in a manner satisfactory to the planning agency.

 

(B)   When, in the opinion of the planning agency, a subdivision may cause an unnatural increase or concentration of surface waters onto downstream property, said subdivision shall not be approved by the planning agency unless drainage outlets are provided which will be adequate to render the city of Yucaipa and the County Flood Control District harmless from any damages caused therefrom.

 

(C)   The location, type, and size of watercourses or drainage works, and all drainage of streets and other drainage works between streets, shall be in accordance with city standards or as required by the planning agency.

 

(D)   When, in the opinion of the Planning Agency, drainage rights-of-way are necessary, the subdivider shall offer to dedicate upon the final map of the subdivision the necessary rights-of-way for such drainage facilities.

 

(E)   Where dedication is offered or granted for Flood Control District rights-of-way, such rights-of-way shall be shown as lots lettered alphabetically on the final map. Such offer of dedication or grant shall be made by an appropriate statement on the title sheet of the final map.

 

(2)    The standards contained herein related to fire protection measures shall be considered as requirements for map approval.

 

(A)   Subdivision design shall provide for safe and ready access for fire and other emergency equipment and for routes of escape to safely handle evacuations.

 

(B)   The subdivision shall be served by water supplies for community fire protection in accordance with the standards set by the appropriate fire authority.

 

(C)   In hazardous fire areas, all flammable or combustible vegetation shall be removed from around all structures, in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code. Where erosion is probable, the slopes shall be planted with fire-resistive ground cover.

 

(3)    The standards contained herein related to sewage disposal systems shall be considered as requirements for map approval.

 

(A)   Subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be located as far as practical from a perennial or intermittent stream pursuant to San Bernardino County Code, Division 3, Article 5, Sections 33.055 and 33.056, and the requirements of the Department of Environmental Health Services and the Regional Water Quality Control Board.

 

(B)   When a soils or a geologic hazards report for a subdivision is prepared (either at the developer’s volition or as a requirement of any governmental agency), it shall include findings and recommendations concerning probable adverse effects of such hazards to the integrity of water supply and sewage disposal facilities and structures.

 

(e)    Environmental and Public Health

Lands to be subdivided for residential, park, playground, or land recreation purposes may be subject to environmental quality standards as established by ordinances and regulations of the different departments and agencies within the City. (Amended by Ord. 186 § 13, 1998; Ord. 253 § 4, 2006; Ord. 389 § 3, 2020)

 

83.041125 Improvement Security.
The necessity for improvement security and the related requirements shall be governed by the following regulations.

 

(a)    Requirement for Improvement Security

If all required improvements, engineering, and inspection are not satisfactorily completed before the final map is approved, the owner or owners of the subdivision shall, prior to the approval of the final map, enter as contractor into an agreement with the city council whereby in consideration of the acceptance by the city council of the streets, easements, and any other land offered for dedication, the contractor agrees to furnish the equipment, labor, and material necessary to complete the work within the time specified in the agreement.

 

 

(1)    Amount of Improvement Security Required

To assure the city that the work will be completed, improvement security shall be furnished to guarantee the performance of any act or agreement in the following amounts for the following purposes.

 

(A)   An amount, not less than 100% of the total estimated cost of the improvement or of the act to be performed, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the act or agreement.

 

(B)   An additional amount, not less than 50% nor more than 100% of the total estimated cost of the improvement or the performance of the required act, securing payment to the contractor, to the subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment to them for the improvement or the performance of the required act.

 

(C)   Whenever an entity required to furnish security in accordance with this section is a California nonprofit corporation, funded by the United States of America or one of its agencies, or funded by this state or one of its agencies, the entity shall not be required to comply with Subsections 83.041125 (a) (1) (A) and (B), if the following conditions are met.

 

(I)    The contractor installing the improvements  has bonded to the nonprofit corporation and the city as co-obligee the amount of 100% of the contract for the faithful performance of the work, and has further bonded to the nonprofit corporation and the city as co-obligee an amount of not less than 50% of the contract for the payment of labor and materials, and those bonds comply with the provisions of this article.

 

(II)   All moneys payable to the contractor by the nonprofit corporation are deposited in a depository complying with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and out of which moneys progress payments are conditioned upon the following:

 

(i)     The contractor’s certification to the nonprofit corporation that all labor performed in the work, and all materials furnished to and installed in the work, have been paid for in full to the date of the certification.

 

(ii)    The written approval of the nonprofit corporation.

 

 

(iii)   Final payment to the contractor not being made until 60 days shall have expired after the filing and recording of the notice of completion of the work and acceptance of the work by the city in writing.

 

(III)  All certifications as to progress payments shall be delivered through the United States mail to the nonprofit corporation. The term “progress payments” means payments made in compliance with the schedule of partial payments agreed upon in the contract for the work. No less than 10% of the total contract price shall be retained for the 60 days following the filing of the notice of completion.

 

(D)   An amount as determined by the City Engineer, but not more than 25% of the total estimated cost of improvements or performance of the required act necessary for the guarantee and warranty of the improvement for a period of one year following the completion and acceptance thereof, against any defective work or labor done, or defective materials furnished.

 

As part of the obligation guaranteed by the security and in addition to the face amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the City in successfully enforcing the obligation secured.

 

(2)    Type of Security Required

The furnishing of security in connection with the performance of any act or agreement shall be one of the following, at the option of and subject to the approval of the City Council.

 

(A)   Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties.

 

(B)   A deposit, either with the City, a responsible bank or trust company, at the option of the City, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public monies.

 

(C)   An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the State or Federal government, and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment, or a letter of credit issued by such a financial institution.

 

Bonds to secure faithful performance and for the benefit of laborers and material of any agreement shall be in substantially the forms as shown in the Subdivision Map Act.

 

Such money, negotiable bond, or instrument of credit shall be a trust fund to guarantee performance and shall not be subject to enforcement of a money judgment by any creditors of the depositor until the obligation secured thereby is performed to the satisfaction of the City.

 

(3)    Forfeiture on Failure to Complete

Upon the failure of a subdivider to complete any improvements and work within two years from the date the agreement is executed, the City Council may, upon notice in writing served by registered mail addressed to the last known address of the person, firm, or corporation signing such contract, determine that said improvement work or any part thereof is uncompleted and may cause to be forfeited to the City or Flood Control District, such sum of money or bonds given for the faithful performance of said work as may be necessary to complete such work.

 

(4)    Exoneration of Improvement Security

With the exception of flood control or drainage works inspected by the Flood Control Engineer, it shall be the duty of the City Engineer to inspect or receive certificates of completion of all improvements installed as to their compliance with this Article and City standards. The security furnished by the subdivider shall be released in the following manner.

 

(A)   Security given for faithful performance of any act or agreement shall be released upon the performance of the act or final completion and acceptance of the required work.

 

(B)   Security securing the payment to the contractor, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment shall, after passage of the time within which claims of lien are required to be recorded pursuant to Article 3 (commencing with Section 3114) of Chapter 2 of Title 15 of Part 4 of Division 3 of the California Civil Code and other acceptance of the work, be reduced to an amount equal to the total claimed by all claimants for whom claims of lien have been recorded and notice thereof given in writing to the City Council, and if no such claims have been recorded, the security shall be released in full.

 

Such release shall not apply to any required guarantee and warranty period, nor to the amount of the security deemed necessary by the City for such guarantee and warranty period, nor to cost and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney’s fees.

 

(C)   Maintenance security necessary for guarantee and warranty of the work for a period of one year following completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor completed, or defective materials furnished shall be released should no claims of such defective work be filed with the City Council. In the event of such defective work, the security shall be held until all work is considered satisfactory and acceptable by the City.

 

(5)    Reimbursement for (Oversized) Supplemental Improvements

The Planning Agency may, at the request of a public agency, require that the improvements installed for the benefit of the subdivision contain supplemental size, capacity, or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision as a condition precedent to the approval of a subdivision or Parcel Map, and thereafter dedication of such improvements to the said public agency. However, the subdivider shall be reimbursed by said public agency for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between actual cost and the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. Standards and procedures for requiring such improvements and for reimbursement shall be contained in the operating rules and regulations of said public agencies and shall be made a public record.

 

ARTICLE 12 ENFORCEMENT
83.041201 Prohibition and Penalty.
This section shall provide the prohibition and penalty provisions of this division.

 

(a)    Prohibition on Transfers

No person shall sell, lease, or finance any parcel or portion of parcels of real property, or commence construction of any building for sale, lease, or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a Final Map or Parcel Map is required by this Division and the Subdivision Map Act, until such map thereof in full compliance with the provisions of this Division has been filed for record by the County Recorder.

 

Conveyance of any part of a division of real property for which a Final or Parcel Map is required by this Division shall not be made by parcel or block number, initial or other designation, unless and until such map has been filed for record by the County Recorder.

 

(b)    Prohibition on Issuance of Permits

No officer, board, commission, agency, department, or special district of the City shall issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this division if it finds or is informed by the Community Development Director that development of such real property is contrary to the public health and safety. Prior to making such a finding that the development of such real property is contrary to the public health and safety, the Community Development Director shall conduct a review. At said review, the Officer shall consider all information and evidence submitted. The decision of the Community Development Director may be appealed therefrom, within 30 days, to the Planning Commission by any person aggrieved, or by an officer, board, department or agency of the City. The authority to deny such a permit or such approval shall apply whether the applicant therefore was the owner of the real property at the time of such violation, or whether the applicant therefore, if the current owner of the real property, was with or without actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of such violation, at the time of the acquisition of his interest in such real property. If any officer, board, commission, agency, department, or special district of the City issues any permit or grants of approval for the development of any such real property, it may request a report from the Community Development Director and impose any additional conditions as would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property.

 

For parcels created before March 4, 1972, notice of said review shall be given, by registered mail, to the owner of such real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll book. Said review shall be held not less than 14 days nor more than 30 days after receipt by the owner of the notice of review.

 

(c)    Statement of Limitations

This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contract for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established.

 

(d)    Penalties

Penalties shall be as specified in Division 1, Chapter 2, of this Code.

 

83.041205 Remedies.
The following remedies are available pursuant to the provisions of this subsection.

 

(a)    Voiding of Sale by Grantee

Any deed of conveyance, sale, or contract to sell real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this division is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer, or person contracting to purchase, heirs, personal representative, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one year after the date of discovery of the violation of the provisions of this division; but the deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee, buyer, or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor, or person contracting to sell, or any assignee, heir, or devisee.

 

(b)    Superior Court Action by Grantee

Any grantee, or his successor in interest, of real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this Division may, within one year of the date of discovery of such violation bring an action in the Superior Court to recover any damages he has suffered by reason of such division of property. The action may be brought against the person who divided the property in violation of the provisions of this division, and against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such a division of property.

 

(c)    Statement of Limitations

The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of any parcel of real property identified in a Certificate of Subdivision Compliance filed pursuant to Article 9, or identified in a recorded Final Subdivision Map, Parcel Map, or Official Map and after the date of recording. The provisions of this section shall not limit or affect in any way the rights of a grantee or his successor in interest under any other provision of law.

 

This subsection does not bar any legal, equitable, or summary remedy to which any aggrieved local agency or other public agency, or any person, firm, or corporation may otherwise be entitled. Any such local agency or other public agency, or such person, firm, or corporation may file a suit regarding any real property attempted to be subdivided or sold, leased, or financed in violation of this division, or to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale, lease, or financing in violation of this division, in the Superior Court of the County of San Bernardino.

 

(d)    Request for Certificate of Subdivision Compliance

Any person owning real property may request a Certificate of Subdivision Compliance in accordance with the provisions of Article 9.

 

(e)    Notice of Violation

Whenever the Community Development Director has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of this Division, then within the guidelines set forth by City Counsel, the Community Development Director shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the then current owner of record of the property a Notice of Intention to Record a Notice of Violation, describing the real property in detail, naming the owners thereof, describing the violation, and stating that an opportunity will be given to the owner to present evidence. The notice shall specify a time, date, and place at which the owner may present evidence to the Planning Agency why such notice should not be recorded. The notice shall also contain a description of the violations and an explanation as to why the subject parcel is not lawful under Subdivision (a) or (b) of Section 66412.6 of the Government Code for the State of California. Evidence shall be presented by the owner to the Planning Agency no sooner than 30 days and no later than 60 days from the date of mailing. If, after the owner has presented evidence, it is determined that there has been no violation, the Community Development Director shall cause to be filed for record with the County Recorder a release of the Notice of Intention to record a Notice of Violation. If, however, after the owner has presented evidence, the Planning Agency determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, or if within 15 days of receipt of such copy the owner of such real property fails to inform the Planning Agency of his objection to recording the Notice of Violation, the Planning Agency shall cause to be filed for record with the County Recorder the Notice of Violation. The Notice of Intention to record a Notice of Violation and the Notice of Violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property. The County Recorder shall index the names of the fee owners in the general index.

 

ARTICLE 13 RESIDENT-INITIATED MOBILEHOME PARK CONVERSION
83.041301 Intent.
The intent of this Article is to facilitate resident purchase of mobilehome parks. This Article allows the waiver of certain subdivision requirements and expedites local government processing for mobilehome park conversions to condominiums or stock cooperatives. Such conversions will preserve an important source of affordable housing.

 

For the purposes of this Article, an application for subdivision shall be considered “resident-initiated” when signed by a resident organization formed by the tenants of the subject mobilehome park for the purpose of purchasing the mobilehome park. The proposed conversion shall be supported by a minimum of two-thirds of the current residents of the park. The resident organization shall have a legally binding contract, which, if the conditions of the contract are met, would result in the acquisition of an interest in the mobilehome park. A preapplication conference may be requested by the applicant(s) prior to formation of the resident organization or prior to entering into a legally binding contract provided the Planning Agency determines in writing that it is reasonable to believe that such contract may be entered into within one year.

 

83.041305 Exclusions.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to the following.

 

(a)    The purchase of a mobilehome park by a non-profit corporation which is subject to the provisions of Section 11010.8 of the California Business and Professions Code.

 

(b)    Special Occupancy Parks (e.g., Recreation Vehicle Parks) as defined in Section 2008 of the Mobilehome Parks Act, Title 25 of the California State Administrative Code

 

83.041310 Waiver of Tentative and Final Map Requirements.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this division, the requirement for the filing of a Tentative Subdivision Map and the preparation, filing, and recordation of a Final Map for a mobilehome park conversion to a condominium or stock cooperative on a single parcel may be waived by the Planning Agency, provided that the following procedures are followed by a resident organization desiring to convert their park and the necessary findings are made by the Planning Agency.

 

(a)    Preapplication Conference

Prior to filing an application for mobilehome park conversion, the resident association shall have a preapplication conference with the Development Review Committee. This conference shall be scheduled in accordance with the policy established by the Council for the Housing Incentive Program. The purpose of this conference is to determine that the proposal qualifies under the provisions of this Article.

 

The following information shall be submitted with the application for this conference.

 

(1)    A previously approved plot plan for the mobilehome park shall be submitted. If one does not exist, a plot plan shall be filed in accordance with the requirements established by the City reviewing authority and available at the information counter of the City of Yucaipa Department of Community Development.

 

(2)    A supplemental report to include the following information

 

(A)   Name of consultant(s), if any

 

(B)   Disclosure of all known fees and costs for the conversion process

 

(C)   Documentation demonstrating that two-thirds of the residents of the mobilehome park support the proposed conversion

 

(D)   Declarations from those residents supporting the conversion that their principal place of residence is within the subject mobilehome park

 

(E)   The location of the park and results of a field inspection done by the applicant(s) or consultant regarding the status of the compliance of the park with City health and safety standards in effect at the time the park was created; any on-site dedications or public improvements to be required, if any, shall be identified by the committee

 

(F)    Proposed tentative schedules to expedite meeting and coordinating any requirements of the City of Yucaipa Planning Agency and the Department of Real Estate, including but not limited to, the Public Report; such schedule shall include an outline of the permits and noticing required to allow this conversion and the estimated time at which such permits are obtained

 

(G)   Evidence showing that the 60-day Notice of Intent to file the conversion application [as required by Subsection 66427. l(a) of the Subdivision Map Act] has been met

 

(H)   Initial report on the impact of the conversion on the residents of the mobilehome park; this report is needed to determine whether an impact report as required in Section 66427.4 of the Subdivision Map Act is needed; the report shall specify whether any residents of the park are to be involuntarily displaced and any proposed measures to mitigate such displacement; a resident who is offered an opportunity to remain in the park after the conversion through continuation of the tenancy at generally the same terms as existed prior to proposed conversion, shall not be considered involuntarily displaced; at the preapplication conference the Development Review Committee shall indicate whether an impact report needs to be filed with the formal application for the conversion; if it is required, the Development Review Committee shall identify in detail any additional items to be required as mitigation measures to assist any displaced residents; no current resident shall be involuntarily displaced without proper notice, assistance or compensation, to be worked out on a case-by-case basis; such noticing, assistance, or compensation may include, but is not limited to, the following:

 

(I)    The project shall comply with the Mobilehome Residency Law, Section 798, et. seq., of the California Civil Code.

 

(II)   The project applicant(s) may be required to provide relocation assistance pursuant to federal, state, or local laws.

 

(b)    The Development Review Committee shall fieldcheck the park prior to the scheduled meeting. The Development Review Committee shall establish if the proposed mobilehome park conversion meets the intent and is capable of meeting the provisions of this Article. The City Planner shall attempt to inform the applicant(s) at the earliest opportunity if a public hearing is to be required. If the proposed mobilehome park conversion is acceptable, the Development Review Committee shall identify the information the applicant needs to file to proceed with the proposal. Such information shall include the following.

 

(1)    Development Review Committee Preapplication Conference Minutes

These minutes shall include the proposed tentative schedules required by Subsection 83.041310 (a)(2) (F).

 

(2)    If the parcel upon which the park lies was created prior to January 1, 1960, a Parcel Map Application shall be required. Such application shall be processed concurrently with any other information filed pursuant to the preapplication conference.

 

(3)    Mobilehome Park Conversion Impact Report, if required at the preapplication conference to meet the requirements of Section 66427.4 of the Subdivision Map Act (such report shall be given to each resident within the mobilehome park).

 

(4)    Mobilehome Park Plot Plan, if no plot plan was previously approved.

 

(5)    Any special information which was identified by the committee. Among such information may be information to assist in the environmental review of the proposal.

 

(6)    Certificate of Subdivision Compliance Application

The review and processing of any application pursuant to this section shall be subject to the same review and time requirements and appeal procedures as are provided in this Division for Tentative Subdivision Maps. In any case where waiver of the Tentative and Final Map is granted the Community Development Director shall cause to be filed for record with the County Recorder a Certificate of Subdivision Compliance pursuant to Article 9 of this Division. The Community Development Director may require a public hearing pursuant to the provisions of Subsection 83.04022 (b) of this Code. Should a public hearing be required, the noticing provisions of Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act shall be met.

 

(c)    Findings of Approval

A mobilehome park conversion shall be approved or conditionally approved only if the following are found and justified as being true.

 

(1)    The mobilehome park complies with the requirements established by State law and City Ordinance for such uses at the time the mobilehome park was constructed. Such regulations shall include those regarding area, improvement, and design, flood water drainage control, public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply, and distribution systems, environmental protection, and other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act or this Division.

 

(2)    Any measures necessary to mitigate the impact of the conversion on current residents of the park have been required as conditions of approval.

 

(3)    Applicable noticing requirements of the Subdivision Map Act have been, or will be met.

 

(d)    Conditions of Approval

The following conditions may be required by the Planning Agency as conditions of approval for the proposed conversion.

 

(1)    Subdivisions permitted by this Article may include conditions requiring a Compliance Survey inspection to the satisfaction of the Planning Agency. However, such a survey shall be limited to require improvements relating only to items of a health and safety nature.

 

(2)    The mobilehome condominiums or stock cooperatives shall be subject to Title 25 of the California State Administrative Code.

 

(3)    Only additional on-site improvements or development standards which were applicable at the time the mobilehome park was originally developed may be required.

 

(4)    Off-site public improvements for qualifying mobilehome parks shall be waived, except as follows.

 

(A)   Any off-site improvements shall be financed with appropriate assessment bonds.

 

(B)   The Certificate of Subdivision Compliance shall not be delayed or contingent upon completion of the off-site improvements.

 

(5)    Any requirements and/or documents required by the State Common Interest Development Act, Title 6 (commencing with Section 1350), Part 4, Division 2 of the California Civil Code.

 

(6)    Conditions of approval necessary to ensure any noticing requirements that are required by Section 66427.1 of the Subdivision Map Act are met.

 

(7)    Any plan or document required to be submitted to the Department of Real Estate shall be reviewed for consistency with the approved project and plot plan. Such plan shall reference the “waiver” notice requirement in Condition Eight below, to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director.

 

(8)    Notice shall be placed on the Certificate of Subdivision Compliance that standard subdivision requirements for the creation of condominiums/stock cooperatives have been waived by the City of Yucaipa, and only conditions applicable to the original development of the mobilehome park have been required.

 

(9)    The applicant(s) shall comply with the indemnification requirements of Section 81.0150 of this Code.

 

(10)  The Planning Agency may impose any conditions of approval to assure any appropriate measures for relocation assistance are implemented.

 

(e)    Any conditions of approval required pursuant to this Article shall be drafted in such a way so as to expedite the conversion process. No mobilehome shall be required to be placed on permanent foundations as a result of the conditional approval.

DIVISION 4 LAND USES
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
84.0101 Intent.
This division provides land use regulations as part of the Official Land Use Plan of the City of Yucaipa for the incorporated area in said City.

 

84.0105 General Use Provisions.
Except as otherwise provided in the Development Code, when a building, structure or land use is within the incorporated portion of the City the following shall apply.

 

(a)    Buildings or structures shall be erected, reconstructed, structurally altered, enlarged, moved, and/or maintained only for those land uses allowed by and in compliance with the provisions of the Development Code.

 

(b)    Land uses, buildings or structures shall only be designed, occupied, and used for those land uses allowed by and in compliance with the provisions of the Development Code.

 

(c)    Structures, buildings, and land uses shall be permitted only after applying for and securing all permits and licenses required by all laws and ordinances. The Development Code specifies regulations and additional land uses which apply to all incorporated areas. If other provisions of the Development Code and an applicable land use district are in conflict, the more stringent provision shall prevail, unless such provision is specifically addressed and is modified by a less stringent provision.

 

84.0110 Official Land Use Plan.
The land use district maps showing the Official Land Use Plan, classifications, and boundaries of land use districts and all notations, references, and other information shown thereon, after final adoption in the manner required by law, shall thereafter be as much a part of the Development Code as if all the matters and information set forth by said maps were fully described herein.

 

84.0115 Land Use District Boundaries.
The boundaries of such districts shown on any sectional land use district map adopted by the Development Code and General Plan or amendment thereto are hereby adopted and approved. The regulations of the Development Code governing the uses of land, buildings, structures, the height of buildings and structures, the sizes of yards about buildings and structures, and other matters as hereinafter set forth, are hereby established and declared to be in effect upon all land included within the boundaries of each and every district shown upon the Land Use Map.

 

(a)    The boundaries of established districts are shown and delineated on the land use district maps entitled “Official Land Use Plan” as amended and as certified by the City Clerk and on file with the Community Development Department, which are hereby adopted as the Official Land Use Plan of the City of Yucaipa.

 

(b)    Changes, additions, and amendments to the Official Land Use Plan shall be determined and defined from time to time by ordinance adopting sectional Land Use District Maps covering portions of the City of Yucaipa, each of which shall become, upon final adoption and certification by the City Clerk, a part of the Official Land Use Plan for the City.

 

(c)    Unless otherwise noted, land use district boundaries shall extend to street right-of-way centerlines.

84.0120 District Boundary Uncertainties.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any districts shown on the land use district maps, the following rules shall apply.

 

(a)    Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.

 

(b)    In unsubdivided property and where a district boundary divides a lot, the locations of such boundaries, unless indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.

 

(c)    Where any uncertainty exists, the Planning Commission shall determine the location of boundaries.

 

(d)    Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverts shall apply to such vacated or abandoned street or alley.

 

84.0125 Land Use District Maps Amendment.
The City Council may act upon changes in classification of property from one or more adopted land use districts to other adopted land use districts and upon amendments to the text of land use districts at any time.

 

 

CHAPTER 2 LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS
84.0205 General Provisions.
(a)    A Land Use Classification system is utilized to group primary land uses into categories. The land use types contained within each use classification groups various land use activities into categories according to their common performance characteristics. These characteristics relate land uses by the type of commodity sold, scope of service provided, method of operation, or extent of environmental impact.

 

(b)    Accessory uses are classified in Chapter 5 of this division.

 

(c)    The Planning Agency shall develop and maintain an alphabetical listing of typical land uses allowed within each land use classification type. This administrative listing shall clarify the various land use classifications and may be updated periodically to reflect additional uses. The listed uses shall be considered as “typical” and in no way reflect an absolute list of the land uses allowed by the land use classification category. The list of typical uses represents a list of specific land uses that are normally associated with a given land use type category. The typical land use listed is accepted as meeting the land use type category.

 

(d)    Where a term is not defined by this chapter and/or further clarified by Division 12 of this Code, the common usage of that term shall be as defined by any current English dictionary and as interpreted by the Planning Agency.

 

84.0210 Agricultural Land Use Types.
Agricultural land use types include the following sub-classifications:

 

(a)    Row, Field, Tree, and Nursery Crop Cultivation

This land use type refers to a primary use of the land which includes cultivation of open field or greenhouse crops of fruits, vegetables, grain, fibers, flowers, ornamental, and nursery plant materials for wholesale or retail sales and ultimate consumption by others.

(b)    Animal Raising

This land use type refers to a primary use of the land which includes animal husbandry activities for the production of animal products which will be consumed by others. Animal types and densities shall be specified by each land use district. Additional animals may be raised as accessory uses.

 

(c)    Commercial Kennels and Catteries

This land use type refers to the keeping of more than five dogs or five cats for breeding, boarding and/or sale.

 

(d)    Wholesale trade of livestock (e.g., animal auctions).

 

(e)    Cow and Goat Dairies

This land use type refers to a any premises where milk is produced for sale or distribution and where 10 more cows or goats are in lactation.

 

(f)    Hog Ranches and Calf Raising

This land use type refers to any premise used for the raising or keeping of 10 or more weaned animals.

 

(g)    Agricultural Support Services

This land use type refers to uses supportive of the farm community which are fully compatible with agricultural uses. These include, but are not limited to, the following.

 

(1)    Farm machinery equipment and supplies, sale, and repair.

 

(2)    Farm produce sales and supply (feed, hay, grain and grain products, fertilizer).

 

(3)    Farm products packaging and processing.

 

(4)    Feed storage, farm products warehousing and storage (except stockyards).

 

(5)    Animal husbandry services, veterinary services for large and small animals, horseshoeing, agricultural processing.

 

(6)    Animal waste processing, stockyards, organic fertilizer, feed lots.

 

(7)    The display and sales of farm machinery equipment and supplies.

 

(8)    Agricultural chemicals, fuel and fuel oil, nonflammable bottled gas.

Agricultural support services are uses which directly support or which are accessory or incidental to established agricultural uses within the general vicinity. Such services do not adversely affect surrounding properties, groundwater, or infrastructure.

 

84.0220 Residential Land Use Types.
Residential land uses refers to the occupancy of living accommodations where the accommodations are owned or are leased or rented on a monthly or greater basis.

 

(a)    Single Dwelling Unit

A single dwelling unit is a detached structure or combination of structures designed and/or used to house not more than one family, including all domestic employees of such family in which is provided provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation as required by this Code and the Uniform Fire Code, and the Uniform Building Code. Single dwelling unit includes Transitional Housing and Supportive Housing when structured as a single dwelling unit, consistent with State law.

 

(b)    Multiple Dwelling Unit

A multiple dwelling unit is a series or combination of dwelling units, either attached or detached, designed to house more than one family (e.g., apartments, condos, single room occupancy facilities).

 

(c)    Mobilehome park.

 

(d)    Large residential care facility.

 

(e)    Boarding house.

 

(f)    Parolee home. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 17, 2001; Ord. 345 § 19, 2016)

 

84.0230 Commercial Land Use Types.
(a)    Professional Services

Professional services include those establishments which provide advice, designs, information, medical treatment, commercial education, consultation, travel, job placement, advertising, finance, insurance and real estate services, generally from an office with no on-site storage of goods. This category includes all types of business offices and service-type businesses where service is basically on an individual-to-individual or firm-to-firm basis, as opposed to services which are performed on objects or personal property.

 

 

(b)    Retail Trade/Personal Services

Retail trade/personal services include those establishments engaged in selling merchandise for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of the goods. This classification also includes activities which primarily provide for care of the person or their apparel and which are typically needed frequently or recurrently.

 

 

(1)    Class I - Limited Retail Trade/Personal Services

This class includes convenience good outlets that sell items characterized by relatively short-term utility or consumption. It includes establishments that either provide for the day-to-day or frequent service needs of nearby consumers or provide infrequent services for a segment or special sector of the community. The consumer generally purchases these items or acquires these services at the most convenient location, rather than making extensive comparisons of the goods available at several stores.

 

Typical uses in this class include beauty salons, barbers, self-service laundry, groceries, restaurants, pharmacy, cosmetics, candy, frozen dessert shops, and paper goods.

 

(2)    Class II - General Retail Trade/Personal Services

This class includes market good outlets that sell or rent items characterized by long-term utility. It also includes establishments that provide for the frequent or infrequent service needs of consumers located throughout the community or region. The scope of service or method of operation of these uses need additional design standards to insure compatibility with surrounding uses. The consumer does some comparison shopping and is willing to travel from throughout the community or region to make special purchases.

 

Typical uses in this class include department stores, dry goods, auto accessories (tires and batteries), secondhand merchandise, bicycles, garden shops, hobby shops, footwear, office supplies, electronics, appliances, music, books, toys, and photographic studios.

 

(c)    Open Lot Services

This use includes commercial establishments which are primarily involved in the delivery of their service from an open lot with relatively few support structures.

 

(1)    Class I - Limited Open Lot Service

These uses are fully paved and do not attract a large number of people daily. Typical uses include car sales, and small equipment rental.

 

(2)    Class II - General Open Lot Service

These uses may attract a large volume of clients, may not be fully paved, and may have large or diverse equipment for sale or rent. Typical uses include construction equipment sales, swap meets, open air markets, and manufactured home sales.

 

(d)    Lodging Services

This use includes establishments engaged in the provision of lodging services, normally on a daily or weekly basis, with incidental food and alcoholic beverages sales and service intended for the convenience of the guests at a hotel, motel, tourist court, or recreational vehicle park. Recreational vehicle parks shall not exceed 12 spaces per acre.

 

(e)    Recreation/Entertainment Services

This use includes establishments that provide leisure-time activities and services which involve many people in a public assembly use where people either participate individually or are entertained by an activity.

 

(1)    Class I - Limited Recreation/Entertainment Service

This class includes minor sport, recreation, or social activities that are wholly enclosed within a structure. Typical uses include arcades, poolhalls, and meeting halls for less than 50 people.

 

(2)    Class II - General Recreation/Entertainment Services

This class includes sport and recreational activities that attract large numbers of people in major indoor or outdoor recreational entertainment complexes. Typical uses include amusement parks, drive in theatres, motion picture theatres, miniature golf, sports stadiums, and convention or other meeting halls.

 

(f)    Repair Services

Repair services are those establishments engaged in the provision of repair services to individuals, households, and firms.

 

(1)    Class I - Limited Repair Services

This class includes those operations occupying less than 2,000 square feet of floor area which are wholly enclosed without any discernible noise, odor, glare, or vibration affecting adjoining shops or properties. Typical uses include watch repair, bicycle repair, audio and video equipment repair, and locksmiths.

 

(2)    Class II - Intermediate Repair Services

This class includes operations within an enclosed building with exterior storage limited to no more than 500 square feet. Typical uses include auto servicing with no overnight repairs, appliance repair, reupholstery, or furniture repair.

 

(3)    Class III - General Repair Services

This class includes operations which require overnight exterior storage. Typical uses include motor vehicle repair and rebuilding, auto glass, paint, muffler and transmission shops, welding and metal repair, and heavy equipment repair.

 

(g)    Convenience/Support Services

This category includes establishments that provide convenience or support services to people in employment locations or to the traveling public in locations away from developed commercial centers. These limited services include food, beverage, gasoline, retail services, and minor automobile service.

 

84.0240 Industrial Land Use Types.
(a)    Manufacturing Operations

This category includes the on-site production of goods by methods other than those which are agricultural or extractive in nature, including the production of food and kindred products (the processing or production of natural or man-made solid or liquid food substances used for human or animal internal consumption); textile mill products (the preparation of fiber and subsequent manufacturing, drying, finishing or coating of fiber, thread, yarn, woven, knit, or nonwoven fabrics or miscellaneous textiles); apparel and other finished products (the manufacture of clothing and accessories by cutting and sewing purchased woven or knit textile fabrics and related materials); lumber and wood products (the cutting, planing, compression and finishing of wood articles, except furniture and related fixtures and miscellaneous household or office products made wholly or partially of wood); furniture and fixtures (the construction or assembly of furniture and related fixtures); paper and allied products (the manufacturing of pulp, paper [both recycled and paper products from wood], other cellulose fibers, used paper, and rag cloth); chemicals and allied products (the manufacture or processing of basic, organic or inorganic chemicals, including chemicals to be used in making other products and finished chemical products used for direct consumption or as industrial supplies); petroleum refining and related industries (the modification, refining, and mixing or storage of fossil fuels which are composed of petroleum or coal); rubber and miscellaneous plastic products (the manufacture from natural, synthetic or reclaimed rubber, and from chemicals or rubber or plastic products); stone, clay, and glass products (the manufacture of products from stone, clay, sand, and other non-metallic minerals, excluding fuels); primary metal industries (the smelting, refining, rolling, drawing, and alloying of metals, manufacture of metal castings and production of coke); fabricated metal products (the fabrication or further processing and assembly of metal parts into equipment or machinery); professional and scientific goods (the manufacture of instruments for measuring, testing, sensing, analyzing and controlling natural or manmade objects, physical conditions or states); and miscellaneous manufacturing (the manufacture or repair of products not included in any other category and mainly consisting of small household or office luxuries, recreational goods or supplies, and large-scale printing operations).

 

(1)    Class I - Limited Manufacturing

This class includes manufacturing operations which occupy less than 10,000 square feet of enclosed floor area and employ fewer than 20 employees on the largest shift, with limited exterior storage. Typical uses include cabinet shops and the manufacture of garments and leather goods.

 

(2)    Class II - General Manufacturing

This class includes manufacturing operations which involve exterior storage, large equipment, and/or a large number of employees. Typical uses include petroleum refining, and the manufacture of paper products, paint, asphalt batch plants, explosives, propellants, chemicals and plastics.

 

(b)    Wholesale/Warehouse Operations

These operations include establishments which normally employ warehouses or display and office space for the assembly, storage, distribution, and display of commodities for sale to community or regional retailers, manufacturers, agricultural, institutional, or professional uses.

 

(1)    Class I - Limited Wholesale/Warehouse Operations

This class includes those operations which are compatible with a commercial environment and are wholly enclosed or screened. Typical uses include mini-warehouse storage, discount wholesale stores, and recreational vehicle storage.

 

(2)    Class II - General Wholesale/Warehouse Operations

Typical uses include warehouses and lumber yards.

 

(c)    Contract Construction Services

This land use includes those establishments mainly engaged in construction activities and storage on lots other than construction sites.

 

(d)    Transportation Services

This use includes activities of a public or commercial nature which move persons and goods from one place to another via roadways, railways, airways, or waterways.

 

(1)    Class I - Limited Transportation Services

This class includes those services which are compatible with commercial operations. Typical uses include bus depots, travel agencies, and parking lots.

 

(2)    Class II - General Transportation Services

This class includes those activities primarily involved with the operation and maintenance of transportation facilities and equipment. These uses generally create significant environmental impacts. Typical uses include railroad classification yards and bus maintenance yards.

 

 

(e)    Salvage Operations

This use includes those establishments involved in the storage, sale, wholesale, and processing of salvage materials. These uses create major disruption to an area’s environment even when carefully regulated. Dust, dirt, noise, and unsightly conditions often prevail with these operations. This land use classification does not include recycling collection facilities.

 

84.0250 Planned Development.
Planned Development is a land use application which allows the modification of the development standards of a land use district to allow innovative design and layout. A Planned Development review may approve lot sizes smaller than those required by the Land Use District, provided the overall lot density is not exceeded, except as otherwise allowed by this Code and/or the General Plan. A Planned Development Review may approve phased projects. The land uses allowed are limited to those listed in the Land Use District. The Planned Development (PD) Land Use District allows an intermix of various land uses.

 

 

CHAPTER 3 LAND USE DISTRICTS
84.0301 Establishment and Designation.
The following Land Use Districts are hereby established as directed by the City of Yucaipa General Plan. The following symbols shall appear on the Official Land Use Maps to identify the Land Use Districts.

 

Symbol

Land Use District

RL

Rural Living

RS

Single Residential

RM

Multiple Residential

RM-24

High Density Multiple Residential

CN

Neighborhood Commercial

CG

General Commercial

CS

Service Commercial

IC

Community Industrial

P

Park

IN

Institutional

FW

Floodway

PD

Planned Development

OS

Open Space

(Amended by Ord. 294 § 3, 2010; Ord. 296 § 3, 2010; Ord. 346 § 1, 2016)

 

84.0320 Rural Living (RL) District.
The Rural Living (RL) District shall be located as specified by the Yucaipa General Plan.

 

(a)    Permitted Land Uses

 

(1)    Row, Field, Tree, and Nursery Crop Cultivation

Any structure associated with this activity is limited to 10,000 square feet on parcels of five acres or less.

 

(2)    Single dwelling unit.

 

(3)    Small residential care facility.

 

(4)    Animal Raising

 

(A)   Animal raising as a primary use of the property must be on a parcel no less than two acres in size. Lot area used to qualify one animal type, either Primary or Accessory Animal Raising, shall not be reused to qualify another animal type. Proper manure management will be carried out in accordance with Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code as adopted by the city of Yucaipa.

 

Animal Type

Animal Density Per Square Foot

Cattle/Buffalo

1 per 10,000

Horses

1 per 10,000

Hogs (9 maximum)

1 per 20,000

Sheep, Female Goats, and Similar Livestock

1 per 4,000

Male Adult Goats (4 maximum)

for parcels of less than 10 acres, 1

Male Adult Goats (4 maximum)

for parcels 10 acres+, 1 per 5 acres

Rabbits and Chinchillas (200 maximum)

50 per 10,000 (min. parcel size 1 acre)

Female Poultry

for parcels of less than 1 acre, 25

Female Poultry

for parcels of 1 to less than 10 acres, 99

Female Poultry

for parcels of 10 acres +, 99 per 10 acres

Male Poultry (9 maximum)

for parcels of less than 10 acres, 2 per parcel

Male Poultry (9 maximum)

for parcels of 10 acres +, 2 per 5 acres

 

(B)   Small Animal Ranches/Farms

Aviaries, apiaries, or similar small animal ranches or farms shall be permitted on parcels that are at least one-half acre in size. Fish raising shall be limited to one pond per acre, with a maximum of four ponds per parcel. Each pond shall not exceed one-half surface acre in area.

 

(5)    Accessory uses as specified by Chapter 5 of this division.

 

(6)    Small family day care home.

 

(b)    Land Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit

 

(1)    Commercial kennels and catteries—two-acre minimum parcel size.

 

(2)    Commercial chicken ranches restricted to a minimum of 10 acres.

 

(3)    Agricultural support services.

 

(4)    Mobilehome park (not to exceed four spaces per acre on minimum parcel size of 20 acres).

 

(5)    Any structure associated with row, field, tree, and nursery crop cultivation that is greater than 10,000 square feet on parcels of five acres or less.

 

(6)    Planned development.

 

(7)    Boarding house (for up to six residents).

 

(8)    Bed and breakfast lodge (for up to six guests).

 

(9)    Parolee homes.

 

(10)  Botanical gardens and arboretums.

 

(11)  Historic and monument sites.

 

(12)  Unmanned public utilities and services uses/structures.

 

(13)  Unmanned radio and television stations/towers.

 

(14)  Wildlife and nature preserves.

 

 

(c)    Property Development Standards

The following property development standards shall apply to all land uses within the RL District.

 

Maximum Structure Height

35 feet

Minimum Lot Size (map suffix will modify)

1.0 gross acre

Maximum Lot Coverage

40%

Maximum Building Coverage

40%

Maximum Lot Dimensions (width/depth ratio)<

10 acres = 1:3

Maximum Lot Dimensions (width/depth ratio)>

10 acres = 1:4

Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth in feet)

125/125

Front Yard Setback

30 feet

Side Yard Setbacks

15 feet

Rear Yard Setbacks

25 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks (local streets)

20 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks (collector streets)

30 feet

Maximum Housing Density

1 du/acre

Minimum District Size

10 gross acres

 

(Amended by Ord. 210 § 18, 2001; Ord. 247 § 3, 2005; Ord. 345 § 20, 2016)

 

84.0325 Single Residential (RS) District.
The Single Residential (RS) District shall be located as specified by the Yucaipa General Plan.

 

(a)    Permitted Uses

 

(1)    Row, field, tree, and nursery crop cultivation on parcels of 10,000 square feet or greater (any structure associated with this activity is limited to 1,000 square feet).

 

(2)    Single dwelling unit.

 

(3)    Small residential care facility.

 

(4)    Accessory uses specified by Chapter 5 of this division.

 

(5)    Small family day care home.

 

 

(b)    Land Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit

 

(1)    Mobilehome park (not to exceed seven spaces per acre on minimum parcel size of 10 acres).

 

(2)    Planned development.

 

(3)    Boarding house (for up to six residents).

 

(4)    Bed and breakfast lodge (for up to six guests).

 

(5)    Parolee homes.

 

(6)    Botanical gardens and arboretums.

 

(7)    Historic and monument sites.

 

(8)    Unmanned public utilities and services uses/structures.

 

(9)    Unmanned radio and television stations/towers.

 

(10)  Wildlife and nature preserves.

 

(c)    Property Development Standards

The following property development standards shall apply to all land uses within the RS District.

 

Maximum Structure Height

35 feet

Minimum Lot Size (map suffix will modify)

7,200 sq. ft.

Maximum Lot Coverage

55%

Maximum Building Coverage

40%

Maximum Lot Dimensions (width/depth ratio)<

10 acres = 1:3

Maximum Lot Dimensions (width/depth ratio)>

10 acres = 1:4

Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth in feet)

60/100

Front Yard Setback

25 feet

Side Yard Setbacks

10 ft. & 5 ft.

Rear Yard Setbacks

20 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks (local streets)

15 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks (collector streets)

25 feet

Maximum Housing Density

4.2 du/acre

Minimum District Size

10 gross acres

 

(1)    A final or parcel map may establish front yard setbacks of not less than 22 feet, provided the average setback of all parcels is at least 25 feet. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 19, 2001; Ord. 247 § 4, 2005; Ord. 345 § 21, 2016)

 

84.0330 Multiple Residential (RM) District.
The Multiple Residential (RM) District shall be located as specified by the Yucaipa General Plan.

 

(a)    Permitted Land Uses

 

(1)    Row, field, tree, and nursery crop cultivation on parcels of 10,000 sq. ft. or greater. Any structure associated with this activity is limited to 1,000 square feet.

 

(2)    Single dwelling unit.

 

(3)    Small residential care facility.

 

(4)    Accessory uses as specified by Chapter 5 of this division.

 

(5)    Small family day care home.

 

(6)    Four or fewer multiple dwelling units, subject to Land Use Compliance Review.

 

(b)    Land Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit

 

(1)    Five or more multiple-dwelling units.

 

(2)    Mobilehome parks (minimum parcel size—10 acres).

 

(3)    Planned developments.

 

(4)    Parolee homes.

 

(5)    Supportive housing.

 

(6)    Transitional housing.

 

(7)    Large residential care facility.

 

(8)    Large family day care home.

 

 

(9)    Boarding house.

 

(10)  Bed and breakfast lodge.

 

(11)  Botanical gardens and arboretums.

 

(12)  Historic and monument sites.

 

(13)  Unmanned public utilities and services uses/structures.

 

(14)  Unmanned radio and television stations/towers.

 

(15)  Wildlife and nature preserves.

 

(c)    Property Development Standards

The following property development standards shall apply to all land uses within the RM District. Single Residential (RS) District development standards shall apply to all single-family land uses within the RM District.

 

Maximum Structure Height

35 feet

Minimum Lot Size (map suffix will modify)

7,200 sq. ft.

Maximum Lot Coverage

60%

Maximum Building Coverage

60%

Maximum Lot Dimensions (width/depth ratio)<

10 acres = 1:3

Maximum Lot Dimensions (width/depth ratio)>

10 acres = 1:4

Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth in feet)

75/100 interior

Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth in feet)

85/100 corner

Front Yard Setback (Single Story)

25 feet

Front Yard Setback (Multi Story)

30 feet

Side Yard Setbacks (Single Story)

10 feet

Side Yard Setbacks (Multi Story)

20 feet

Rear Yard Setbacks

15 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks (for local streets)

15 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks (collector streets)

25 feet

Maximum Housing Density

8 du/acre

Minimum District Size

10 gross acres

 

(1) A final or parcel map may establish front yard setbacks of not less than 22 feet, provided the average setback of all parcels is at least 25 feet. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 5, 2001; Ord. 247 § 5, 2005; Ord. 253 § 5, 2006; Ord. 296 § 2, 2010; Ord. 345 § 22, 2016)

84.0335 High Density Multiple Residential (RM-24) District.
The High Density Multiple Residential (RM-24) District shall be located as specified by the Yucaipa General Plan.

 

(a)    Permitted Land Uses

 

(1)    Row, field, tree, and nursery crop cultivation.

 

(2)    Multiple-family dwelling units as specified by Chapter 13 of Division 8.

 

(3)    Accessory uses as specified by Chapter 5 of this division.

 

(b)    Property Development Standards

The following property development standards shall apply to all multi-family land uses within the RM-24 District.

 

Maximum Structure Height

45 feet

Minimum Lot Size

5 gross acres

Maximum Lot Coverage

60%

Maximum Building Coverage

50%

Maximum Lot Dimensions (width/depth ratio) <

10 acres = 1:3

Maximum Lot Dimensions (width/depth ratio) >

10 acres = 1:4

Front Yard Setback (single story)

25 feet min. 30 feet avg.

Front Yard Setback (multi-story)

35 feet min. 40 feet avg.

Side Yard Setbacks (single story)

10 feet

Side Yard Setbacks (multi-story)

20 feet

Rear Yard Setbacks (single story)

15 feet

Rear Yard Setbacks (multi-story)

20 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks (for local streets)

20 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks (collector streets)

25 feet

Maximum Housing Density

24 du/ac

Minimum Housing Density

20 du/ac

Minimum District Size

5 gross acres

 

(1)    The establishment of the High Density Multiple Residential (RM-24) District is intended to facilitate the implementation of General Plan policies that allow for the development of high quality multiple-family housing that may include dwelling units that are also affordable to lower income households. The district provides alternate review procedures and development standards for the existing requirements that are specified by this Code. When the High Density Multiple Residential (RM-24) District is established on any property, including property within the Freeway Corridor Specific Plan, the review procedures and development standards used for that site shall be those that are set forth above and in Chapter 13 of Division 8 of this Code.

 

(2)    Multiple-family dwelling units constructed in the High Density Multiple Residential (RM-24) District shall be permitted by right, pursuant to the administrative review procedures contained in Development Code Section 83.030305, and the development review procedures contained in the City’s Architectural/Design Review application. (Added by Ord. 298 § 4, 2010)

 

84.0340 Neighborhood Commercial (CN) District.
The Neighborhood Commercial (CN) District shall be located as specified by the Yucaipa General Plan.

 

(a)    Permitted Land Uses

 

(1)    Row, field, tree, and nursery crop cultivation.

 

(2)    Accessory uses as specified in Chapter 5 of this division.

 

(b)    Land Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit

 

(1)    Professional services.

 

(2)    Retail trade/personal services I.

 

(3)    Repair services I.

 

(4)    Convenience support services (minimum five acres).

 

(5)    Recreation/entertainment I.

 

(6)    Additional uses as specified in Chapter 4 of this division.

 

(7)    Parolee homes.

 

(c)    Property Development Standards

        The following property development standards shall apply to all land uses within the CN District.

 

 

 

 

Maximum Structure Height

35 feet

Minimum Lot Size

 

   (map suffix will modify)

1 gross acre

Maximum Lot Coverage

80%

Maximum Building

 

Coverage

40%

Maximum Lot Dimensions

 

   (width/depth ratio)

1:3

Minimum Lot Dimensions

 

   (width/depth in feet)

100/100

Front Yard Setback

25 feet

Side Yard Setbacks

10 feet

Rear Yard Setbacks

10 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks

25 feet

Maximum Floor Area/Lot

 

   Area Ratio

0.5:1.0

Minimum District Size

1 gross acre

 

(1)    Minimum lot size can be less than one acre if the subdivision application is filed concurrently with a Planned Development or Conditional Use Permit Application.

 

(2)    Only one side yard is required to provide for emergency access. If the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial, a side yard shall be required along that side of the property.

 

(3)    A rear yard is required only when the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial. The rear yard setback shall be 15 feet when the lot abuts a residential district.

 

(d)    Neighborhood Commercial (CN) District Accessory Sign Standards

 

 

 

Sign Type

 

Sign Configuration

Individual

Complex

Complex Occupant

 

 

 

 

Wall

P R 1:2

NP —

P R 1:2

 

A 50

—

A 50

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Roof

P R 1:2

NP —

P R 1:2

 

P A 50

—

A 50

 

 

 

 

Monument

P H 4

P H 4

NP —

 

P A 36

A 36

—

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Freestanding

P H 25

P H 25

NP —

 

P A 50

A 100

—

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Projecting

P H 25

P H 25

NP—

 

P A 50

A 100

—

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Area (sq. ft.)

150

100

50

Total Number

1 FS

1

1

 

 

 

 

 

1 AT/FR

 

 

 

Key

 

 

A = Max. Area (sq. ft.)

AT = Attached

FR = Per Frontage

FS = Freestanding

H = Max. Height

 

LR = Land Use Compliance Review

NP = Not Permitted

P = Permitted

R = Ratio (bldg. frontage to sign area)

 

 

 

(Amended by Ord. 247 § 6, 2005; Ord. 253 § 6, 2006)

 

84.0350 General Commercial (CG) District.
 

The General Commercial (CG) District shall be located as specified by the Yucaipa General Plan.

 

(a)    Permitted Land Uses

 

(1)    Row, Field, Tree, and Nursery Crop Cultivation

 

(2)    Accessory Uses as Specified by Chapter 5 of this Division

 

(b)    Land Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit

 

(1)    Professional Services

 

(2)    Retail Trade/Personal Services I and II

 

(3)    Lodging Services

 

(4)    Recreational/Entertainment Services I and II

 

(5)    Repair Services I, II, and III

 

(6)    Convenience/Support Services

 

(7)    Open Lot Services I

 

(8)    Wholesale/Warehouse Services I

 

(9)    Contract/Construction Services

 

(10)  Transportation Services I

 

(11)  Primary Signs as Specified by Division 7, Chapter 7

 

(12)  Agricultural Support Services

 

(13)  Additional Uses as Specified by Chapter 4 of this Division

 

(14)  Manufacturing Operations I

 

(15)  Parolee Homes

 

(c)    Land Uses Subject to a Planned Development Review

 

(1)    Planned Development

 

(2)    Dwelling Units in Conjunction with a Commercial Use

 

(d)    Property Development Standards

The following property development standards shall apply to all land uses within the CG District.

 

Maximum Structure Height

45 feet

Minimum Lot Size

 

    (map suffix will modify)

1 gross acre

Maximum Lot Coverage

90%

 

 

Maximum Building

 

    Coverage

60%

Maximum Lot Dimensions

 

    (width/depth ratio)

1:3

Minimum Lot Dimensions

 

    (width/depth in feet)

100/100

Front Yard Setback

15 feet

Side Yard Setbacks

10 feet

Rear Yard Setbacks

10 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks

15 feet

Maximum Floor Area/Lot

 

    Area Ratio

1.0:1.0

Minimum District Size

5 gross acres

 

(1)    Minimum lot size can be less than one acre if the subdivision application is filed concurrently with a Planned Development or Conditional Use Permit Application.

 

(2)    Only one side yard is required to provide for emergency access. If the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial, a side yard shall be required along that side of the property.

 

(3)    A rear yard is required only when the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial. The rear yard setback shall be 15 feet when the lot abuts a residential district.

 

(e)    General Commercial (CG) District Accessory Sign Standards

 

 

 

Sign Type

 

Sign Configuration

Individual

Complex

Complex Occupant

 

 

 

 

Wall

P R 1:3

NP —

P R 1:2

 

A 100

—

A 50

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Roof

P R 1:3

NP —

P R 1:2

 

P A 100

—

A 50

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Monument

P H 4

P H 4

NP —

 

P A 50

A 50

—

 

 

 

 

Freestanding*

P H 25

P H 25

NP —

 

P A 100

A 100

—

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Projecting

P H 35

P H 35

NP —

 

P A 100

A 100

—

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Area (sq. ft.)

200

200

100

Total Number

1 FS

1 FR

1

 

2 AT

 

 

*Min. Lot Width = 60 ft.

 

 

 

Key

 

 

A = Max. Area (sq. ft.)

AT = Attached

FR = Per Frontage

FS = Freestanding

H = Max. Height

 

LR = Land Use Compliance Review

NP = Not Permitted

P = Permitted

R = Ratio (bldg. frontage to sign area)

 

 

 

(Amended by Ord. 247 § 7, 2005; Ord. 253 § 7, 2006)

 

84.0355 Service Commercial (CS) District.
The Service Commercial (CS) District shall be located as specified by the Yucaipa General Plan.

 

(a)    Permitted Land Uses

 

(1)    Row, Field, Tree, and Nursery Crop Cultivation

 

(2)    Emergency Shelters (as defined in Section 812.05011)

 

(3)    Accessory Uses as Specified by Chapter 5 of this Division

 

(b)    Land Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit

 

(1)    Professional Services

 

(2)    Retail Trade/Personal Services I and II

 

(3)    Lodging Services

 

 

(4)    Recreational/Entertainment Services I and II

 

(5)    Repair Services I, II, and III

 

(6)    Convenience/Support Services

 

(7)    Open Lot Services I and II

 

(8)    Agricultural Support Services

 

(9)    Manufacturing Operations I and II

 

(10)  Wholesale/Warehouse Services I

 

(11)  Contract/Construction Services

 

(12)  Transportation Services I

 

(13)  Common Interest Planned Developments

 

(14)  Kennels and Catteries - 2.0-acre minimum lot size (number of animals permitted as specified by health laws)

 

(15)  Parolee Homes

 

(16)  Single Room Occupancy Facilities

 

(17)  Additional Uses as Specified by Chapter 4 of this Division

 

(c)    Land Uses Subject to a Planned Development Review

 

(1)    Planned Development

 

(2)    Dwelling Units in Conjunction with a Commercial Use

 

(d)    Property Development Standards

        The following property development standards shall apply to all land uses within the CS District.


Maximum Structure Height

45 feet

Minimum Lot Size

 

(map suffix will modify)

1 gross acre

Maximum Lot Coverage

90%

Maximum Building

 

Coverage

65%

Maximum Lot Dimensions

 

(width/depth ratio)

1:3

Minimum Lot Dimensions

 

(width/depth in feet)

100/100

Front Yard Setback

15 feet

Side Yard Setbacks

10 feet

Rear Yard Setbacks

10 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks

15 feet

Maximum Floor Area/Lot Area Ratio

1.2:1.0

Minimum District Size

5 gross acres

 

(1)    Minimum lot size can be less than five acres if the subdivision application is filed concurrently with a Planned Development or Conditional Use Permit Application.

 

(2)    Only one side yard is required to provide for emergency access. If the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial, a side yard shall be required along that side of the property.

 

(3)    A rear yard is required only when the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial. The rear yard setback shall be 15 feet when the lot abuts a residential district.

 

(e)    Service Commercial (CS) District Accessory Sign Standards

 

 

 

Sign Type

 

Sign Configuration

Individual

Complex

Complex Occupant

 

 

 

 

Wall

P R 1:3

NP —

P R 1:2

 

A 200

—

A 50

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Roof

P R 1:3

NP —

P R 1:2

 

P A 200

—

A 50

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Monument

P H 4

P H 4

NP —

 

P A 50

A 50

—

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Freestanding

P H 25*

P H 25*

NP —

 

P A 200

A 200

—

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Projecting

P H 35

P H 35

NP —

 

P A 200

A 200

—

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Area (sq. ft.)

300

200

100

Total Number

1 FS

1 FR

1

 

2 AT

 

 

 

*      Freestanding freeway oriented accessory signs may be permitted additional height per Section 87.0730(f).

 

Key

 

 

A = Max. Area (sq. ft.)

AT = Attached

FR = Per Frontage

FS = Freestanding

H = Max. Height

 

LR = Land Use Compliance Review

NP = Not Permitted

P = Permitted

R = Ratio (bldg. frontage to sign area)

 

 

 

(Amended by Ord. 247 § 8, 2005; Ord. 253 § 8, 2006; Ord. 296 § 5, 2010; Ord. 378 § 3, 2019)

 

84.0370 Community Industrial (IC) District.
The Community Industrial (IC) District shall be located as specified by the Yucaipa General Plan.

 

(a)    Permitted Land Uses

 

(1)    Row, Field, Tree, and Nursery Crop Cultivation

 

(2)    Accessory Uses as Specified by Chapter 5 of this Division

 

(3)    Sexually-Oriented Businesses, subject to the provisions of Chapter 7 of Division 8, and Article 12 of Chapter 3 of Division 3.

 

 

(b)    Land Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit

 

(1)    Agricultural Support Services

 

(2)    Professional Services

 

(3)    Repair Services I, II, and III

 

(4)    Convenience/Support Services

 

(5)    Manufacturing Operations I and II

 

(6)    Wholesale/Warehouse Services I and II

 

(7)    Open Lot Services I and II

 

(8)    Contract/Construction Services

 

(9)    Transportation Services I

 

(10)  Planned Development

 

(11)  Additional Uses as Specified by Chapter 4 of this Division

 

(12)  Parolee Homes

 

(c)    Property Development Standards

The following property development standards shall apply to all land uses within the IC District.

 

Maximum Structure Height

45 feet

Minimum Lot Size

 

    (map suffix will modify)

1 gross acre

Maximum Lot Coverage

85%

Maximum Building coverage

70%

Maximum Lot Dimensions

 

    (width/depth ratio)

1:3

Minimum Lot Dimensions

 

    (width/depth in feet)

100/100

Front Yard Setback

15 feet

Side Yard Setbacks

10 feet

Rear Yard Setbacks

10 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks

15 feet

Maximum Floor Area/Lot

 

    Area Ratio

1.0:1.0

Minimum District Size

5 gross acres

 

(1)    Minimum lot size can be less than one acre if the subdivision application is filed concurrently with a Planned Development or Conditional Use Permit Application.

 

(2)    Only one side yard is required to provide for emergency access. If the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial, a side yard shall be required along that side of the property.

 

(3)    A rear yard is required only when the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial. The rear yard setback shall be 15 feet when the lot abuts a residential district.

 

(d)    Community Industrial (IC) District Accessory Sign Standards

 

 

 

Sign Type

 

Sign Configuration

Individual

Complex

Complex Occupant

 

 

 

 

Wall

P R 1:3

NP —

P R 1:2

 

A 100

—

A 150

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Roof

P R 1:3

NP —

NP —

 

P A 100

—

—

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Monument

P H 4

P H 4

NP —

 

P A 100

A 100

—

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Freestanding

P H 25*

P H 25*

NP —

 

P A 200

A 200

—

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Projecting

NP

NP

NP —

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Area (sq. ft.)

300

200

150

 

 

 

 

Total Number

1 FS

1 FR

1

 

2 AT

 

 

 

*      Freestanding freeway oriented accessory signs may be permitted additional height per Section 87.0730(f).

 

Key

 

 

A = Max. Area (sq. ft.)

AT = Attached

FR = Per Frontage

FS = Freestanding

H = Max. Height

 

LR = Land Use Compliance Review

NP = Not Permitted

P = Permitted

R = Ratio (bldg. frontage to sign area)

 

 

 

(Amended by Ord. 151 § 13, 1996: Ord. 247 § 9, 2005; Ord. 253 § 9, 2006; Ord. 378 § 4, 2019)

 

 

84.0375 Park (P) District.
The Park (P) District shall be located as specified by the Yucaipa General Plan.

 

(a)    Permitted Uses

 

(1)    Publicly owned parks, playgrounds, recreational uses and facilities, and such buildings and structures as are accessory thereto.

 

(2)    Publicly owned picnic areas.

 

(3)    Publicly owned restroom facilities and parking areas.

 

(4)    Natural channels, levees, spreading grounds, detention basins, ponds, roads, trails, culverts, and diversion drains, where plans are approved by the City Engineer.

 

(5)    Historic and monument sites.

 

(6)    Nature preserves and mitigation “banks,” including habitat restoration.

 

(7)    Accessory uses as specified in Section 84.0510 of this division.

 

(b)    Land Uses Subject To Conditional Use Permit

 

(1)    Public utilities and public service uses or structures.

 

(2)    Publicly owned fixed accommodation campgrounds, including cabins, cottages, and yurts.

 

(3)    Temporary and permanent government facilities and enterprises (federal, state, and local) where buildings and/or property are publicly owned or leased.

 

(4)    Museums, art galleries, and libraries.

 

(c)    Property Development Standards

The following property development standards shall apply to all land uses within the P District.

 

Maximum Structure Height

45 feet

Minimum Lot Size (map suffix will modify)

none required

Maximum Lot Coverage

40%

Maximum Building Coverage

40%

Maximum Lot Dimensions (width/depth ratio)

1:4

Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth feet)

100/100

Front Yard Setback

15 feet

Side Yard Setback

10 feet

Rear Yard Setback

10 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks (local streets)

15 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks (collector streets)

25 feet

Minimum District Size

none required

(Added by Ord. 346 § 2, 2016)

 

84.0380 Institutional (IN) District.
The Institutional (IN) District shall be located as specified by the Yucaipa General Plan.

 

(a)    Permitted Land Uses

 

(1)    Row, Field, Tree, and Nursery Crop Cultivation

 

(2)    Accessory Uses as Specified by Chapter 5 of this Division

 

(b)    Land Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit

 

(1)    Additional Uses as Specified by Chapter 4 of this Division

 

(2)    Planned Development

 

(3)    Parolee Homes

 

(c)    Property Development Standards

The following property development standards shall apply to all land uses within the IN District.

 

Maximum Structure Height

75 feet

Minimum Lot Size (map suffix will modify)

none required

Maximum Lot Coverage

80%

Maximum Building Coverage

60%

Maximum Lot Dimensions (width/depth ratio)

1:4

Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth in feet)

100/100

Front Yard Setback

15 feet

Side Yard Setbacks

10 feet

Rear Yard Setbacks

10 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks

15 feet

Maximum Floor Area/Lot Area Ratio

0.8:1.0

Minimum District Size

none required

 

(d)    Institutional (IN) District Accessory Sign Standards

 

 

 

Sign Type

 

Sign Configuration

Individual

Complex

Complex Occupant

 

 

 

 

Wall

P R 1:1

NP —

NP —

 

A 100

—

—

 

 

 

 

Roof

P R 1:1

NP —

NP —

 

P A 100

—

—

 

 

 

 

Monument

P H 4

NP —

NP —

 

P A 50

—

—

 

 

 

 

Freestanding

P H 25

NP —

NP —

 

P A 50

—

—

 

 

 

 

Projecting

P H 15

NP —

NP —

 

P A 50

—

—

 

 

 

 

Total Area (sq. ft.)

150

 

 

Total Number

1 FS

 

 

 

2 AT

 

 

 

Key

 

 

A = Max. Area (sq. ft.)

AT = Attached

FR = Per Frontage

FS = Freestanding

H = Max. Height

 

LR = Land Use Compliance Review

NP = Not Permitted

P = Permitted

R = Ratio (bldg. frontage to sign area)

 

 

 

(Amended by Ord. 247 § 10, 2005)

 

84.0385 Floodway (FW) District.
The Floodway (FW) District shall be located as specified by the Yucaipa General Plan.

 

 

(a)    Permitted Land Uses

Uses shall be permitted where shown to be consistent with the intent and provisions of the FW District as specified by the Yucaipa General Plan. Uses are only permitted where the property owner(s) understand that the use is placed at their own risk and that shall not obstruct and/or deflect flows onto other property.

 

If the regulations or standards of this section conflict with regulations or standards of other provisions of the Code, the more stringent regulations or standards shall govern.

 

(1)    Row, Field, Tree, and Nursery Crop Cultivation

 

(2)    Flood control channels, levees, spreading grounds and basins, roads, bridges, and diversion drains, where plans are approved by the San Bernardino County Flood Control District

 

(3)    Animal Raising

 

(A)   Animal raising as a primary use of the property must be on a parcel no less than one-half acre in size. All animal densities are mutually exclusive. Lot area used to qualify one animal type, either Primary or Accessory Animal Raising, shall not be reused to qualify another animal type. Proper manure management will be carried out in accordance with Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code as adopted by the City of Yucaipa.

 

Animal Type

Animal Density Per

 

Square Foot

Cattle/Buffalo

1 per 10,000

Horses

1 per 10,000

Hogs (9 maximum)

1 per 20,000

Sheep, Female Goats, and Similar Livestock

1 per 4,000

Male Adult Goats (4 maximum)

for parcels of less than 10 acres, 1

Male Adult Goats (4 maximum)

for parcels 10 acres +, 1 per 5 acres

Rabbits and Chinchillas (200 maximum)

50 per 10,000 (min. parcel size 1 acre)

Female Poultry

for parcels of less than 1 acre, 25

Female Poultry

for parcels of 1 to less than 10 acres, 99

Female Poultry

for parcels of 10 acres +, 99 per 10 acres

Male Poultry (9 maximum)

for parcels of less than 10 acres, 2 per parcel

Male Poultry (9 maximum)

for parcels of 10 acres +, 2 per 5 acres

 

(B)   Small Animal Ranches/Farms

        Aviaries, apiaries, or similar small animal ranches or farms shall be permitted on parcels that are at least one-half acre in size. Fish raising shall be limited to one pond per acre, with a maximum of four ponds per parcel. Each pond shall not exceed one-half surface acre in area.

(4)    Accessory uses as specified by Chapter 5 of this division.

 

(b)    Land Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit

 

(1)    Wholesale trade of livestock.

 

(2)    Commercial chicken ranches restricted to a minimum of 10 acres.

 

(3)    Cow and goat dairies—Parcels of 10 acres or more.

 

(4)    Hog ranches and calf-growing ranches—Parcels of five acres or more.

 

(5)    Agricultural support services.

 

(6)    Additional uses as specified by Chapter 4 of this division.

 

(c)    Property Development Standards

Development in the Floodway (FW) District, shall, in addition to the following provisions, be subject to the development standards set forth in Section 85.020325.

 

Maximum Structure Height

35 feet

Minimum Lot Size (map suffix will modify)

1 gross acre

Maximum Lot Dimensions (width/depth ratio)

1:4

Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth ratio)

100/100

Front Yard Setback

25 feet

Side Yard Setbacks

15 feet

Rear Yard Setbacks

15 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks

25 feet

Minimum District Size

none required

 

(1)    No structure or use shall be constructed, located, or substantially improved, and no land shall be graded or developed in the area designated as floodway, except upon approval of a plan which provides that the proposed development will not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

 

(2)    All proposed land use permits within the FW District shall meet all of the requirements necessary for approval of a permit in the Floodplain Overlay District.

 

84.0390 Planned Development (PD) District.
The Planned Development (PD) District shall be located as specified by the Yucaipa General Plan.

 

(a)    Permitted Land Uses

 

(1)    Row, field, tree, and nursery crop cultivation.

 

(2)    Single dwelling unit.

 

(3)    Small residential care facility.

 

(4)    Animal Raising

 

(A)   Animal raising as a primary use of the property must be on a parcel of no less than two acres in size. Lot area used to qualify one animal type, either primary or accessory animal raising, shall not be reused to qualify another animal type. Proper manure management will be carried out in accordance with Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code.

 

Animal Type

Animal Density Per Square Foot

Cattle/Buffalo

1 per 10,000

Horses

1 per 10,000

Hogs (9 maximum)

1 per 20,000

Sheep, Female Goats, and Similar Livestock

1 per 4,000

Male Adult Goats (4 maximum)

for parcels of less than 10 acres, 1

Male Adult Goats (4 maximum)

for parcels 10 acres +, 1 per 5 acres

Rabbits and Chinchillas (200 maximum)

50 per 10,000 (min. parcel size 1 acre)

Female Poultry

for parcels of less than 1 acre, 25

Female Poultry

for parcels of 1 to less than 10 acres, 99

Female Poultry

for parcels of 10 acres +, 99 per 10 acres

Male Poultry (9 maximum)

for parcels of less than 10 acres, 2 per parcel

Male Poultry (9 maximum)

for parcels of 10 acres +, 2 per 5 acres

 

(B)   Small Animal Ranches/Farms

Aviaries, apiaries, or similar small animal ranches or farms shall be permitted on parcels that are at least one-half acre in size. Fish raising shall be limited to one pond per acre, with a maximum of four ponds per parcel. Each pond shall not exceed one-half surface acre in area.

 

(5)    Accessory uses as specified by Chapter 5 of this division.

 

(6)    Small family day care home.

 

(b)    Land Uses Subject to a Conditional Use Permit

 

(1)    Boarding house (for up to six residents).

 

(2)    Bed and breakfast lodge (for up to six guests).

 

(3)    Parolee homes.

 

(4)    Botanical gardens and arboretums.

 

(5)    Historic and monument sites.

 

(6)    Unmanned public utilities and services uses/structures.

 

(7)    Unmanned radio and television stations/towers.

 

(8)    Wildlife and nature preserves.

 

(c)    Land Uses Subject to a Planned Development Review

 

(1)    Residential uses that include more than one primary residential unit.

 

(2)    Commercial and/or industrial uses that include more than 10,000 square feet.

 

(d)    Property Development Standards

The following property development standards shall apply to all land uses within the PD District.

 

Maximum Structure Height

45 feet

Minimum Lot Size (map suffix will modify)

10 gross acres

Maximum Lot Coverage

80%

Maximum Building Coverage

65%

Maximum Lot Dimensions (width/depth ratio)<

10 acres = 1:3

Maximum Lot Dimensions (width/depth ratio)>

10 acres = 1:4

Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth in feet)

60/100

Front Yard Setback

25 feet

Side Yard Setbacks

10 feet

Rear Yard Setbacks

10 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks

15 feet

Maximum Floor Area/Lot Area Ratio

1.2:1.0

Minimum District Size

40 gross acres

 

(1)    A map suffix may allow minimum lot size to be less than 40 acres (e.g., PD-5 = Planned Development, five-acre minimum). A map suffix may also indicate maximum dwelling units per acre (e.g., PD-3/1 = Planned Development, three dwelling units per acre).

 

(2)    Alternate Standards

A Final Development Plan may establish different design standards, including accessory sign standards.

 

(3)    Minimum Lot Size

A Final Development Plan may approve lot sizes smaller than those specified by the land use district. The combination of open spaces and concentrations of smaller lot areas shall be compatible with the land uses on surrounding properties.

 

(4)    Uses Allowed

A Planned Development may allow intermixing of residential, commercial, and industrial uses, provided there is a determined need for such special development standards.

 

(5)    Development Plan standards shall apply in lieu of conflicting standards in this Code. All standards established by this Code which do not conflict with the Development Plan standards shall apply to the project.

 

(e)    Planned Development (PD) District Accessory Sign Standards

 

 

 

Sign Type

 

Sign Configuration

Individual

Complex

Complex Occupant

 

 

 

 

Wall

P R 1:2

NP —

P R 1:2

 

A 50

—

A 50

 

 

 

 

Roof

P R 1:2

NP —

P R 1:2

 

P A 50

—

A 50

 

 

 

 

Monument

P H 4

P H 4

NP —

 

P A 50

A 50

—

Freestanding

P H 25

P H 25

NP —

 

P A 100

A 100

—

 

 

 

 

Projecting

P H 25

P H 25

NP —

 

P A 100

A 100

—

Total Area (sq. ft.)

150

100

50

Total Number

1 FS

1

1

 

1 AT/FR

 

 

 

Key

 

 

A = Max. Area (sq. ft.)

AT = Attached

FR = Per Frontage

FS = Freestanding

H = Max. Height

 

LR = Land Use Compliance Review

NP = Not Permitted

 

P = Permitted

R = Ratio (bldg. frontage to sign area)

 

These standards may be modified by the Planned Development.

 

(Amended by Ord. 210 § 21, 2001; Ord. 247 § 11, 2005; Ord. 345 § 23, 2016)

 

84.0395 Open Space (OS) District.
The Open Space (OS) District shall be located as specified by the Yucaipa General Plan.

 

(a)    Permitted Uses

 

(1)    Single dwelling unit (on parcels with no other Land Use District designations).

 

(2)    Publicly owned group campgrounds and picnic areas.

 

(3)    Publicly owned restroom facilities and parking areas.

 

(4)    Natural channels, levees, spreading grounds, detention basins, roads, trails, culverts, and diversion drains, where plans are approved by the City Engineer.

 

(5)    Nature preserves and mitigation “banks,” including habitat restoration.

 

(6)    Accessory uses as specified in Section 84.0510 of this division.

 

(b)    Land Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit

 

(1)    Public utilities and public service uses or structures.

 

(c)    Property Development Standards

The following property development standards shall apply to all land uses within the OS District.

 

Maximum Structure Height

35 feet

Minimum Lot Size (map suffix will modify)

1.0 gross acre

Maximum Lot Coverage

40%

Maximum Building Coverage

40%

Maximum Lot Dimensions (width/depth ratio)

<10 acres = 1:3

Maximum Lot Dimensions (width/depth ratio)

>10 acres = 1:4

Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth feet)

125/125

Front Yard Setback

50 feet

Side Yard Setback

20 feet

Rear Yard Setback

30 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks (local streets)

25 feet

Street Side Yard Setbacks (collector streets)

35 feet

Maximum Housing Density

1 du/parcel*

Minimum District Size

1 gross acre

*Only applies to parcels with no other Land Use District designations.

 

(Added by Ord. 294 § 4, 2010)

 

 

CHAPTER 4 ADDITIONAL USES
84.0401 Additional Use Criteria.
Except as provided by Section 84.0405, the land uses listed in sections 84.0410 and 84.0420 may be allowed in any official land use district subject to a Conditional Use Permit when one or more of the following criteria cited have been met.

 

(a)    The location of the land use is determined by other land uses which are directly supported by the proposed use.

 

(b)    The land use is part of the community or regional infrastructure.

 

(c)    The location of the proposed use is determined by the location of raw materials in their natural state such as mineral deposits, natural vegetation, and energy sources.

 

(d)    The character of the proposed use is such that it requires a remote location away from other land uses.

 

(e)    The land use is deemed essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare. (Amended by Ord. 253 § 10, 2006)

 

84.0405 Alternate Review Procedure.
Unless preempted by state or federal law, the specific land uses listed in Section 84.0410 shall be permitted in any official land use district without a Conditional Use Permit when, in the opinion of the City Planner, the criteria cited in Section 84.0401 and all the following alternate review procedures have been completed.

 

(a)    Alternate Procedures

 

(1)    The land use has been approved at public hearing by a state or federally-appointed body or commission empowered to approve or license the land use.

 

(2)    Notice has been given to provide an opportunity for those interested or affected by the proposed use to take part in local public hearings conducted by the state or federal body or commission approving the land use.

 

(3)    The review process used by the approving agency has substantially addressed the same issues and concerns that would be addressed in applicable City review and approval process.

 

(4)    The approving state or federal body or commission has made a reasonable effort to respond to concerns expressed by the City of Yucaipa and its citizens.

 

(5)    The approval of the land use would not have a substantially detrimental effect on the public health, safety, and welfare.

 

(6)    Approval of the land use has complied with applicable provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act.

 

(7)    The land use is consistent with the City’s General Plan.

 

(b)    Typical Alternate Procedures

The following procedures may qualify as such alternate review procedures.

 

(1)    Projects approved by the State Energy Commission.

 

(2)    Projects approved by the U.S. Forest Service.

 

(3)    Projects approved by the Bureau of Land Management.

 

(4)    Projects approved by the State Lands Commission.

 

(5)    State or federal water projects.

 

84.0410 List of Additional Uses.
The following uses may be allowed in any official land use district except the RL, RS, RM, RM-24, and PD zones, subject to the reviews specified by Sections 84.0401 and 84.0405.

 

(a)    Temporary and permanent government facilities and enterprises (federal, state, and local) where buildings and/or property are publicly owned or leased.

 

(b)    Temporary support facilities associated with highway construction and other public facilities including, but not limited to, batch plants and equipment storage yards.

 

(c)    Transportation facilities principally involved in the movement of people, together with the necessary buildings, apparatus, or appurtenances incidental thereto, including, but not limited to, airports, heliports, train stations, bus stations, and car pool facilities.

 

(d)    Institutional uses including, but not limited to, schools, colleges and universities, conference centers, hospitals, churches, rehabilitation centers, and organizational camps.

 

(e)    Museums, art galleries, and libraries.

 

(f)    Planetariums, aquariums, zoos, botanical gardens, and arboretums.

 

(g)    Historic and monument sites.

 

(h)    Cemeteries, including pet cemeteries, subject to Design Standards and the mapping requirements specified by this Code, Conditional Use Permit and Tentative Tract Map required to be filed concurrently.

 

(i)     Solid waste disposal sites, rubbish incinerators, and recycling centers (recycling centers limited to certain land use districts as described in Section 84.0625 of this division).

 

(j)     Sewer plants and sewage disposal sites.

 

(k)    (1)    Electrical generating stations.

 

(2)    Public utilities and public service uses or structures including, but not limited to, reservoirs, pumping plants, electrical substations, central communications offices, microwave and repeater huts, and towers and satellite receiving stations (a multiple site network may be submitted as one project).

 

(l)     Radio and television stations and towers.

 

(m)   Racetracks or stadiums.

 

(n)    Campgrounds not exceeding a density of four sites per acre.

 

(o)    Sports-oriented recreational uses requiring remote locations including, but not limited to, rifle, pistol and archery ranges, sky diving jump sites, off-road and recreational vehicle parks, marines, golf courses, hunting and fishing clubs, ski resorts, and recreational camps.

(p)    Gas pressure control stations, water treatment plants (purification), water storage tanks, gas production plants, petroleum pipelines, and pressure control stations.

 

(q)    Development of natural resources including, but not limited to, mineral deposits, extraction, natural vegetation, and energy sources, together with the necessary buildings, apparatus or appurtenances incidental thereto.

 

(r)    Correctional institutions.

 

(s)    Bail bond operation located within one mile of a correctional institution.

 

(t)     Arenas, field houses, auditoriums, and rodeo facilities.

 

(u)    Recreation and community centers, gymnasiums, and athletic clubs.

 

(v)    Wildlife and nature preserves, lakes, general recreation, leisure and ornamental parks open to the general public.

 

(w)   Industrial uses requiring extensive buffering from other land uses for the preservation of the health, safety, and welfare of the general public, restricted to areas designated as Improvement Level 4 or 5 as defined by the City’s General Plan.

 

(x)    Hazardous Waste Operations

Hazardous waste operations are those establishments involved in the transfer, storage, treatment, incineration, recycling, or disposal of waste material that could pose a threat to human health or the environment if not handled properly. These establishments include, but are not limited to, treatment, incineration, recycling, storage, transfer, residual repository and land disposal facilities.

 

(y)    Recreational vehicle storage. (Amended by Ord. 199 § 2, 2000; Ord. 210 § 5, 2001; Ord. 253 § 11, 2006; Ord. 296 § 12, 2010; Ord. 345 § 24, 2016)

 

84.0420 Planned Developments.
Planned Developments shall be allowed in any official land use district, subject to an approved Planned Development application as specified by Division 3 of this Code and the Design Review Standards specified by Division 8 of this Code.

 

 

 

CHAPTER 5 ACCESSORY USES
84.0501 Intent.
This chapter establishes the regulations and criteria which allow compatible accessory uses to be located within the various land use districts. Unless otherwise provided, all accessory uses are subject to the same regulations as the sponsoring primary use.

 

84.0505 General Accessory Uses.
(a)    In addition to the accessory use types and accessory uses specifically provided for by this section or elsewhere within the Development Code, each land use shall be deemed to include such other accessory uses which are necessarily and customarily associated with and are clearly incidental and subordinate to the land use. Whenever such accessory uses are questioned, it shall be the responsibility of the Building Official or Community Development Director to determine if a proposed accessory use meets the criteria set forth in this section. Prior to making a determination whether or not a proposed accessory use meets the criteria set forth in this section, the Building Official or Community Development Director shall give notice to all contiguous property owners in accordance with provisions for Staff Review with Notice.

 

(b)    The combination of accessory and primary use structures shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage specified by the land use district.

 

(c)    Permitted accessory buildings shall be located on either the same parcel as the main building or main use or shall be located on a contiguous abutting parcel that is owned by the same person who owns the parcel which has the main building or use. They shall be placed within the building envelope or as specified by the Table of Projections in Division 7.

 

 

84.0510 Uses Accessory to Primary Residential.
The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses to each single dwelling unit which is allowed by the subject land use district.

 

(a)    Additional Residential Dwelling

Only one of the following shall be allowed on parcels of less than five acres. Each additional residential dwelling shall provide two additional parking spaces, except as otherwise provided by this Code.

 

(1)    Secondary Dwelling Unit

A secondary dwelling unit is an additional single-family residence that is allowed on a lot where there is an existing legal single-family residence, provided that the lot area of the subject property is at least two times the minimum lot size specified by the land use district for the subject property. A secondary dwelling unit is subject to Land Use Compliance Review and must comply with the single residential design standards and the standards specified for the subject land use district.

 

(2)    Temporary dependent housing as defined in Division 12 and subject to Special Use Permit.

 

(3)    Caretaker housing as allowed by Section 84.0550 and a Land Use Compliance Review.

 

(4)    Accessory dwelling units as allowed pursuant to Section 84.0570.

 

(b)    Guest House

Guest housing is residential occupancy of a living unit, with bathroom plumbing only, located on the same parcel as the primary dwelling unit, but separated from it by at least 10 feet. This housing is for use by the occupants or temporary guests of the occupants of the premises and is not to be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling, except as provided by this section.

 

(c)    Carport and/or Garage

Detached structures shall be limited to a four-vehicle capacity on lots less than 20,000 square feet. Vehicle capacity is calculated by multiplying a 14′ x 19′ parking space (adequate for handicapped persons) by the desired number of vehicles to be housed in the garage/carport. Additional storage space (approximately 136 square feet) is added, totaling 1,200 square foot maximum four-vehicle capacity. These provisions pertain to detached garages/carports only. Any detached carport or garage that is greater than 1,200 square feet in area, or more than 20 feet in height, or of an unconventional design (commercial or industrial) that may be incompatible with the surrounding residential area shall be subject to Planning Commission review and approval of a Special Use Permit.

 

(d)    Accessory structures such as a cabana, play yard, tennis court, porch, ramada, awning, patio slab, water tower and well, swimming pool, storage buildings, and similar uses shall be permitted. Parcels that are one acre or less shall be limited to only one detached storage building that exceeds 100 square feet, and such storage building shall not exceed 1,000 square feet. Any detached accessory structure, barn, workshop, or guest housing that is greater than 1,200 square feet in area, or more than 20 feet in height, or of an unconventional design (commercial or industrial) that may be incompatible with the surrounding residential area shall be subject to Planning Commission review and approval of a Special Use Permit.

 

(e)    Accessory animal raising as specified by Section 84.0560 of this chapter.

 

(f)    Special Use Permits shall be required for the following uses:

 

(1)    Exotic animals.

 

(2)    Private kennels.

 

(3)    Dependent housing.

 

(4)    Newly constructed detached carports and/or garages over 1,200 sq. ft. in area, or over 20 ft. in height, or of an unconventional design (commercial or industrial).

 

(5)    Newly constructed accessory structures, barns, workshops and/or guest housing over 1,200 sq. ft. in area, or over 20 ft. in height, or of an unconventional design (commercial or industrial).

 

(g)    Exterior storage shall be fully and solidly screened and kept below the level of the fence or other screening mechanism.

 

(h)    Accessory crop production on lots of 10,000 square feet or less, with a temporary sales facility for plant or animal products grown on the subject property shall stand no greater than 200 square feet and which displays such produce for sale for no greater than 72 hours in any calendar month.

 

(i)     Private office for the sole use of the dwelling unit occupants, within a main building, and with no external advertising or signs. (Amended by Ord. 227 § 2, 2004; Ord. 345 § 25, 2016; Ord. 359 §§ 1, 2, 2017)

 

84.0520 Uses Accessory to Primary Agricultural.
The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses to Primary Agricultural uses which are allowed by a land use district.

 

(a)    Animal Raising

 

(1)    Each animal raising land use includes all structures necessary to maintain and care for such animals (e.g., barn, corral, stable, pens, and coops). Such structures shall comply with all developments standards including those specified by the land use district and this section.

 

(2)    Animal Separation

 

(A)   All animals, other than cats, dogs, canaries or birds of the psitacinae family, shall be restrained at least 70 feet, measured in a straight line, from any structure or area used for human habitation or public assembly (e.g., parks, churches, etc.) on adjoining property. The area of human habitation shall not include cabanas, patios, attached or detached private garages, or storage buildings.

 

(B)   Such animals shall maintain a clearance of at least five feet from interior side and rear property lines and 15 feet from side street rights-of-way, excepting alleys or bridle paths, unless they comply with the following subsection (c).

 

(C)   Animal Enclosure.

Animals may be maintained by a fence at least five feet high and made of either chain link, wood with horizontal members no less than six inches apart, solid masonry, or other appropriate solid screening and confining materials. Such a fence may be located on an interior side or rear lot line and 15 feet from a side street right-of-way.

 

(D)   All animals shall be kept no closer than 100 feet from any domestic water well.

 

(3)    Newborn Animal Exception

Offspring of animals less than four months old or unweaned maintained on the same property in accordance with applicable laws and regulations which are maintained in compliance with the provisions of this code and any other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations shall not be subject to the maximum density or number limitations established by the Land Use District.

 

(b)    Row field tree and nursery crop and animal product sales stand shall be permitted. The retail trade of plant or animal products primarily grown on the subject property shall be allowed when displayed from one stand with a floor area not to exceed 200 square feet on lots greater than 10,000 square feet.

 

84.0530 Uses Accessory to Primary Commercial.
The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses to primary commercial uses which are allowed by a land use district.

 

(a)    Accessory residential dwellings as specified by section 84.0550 of this chapter.

 

(b)    Parking structures and lots

 

(c)    Accessory signs as specified by Division 7 and the Land Use District

 

(d)    Recycling facilities subject to Special Use Permit

 

(e)    Exterior storage shall be fully and solidly screened and kept below the level of the fence or other screening mechanism.

 

84.0540 Uses Accessory to Primary Industrial.
The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses to primary industrial uses as allowed by the land use district.

 

(a)    Accessory residential dwellings as specified by section 84.0550 of this chapter

 

(b)    Parking structures and lots

 

(c)    Accessory signs as specified by Division 7 and the Land Use District

 

(d)    Recycling facilities subject to Special Use Permit

 

(e)    Exterior storage shall be fully and solidly screened when adjacent to a non-industrial land use district and kept below the level of the fence for at least 10 feet from such fence or other screening mechanism.

 

84.0550 Accessory Residential Dwellings.
The following residential dwellings are allowed subject to Land Use Compliance Review as an accessory use to a primary agricultural, commercial, industrial, or institutional use where such use demonstrates the need for on-site residency of one or more people to maintain, operate, and/or secure the primary non-residential land use on the property.

 

(a)    Caretaker Housing

Caretaker housing is the residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by the owners, operators, or caretaker employed to guard or operate part or all of the property on which the caretaker dwelling is located as an accessory use. The caretaker dwelling unit may be located either above the first floor or behind a primary commercial use.

 

(b)    Labor Quarters

Labor quarters refers to the residential occupancy of single or multiple dwelling units with individual, shared, or no kitchen facilities to provide housing for the employees and their families of agricultural, mining, logging, major construction, scientific exploration, or other remote land uses.

 

84.0560 Accessory Animal Raising for Primary Single Dwelling Unit.
(a)    This section establishes regulations to allow animal raising as an accessory use to a primary single dwelling unit. Combinations of the animal types are allowed, provided the following conditions are met.

 

(1)    The total number in each category is not exceeded.

 

(2)    Where a density ratio of animals per lot area is specified, the lot area or portion thereof shall be allocated only once, to either a primary or accessory animal raising use. Lot area used to qualify one animal type shall not be reused to allow another animal type.

 

(3)    Animal types which are limited only by a maximum number per lot are allowed in addition to any other accessory or primary animal raising use.

 

(4)    For the purpose of this section, lots with attached multiple residential structures shall be limited to those animals allowed by Subsection 84.0560(h)(1) and (2) for lots less than 7,200 square feet.

 

(b)    All animal raising land uses shall comply with public health laws regarding proper care and maximum number of animals.

 

(c)    Each animal raising land use includes all structures necessary to maintain and care for such animals (e.g., barn, corral, stable, pens, and coops). Such structures shall comply with all development standards, including those specified by the land use district and this section.

 

(d)    Animal Separation

 

(1)    All animals, other than cats, dogs, canaries or birds of the psitacinae family, shall be maintained at least 70 feet, measured in a straight line, from any structure or area used for human habitation or public assembly (e.g., parks, churches, etc.) on adjoining property. The area of human habitation shall not include cabanas, patios, attached or detached private garages, or storage buildings.

 

(2)    Such animals shall maintain a clearance of at least five feet from interior side and rear property lines, and fifteen feet from side street rights-of-way, excepting an alley or bridle path, unless they comply with the following subsection (3).

 

(3)    Animal Enclosure

Animals may be maintained by a fence at least five feet high and made of either chain link, wood with horizontal members no less than six inches apart, solid masonry, or other appropriate solid screening and confining materials. Such a fence may be located on an interior side or rear lot line and 15 feet from a side street right-of-way.

 

(4)    All animals shall be kept no closer than 100 feet from a domestic water well.

 

(e)    Accessory animal raising of densities greater than those specified by this section or of animal types different from those specified by this section shall be subject to a Special Use Permit (e.g., educational animal projects or temporary grazing operations).

 

(f)    Newborn Animal Exception

Offspring of animals maintained in accordance with applicable laws and regulations which are less than four months old or which have not been weaned, of any animals which are maintained in compliance with the provisions of this Code and any other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations shall not be subject to the maximum density or number limitations established by this Title.

 

(g)    Confined Animals

Animals which are normally maintained in aquariums, terrariums, vivariums, bird cages, or similar devices each of which does not exceed 50 cubic feet and where such devices are maintained within an enclosed building shall be allowed as an accessory animal raising use. The maximum number or density limitations for these animal types shall comply with public health regulations.

 

(h)    Permitted Accessory Animal Raising

 

ANIMAL TYPE

MINIMUM LOT AREA

MAX. DENSITY OR NUMBER

 

 

 

 

less than

 

1)A combination of dogs, cats, and/or pot-bellied pigs

7,200 sq. ft.

7,200 sq. ft.

10,000 sq. ft.

20,000 sq. ft.

or more

2 per lot or unit

3 per lot

4 per lot

5 per lot

 

 

Five or more require a Special Use Permit (SUP) and a Public Health permit.

 

 

less than

 

2)   A combination of chickens or similar fowl (hens only)

   7,200 sq. ft.

   7,200 sq. ft.

2 per lot or unit

3 per lot

 

 

 

      Rabbits or other small animals

   7,200 sq. ft.

10,000 sq. ft.

3 per lot

4 per lot

 

20,000 sq. ft.

1 per 2,000 sq. ft.

 

         or more

 

 

 

 

      The cumulative total of avian species and/or other small animals shall be 9 per lot.

 

 

 

3)   Sheep and/or Goats

   7,200 sq. ft.

1 per lot

 

10,000 sq. ft.

1 per 5,000 sq. ft.

 

 

 

    Miniature Goats, including Pygmy Goats

Up to 9,999 sq. ft.

2 per lot

 

10,000 sq. ft. or more

1 per 5, 000 sq. ft.

 

 

 

      Goats (male)

20,000 sq. ft.

1 per lot

 

 

 

The maximum cumulative total of sheep and goats, inclusive of miniature goats and pygmy goats, shall be nine per lot. However, if keeping miniature goats, there shall be at least two miniature goats or a miniature goat and another companion animal kept on the premises. In addition, any miniature goats kept on the premises shall be dehorned or located in an area with solid fencing. The lot size requirement for male goats refers to male goats that have not been neutered.

 

4)   Cattle, buffalo, horses or similar large animals

20,000 sq. ft. with 60′ min. frontage

1 per 10,000 sq. ft.

 

 

 

      The cumulative total of all large domesticated animals shall be 9 per lot.

 

Note: Matrices for primary animal raising for a specific land use district apply where the animal raising is a primary use as opposed to an accessory use.

 

(Amended by Ord. 269 § 3, 2007; Ord. 365 § 1, 2018)

 

84.0570 Accessory Dwelling Units
(a)    Purpose

The purpose of these provisions is to establish procedures for permitting an accessory dwelling unit on lots zoned for residential uses; to implement State law requiring consideration for such uses; and to protect and preserve existing neighborhoods by ensuring comprehensive established standards.

 

(b)    Definitions

The following definitions apply to this section only:

 

ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT or ADU means an additional attached or detached residential dwelling unit that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons and is located on a lot with a proposed or existing primary residence. The ADU shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel that the primary residence is located. The term “ADU” also includes an “efficiency unit” as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1 and a “manufactured home” as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18007.

 

JUNIOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT or JADU means a unit that is no more than five hundred (500) square feet in size and contained entirely within an existing single-family residence. A junior accessory dwelling unit may include separate sanitation facilities, or may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure.

 

PRIMARY DWELLING UNIT means the existing or proposed single-family residence that is located on the lot where the accessory dwelling unit will be constructed or converted.

 

(c)    Accessory Dwelling Unit Requirements

 

(1)    Application Procedure

 

(A)   Where an ADU or JADU permit application is submitted with an application for a single-family dwelling or multi-family dwelling that is subject to discretionary review under the Development Code, the ADU or JADU permit application will be considered separately without discretionary review or a public hearing, following action on the portion of the project that is subject to discretionary review.

 

(B) Except as provided in subsection (C), an applicant must submit an application for Land Use Compliance Review. Any ADU that meets the standards in subsections (2) through (12) herein shall be approved by the Community Development

Director or designee within sixty (60) days from the date the City receives a completed application if there is an existing single-family dwelling on the lot, or as otherwise required by Government Code Section 65852.2, as that section may be amended from time to time. In addition to obtaining affirmative approval through Land Use Compliance Review, the applicant shall be required to obtain a building permit and any other applicable construction permits prior to the construction of the ADU.

 

(C)   An applicant shall not be required to submit an application for Land Use Compliance Review and may instead seek building permit approval for an ADU or JADU that satisfies the requirements of: (i) the California Building Standards Code, as amended by the City, and (ii) Government Code Section 65852.2(e)(1), as the same may be amended from time to time. This type of ADU or JADU does not need to comply with the requirements of subsections (2) through (12) herein. An ADU or JADU approved by this “building permit only” process shall be rented only for terms of thirty-one (31) days or longer. The property owner shall record a declaration of restrictions, in a form approved by the City Attorney, placing the following restrictions on the property, the property owner, and all successors in interest: (i) the ADU or JADU is to be rented only for terms of thirty-one (31) days or longer, unless State law and the City’s Municipal Code are both amended to allow short-term rentals; and (ii) the ADU or JADU is not to be sold or conveyed separately from the primary dwelling unit. Proof of recordation of the covenant shall be provided to the City before the final building permit may be issued for the ADU or JADU. In accordance with the standards set forth in Government Code Section 65852.22, JADUs shall comply with the following requirements, unless State law is amended to set forth different standards, in which case State law standards will govern:

 

(I)    A JADU shall be a minimum of two hundred twenty (220) square feet and a maximum of five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area. The gross floor area of a shared sanitation facility shall not be included in the maximum gross floor area of a JADU.

 

(II)   A JADU must be contained entirely within the walls of the existing or proposed single-family dwelling.

 

(III)  A separate exterior entry from the main entrance to the single-family dwelling shall be provided to serve a JADU.

 

(IV)  A JADU may include separate sanitation facilities, or may share sanitation facilities with the existing single-family dwelling.

 

(V)   A JADU shall include an efficiency kitchen meeting the requirements of Government Code Section 65852.22.

 

(VI)  No additional parking shall be required for a JADU.

 

(VII) Unless State law is amended, the JADU or single family residence shall be occupied by the owner of record.

 

(2)    Local ADU Standards

An ADU may only be permitted on lots within a residential zoning district on which there is one existing or proposed primary dwelling unit and no second dwelling unit, as defined in Section 812.04158 of the Development Code. Only one ADU shall be permitted on any one lot. ADUs approved in conformance with this chapter do not exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which the ADU is located and shall be considered a residential use that is consistent with the existing general plan and zoning designation for the lot. The ADU shall provide complete and independent living facilities. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the lot upon which the ADU is to be established shall conform to all general development standards of the land use district in which it is located, except where the application of the regulations would not permit construction of an eight hundred (800) square foot ADU that is sixteen (16) feet in height with four-foot side and rear yard setbacks. The permitting of any ADU shall be subject to applicable Development Impact Fees, as allowed by Government Code Section 65852.2, as that section may be amended from time to time.

 

(3)    Size Restrictions

The ADU may be either an attached or detached unit. If the ADU is an attached unit, the ADU shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the area of the primary dwelling unit or one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, whichever is smaller. If the ADU is a detached unit, the unit shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. No ADU shall be smaller in size than an “efficiency unit” as defined in Section 17958.1 of Health and Safety Code.

 

(4)    Rental and Transfer

The ADU may be rented, subject to the limitations on short-term rentals, but shall not be sold, transferred or assigned separately from the primary dwelling unit. The ADU shall not be used for rentals of less than thirty-one (31) consecutive days.

 

(5)    Covenant Required

Within thirty (30) days of the issuance of a Land Use Compliance Review or a building permit for an ADU pursuant to this section, the owner of record shall record a covenant, in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, which shall place future buyers on notice of the maximum size of the ADU as set forth in this subsection (c), the required amount of off-street parking to be provided for the ADU, that the ADU may not be sold, transferred or assigned separately from the primary dwelling unit, that the ADU may not be used for short-term rentals for less than thirty-one (31) consecutive days, and that such restrictions shall run with the land and be binding upon all future owners. The covenant shall be recorded in the official records of the County of San Bernardino, and a copy of the covenant shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk.

 

(6)    Setbacks

No setback shall be required for an ADU that is constructed within an existing structure or within a structure constructed in the same location and dimensions as an existing structure. For all other ADUs, the required setback from side and rear lot lines shall be four feet.

 

(7)    Utilities

The ADU shall have adequate water and sewer services. These services may be provided from the water and sewer points of connection for the primary dwelling unit and need not be a separate set of services. Approval must be obtained from the City’s Building and Safety Department and the County of San Bernardino’s Environmental Health Department when an ADU will be using a septic system rather than connecting to the public sewer system.

 

(8)    Parking Requirement

 

(A)   One independent off-street parking space shall be provided, in addition to the parking spaces required for the primary dwelling unit, for an ADU.

 

(B)   The parking space(s) shall comply with all development standards set forth in Chapter 6 of Division 7 of the Development Code, except that the parking space(s) for the ADU may be located in setback areas or through tandem parking.

 

(C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements, no additional parking space is required for an ADU that satisfies any of the following conditions:

 

(I)    It is located within one-half mile walking distance of public transit;

 

(II)   It is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district;

 

(III)  It is part of the proposed or existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure;

 

(IV)  It is located in an area where on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the ADU occupant; or

 

(V)   It is located within one block of a car share vehicle pick-up or drop-off location.

 

(9)    Design

The ADU shall match the design of the primary unit in terms of landscaping, color, building materials, and exterior treatment, and any applicable City-wide design guidelines. Any detached ADU shall be located behind the primary dwelling unit such that the ADU shall not extend beyond the primary unit where such primary unit faces a right-of-way.

 

(10)  Historic Resources

Any ADU that has the potential to adversely impact any historical resource listed on the National Register or the California Register of Historic Resources, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the “Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring, and Reconstructing Historic Buildings” found at 36 CFR 68.3, as amended from time to time.

 

(11)  Fire Sprinklers

ADUs are required to provide fire sprinklers only if they are required for the primary dwelling unit.

 

(12)  Building Standards

ADUs shall comply with the California Building Standards Code, as amended by the City. (Added by Ord. 359 § 5, 2017; amended by Ord. 385 § 2, 2020)

 

 

 

CHAPTER 6 SPECIAL USES
84.0601 General Provisions.
(a)    The uses described in this chapter shall be permitted in a land use district subject to the issuance of a Special Use Permit. Special Use Permits are required to regularly monitor the operation of certain land uses to insure their continued compatibility with the surrounding property.

 

(b)    Failure to comply with all conditions of this section shall render the Special Use Permit to be null and void and subject to all enforcement, criminal and civil penalty provisions of this Development Code and all other remedies and penalties provided by law, and are not limited or superseded by these sections.

 

(c)    Special Use Permit applications shall be denied if there are any violations of Yucaipa City Code Division 3, Chapters 1 through 11, on the property for which the application is filed, and appropriate legal action will be taken to abate such violation.

 

(d)    The Community Development Director and/or the Building Official may add additional conditions or requirements as deemed necessary to any Special Use Permit.

 

(e)    Special Use Permits shall be renewed annually, unless otherwise specified by this chapter, and inspections will be conducted by the Community Development Department prior to each annual renewal.

 

 

84.0605 Dependent Housing.
(a)    One (1) detached dependent housing unit as defined in Division 12 of the Development Code may be permitted per parcel in any land use district as a temporary accessory use to any permitted single dwelling unit; provided, however, that there is only one single dwelling unit occupying the site.

 

(b)    Requirements

 

(1)    The permittee shall occupy at least one of the dwelling units on the premises.

 

(2)    The permittee shall own the dependent housing unit.

 

(3)    Application for a permit shall be made by a resident owner of the subject property on which the dependent housing unit is to be located, or by his legal agent having power of attorney to make such application.

 

(4)    Renewal of Permit

Permits for a dependent housing unit shall be issued for a period not to exceed 24 months and may be renewed for additional 24-month periods subject to the provisions of this section and Division 3.

 

(5)    Change of Residency

The permittee shall submit written notification to the Community Development Department of any change of residence in the dependent housing unit.

 

(c)    Findings

Prior to acting upon an application for a Special Use Permit for a dependent housing unit, the reviewing authority shall find that all of the following are true.

 

(1)    The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate said use and all yards, building coverage, setbacks, parking areas, and other requirements of the Code.

 

(2)    The proposed dependent housing unit is clearly subordinate in size, location, and appearance in the principal unit.

 

(3)    Issuance of the permit shall not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and district in which the use is located.

 

(4)    The dependent housing unit shall be erected, constructed, or installed so as to allow for its removal.

 

(5)    The appearance of the dependent housing unit and the method of siting are compatible with the surrounding built environment.

 

(d)    Conditions

 

(1)    Permitted Structural Types

 

(A)   Units constructed to meet City Uniform Building Code Standards including, but not limited to, panelized structures or other structural types which may be affixed to a foundation but disassembled at a later date; or

 

(B)   Units constructed to meet the standards of the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 subject to the issuance of a mobilehome permit.

 

(2)    Floor Area

A maximum floor area of 840 square feet shall be permitted on parcels which are in land use districts requiring less than 2.5 acres minimum lot area. Parcels in land use districts which require 2.5 acres minimum lot area shall have a maximum floor area of 1,600 square feet. Park model travel trailers shall have a minimum of 400 square feet.

 

(3)    Design Standards

The appearance of any temporary dependent housing unit erected, constructed, or set down in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be similar to or compatible with the appearance of the principal residence to which the temporary dependent housing unit is to be accessory.

 

(4)    Parking

Additional parking for the dependent housing unit shall not be required if the existing off-street parking complies with the applicable parking requirements of the Development Code, or if the resident(s) of the dependent housing unit are incapable of operating a motor vehicle.

 

(5)    Location

The dependent housing unit shall not extend beyond the principal unit where such principal unit faces a right-of-way.

 

(6)    Lot Area

A dependent housing unit shall not be permitted on any parcel which does not have at least 7,200 square feet.

 

(7)    Removal of Unit

As a condition of permit approval, the permittee shall sign a notarized temporary dependent housing agreement, which shall be recorded, and which places the responsibility upon the permittee to comply with the provisions of this section describing the method of removal of the dependent housing unit, and acknowledging that the permittee shall bear the cost of removal of such unit. (Amended by Ord. 186 § 11, 1998)

 

84.0610 Exotic Animals.
(a)    The keeping of exotic animals as defined in Division 12 and as determined by the County Veterinarian shall be permitted as an accessory use to single dwelling unit, subject to the following regulations.

 

(b)    Requirements

 

(1)    Prior to giving notice, the reviewing authority shall request that the County Veterinarian submit a statement regarding the particular animal’s mature behavior and personality characteristics. Notice given to adjacent property owners shall include a description of the type of animal and its behavior characteristics.

 

(2)    Any action to approve a request for a Special Use Permit for an exotic animal shall not be effective until written evidence is received by the Community Development Director that the following conditions have been met.

 

(A)   The applicant has applied for and obtained a permit from the Public Health Department.

 

(B)   The applicant has applied for and obtained a permit from the State Department of Fish and Game.

 

(c)    Conditions

Any action to approve a request for an exotic animal Special Use Permit shall include the following conditions, in addition to any conditions deemed appropriate by the reviewing authority.

 

(1)    The keeping of the animal must comply with all City Code requirements, including setbacks from property lines and other dwellings.

 

(2)    The keeping of the animal must comply with all applicable federal and state requirements.

 

(3)    No more than two exotic animals over the age of six months may be kept as an accessory use to a single dwelling unit, unless a Conditional Use Permit for a menagerie or zoo has been approved.

 

(4)    Each exotic animal must have sufficient area to be maintained and exercised in a normal healthy manner as determined by the County Veterinarian.

 

(5)    Each permit shall specify the periodic renewal period and inspection requirements.

 

84.0615 Home Occupations/Cottage Industry.
(a)    Home occupations and cottage industries are commercial uses which are accessory to a residential land use where such a use will clearly not alter the character or the appearance of the residential environment. Home occupations and cottage industries shall be permitted as accessory uses to a residential land use, subject to a Home Occupation Permit and to the following conditions. Home occupation and cottage industry standards are divided into three groups of provisions.

 

(1)    General standards applying to both home occupations and cottage industries

 

(2)    Home occupation standards for properties within land use districts which allow residential uses

 

(3)    Cottage industry standards for land use districts which require a minimum parcel size of 2.5 acres where the lot size is at least one acre

 

(b)    General Standards

All home occupations and cottage industries shall adhere to the following standards.

 

(1)    Pedestrian and vehicular traffic will be limited to that normally associated with residential districts.

 

(2)    The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for the delivery of materials to or from the premises beyond those commercial vehicles normally associated with residential uses.

 

(3)    The home occupation shall be confined to an enclosed structure.

 

(4)    The appearance of the structure shall not be altered, nor the occupation within the  residence be conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, or signs, or the emission of sounds, noises, and vibrations. The uses of utilities and community facilities shall be limited to that normally associated with the use of property for residential purposes.

 

(5)    If the operation is to be operated by a tenant of the property, notarized written permission from the property owner for the use of the property for home occupations shall be submitted.

 

(6)    All required permits from other agencies and departments shall be submitted with the Home Occupation Permit application.

 

(7)    Noise emanations shall not exceed 55 dBA as measured at the property lines at all times.

 

(8)    Any activity producing glare shall be carried on so that direct or indirect light from the source shall not cause glare onto an adjacent parcel.

 

(9)    Chemicals, solvents, mixtures, or materials which are corrosive, toxic, flammable, an irritant, a strong sensitizer, or other similar materials used in home occupation shall be used and stored in accordance with regulations of the San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health Services, Hazardous Materials Division.

 

(10)  Parking shall comply with the parking requirements specified by Division 7, Chapter 6 of this Code. One additional parking space shall be provided for each non-resident employee.

 

(11)  Motor vehicle repair or service will not be allowed as a home occupation use.

 

(12)  Public advertising (e.g., handbills) shall only list a phone number, home occupation operator’s name, post office box, and description of business. Location information shall be limited to community name only. Business address or location should not be included in any public advertising.

 

(13)  A non-illuminated identification sign, not to exceed 6 square feet in area and stating the business name and telephone number, shall be permitted. If not attached to the residence, such a sign shall not exceed six feet in height and must blend with the architectural style of the structure and the neighborhood.

 

(c)    Home Occupation Standards

Home occupations are allowed on any property that is within a land use district that allows residential uses, subject to a Home Occupation Permit and the following provisions.

(1)    All employees, partners, or operators of the home occupation shall be members of the resident family and shall reside on the premises.

 

(2)    Up to 25% or 250 square feet, whichever is greater, of the total floor area of the dwelling unit and related accessory structures, may be used for storage of materials and supplies related to the home occupation.

 

(d)    Cottage Industry Standards

Cottage industries are allowed on properties that are at least one acre in area within land use districts that allow residential uses and which require a minimum lot area of 2.5 acres or greater, subject to a Home Occupation Permit and the accordance with the following conditions.

 

(1)    All employees, partners, or operators of the home occupation, except two, shall be members of the resident family and shall reside on the premises.

 

(2)    Up to 35% of the total floor area of the dwelling unit and related accessory structures or 500 square feet, whichever is greater, of the home may be used for storage of materials, supplies, and equipment related to the cottage industry.

 

(3)    Operating hours of a home occupation shall be between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.

 

(4)    Direct sales of products or merchandise shall be limited to seven customers per week.

 

84.0625 Recycling Facilities.
(a)    Requirements

No person, corporation, or legal entity shall place or permit the placement and/or operation of any recycling facility, including a reverse vending machine, collection facility, or processing facility without first obtaining any permits required pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter. Recycling facilities may be permitted as set forth in the following table.

 

Type of Facility

Land Use Districts Permitted

Permit Required

Reverse Vending Machines (up to 100 square feet)

CN, CG, CS, IC

SUP

Small Collection Facility (up to 500 square feet)

CN, CG, CS, IC

SUP

Large Collection Facility (over 500 square feet)

CG, CS, IC

CUP

Light Processing Facility (up to 4,500 square feet)

CG, CS, IC

CUP

Heavy Processing Facility (over 4,500 square feet)

IC

CUP

 

(Note: All facilities, in addition to other designated permits, may be subject to a Special Use Permit and/or health permits as may be required in Title 3 of the City Code.)

 

(b)    Criteria and Standards

Recycling facilities subject to Conditional Use Permit and/or Special Use Permit, shall meet the applicable criteria and standards listed below, provided that the Director of Community Development, Planning Commission, or City Council, as the case may be, may relax such standards or impose stricter standards at their discretion upon a finding that such modifications are reasonably necessary in order to implement the general intent of this chapter and the purposes of this Code. The criteria and standards for recycling facilities are as follows.

 

(1)    Reverse Vending Machines

Reverse vending machines do not require any permits under this Code; however, permits are required for reverse vending machines subject to the requirements of Division 3, Title 3, of the City Code.

 

(2)    Small Collection Facilities

 

 

(A)   The facility shall be established as an accessory use to a primary commercial or industrial use which is in compliance with the zoning, building, and fire codes of the City of Yucaipa and shall not occupy more than 500 square feet of floor space.

 

(B)   Containers shall be constructed and maintained with durable, waterproof, and rustproof material, and shall be covered.

 

(C)   Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type(s) of recyclable(s) which may be deposited.

 

(D)   The facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator.

 

(E)   The site shall be swept and maintained in a dust-free, litter-free condition on a daily basis.

 

(F)    The facility shall be set back at least 10 feet from any street right-of-way and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.

 

(G)   The facility shall not impair the landscaping required for any concurrent use by this title or any permit issued pursuant thereto.

 

(H)   Noise level shall not at any time exceed 65 dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property and shall not exceed 70 dBA at any point.

 

(I)    Small collection facilities shall not include power-driven sorting and/or consolidation equipment, such as crushers or bailers, except reverse vending machines.

 

(J)    Signs may be provided as follows. In addition to the signs and certificates issued by the Department of Conservation and the Division of Recycling, which must be displayed by the operator/processor, and the informational signs required by this chapter, the following signs are permitted.

 

(I)    An unattended container 50 cubic feet or smaller in bulk and nine feet or shorter in height may have a maximum sign area of four square feet.

 

(II)   Other containers or units may have one, flat-mounted sign per side of container or wall of enclosure of 20% of the surface of the side up to a maximum of 16 square feet.

 

(K)   Use of the facility for collection of solid wastes or hazardous wastes, as defined in Division 12 and as specified by Section 812.08022 of Title 8, is prohibited.

 

(L)   If the permit expires without renewal, the collection facility shall be removed from the site on the day following permit expiration.

 

(M)  Attended facilities located within 100 feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use shall be in operation during the hours between 9 am and 7 pm, and otherwise during the hours of operation of the host business. Containers for the 24-hour donation of materials shall be at least 30 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use, unless there is a recognized service corridor and acoustical shielding between the containers and the residential use.

 

(N)   The facility shall conform to all development regulations for the land use district in which it is located.

 

(O)   Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during the hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present.

 

(P)    Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant may not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary host use, unless all of the following conditions exist.

 

(I)    The facility is located in a convenience zone or a potential convenience zone as designated by the California Department of Conservation.

 

(II)   A parking study shows that existing parking capacity is not already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility will be on the site.

 

(III)  The permit will be reconsidered at the end of 12 months. Parking credits in an established parking facility may then be granted as follows.

 

Number of Available Parking Spaces

(commercial host use)

Maximum Reduction

 

 

0-25

0

26-35

2

36-49

3

50-99

4

100 +

5

 

For a community facility host use, a maximum five-space reduction will be allowed when not in conflict with parking needs of the host use.

 

(3)    Large Collection Facilities

A large collection facility is one that is larger than 500 square feet or is on a separate property not appurtenant to a host use and may have a permanent building. A large collection facility is permitted in designated commercial and industrial Land Use Districts with a Conditional Use Permit, provided the facility meets the following standards.

 

(A)   The facility is located at least 150 feet from the property line of any residential use or Land Use District which allows residential land uses.

 

(B)   The facility shall be screened from the public right-of-way by operating in an enclosed building or within an area enclosed by an opaque fence at least six feet in height with landscaping and shall meet all applicable noise standards specified in this chapter.

 

(C)   Setbacks and landscape requirements shall be those provided for the Land Use District in which the facility is located.

 

(D)   All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition, or may be baled or placed on pallets. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of non-flammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the Department of Environmental Health Services. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, shall be visible above the height of the fencing.

 

(E)   The site shall be maintained free of litter, dust, flies, and any other undesirable materials, and shall be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis.

 

(F)    Space shall be provided on site for six vehicles or the anticipated peak customer load, whichever is higher, to circulate and to deposit recyclable materials, except where the Planning Agency determines that allowing overflow traffic above six vehicles is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety.

 

(G)   One parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility. Parking requirements shall be as provided for in the Land Use District in which the facility is located, except that parking requirements for employees may be reduced when it can be shown that parking spaces are not necessary, such as when employees are transported in a company vehicle to a work facility.

 

(H)   Noise levels shall not exceed 65 dBA as measured at the property line of residentially-zoned property and shall not exceed 70 dBA at any point.

 

(I)    If the facility is located within 500 feet of property zoned, planned, or occupied for residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7 pm and 7 am.

 

(J)    Any containers or enclosures provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials shall be located at least 50 feet from any property zoned, planned, or occupied for residential use, shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and shall be secured from unauthorized entry or removal of materials.

 

(K)   Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material, and the containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited. The facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers.

 

(L)   The facility shall be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation; identification and information signs shall meet the standards of the zone, and directional signs may be installed with the approval of the City Planner if necessary to facilitate traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way.

 

(M)  Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material may be approved at the discretion of the Planning Agency if noise and other conditions are met.

 

(4)    Processing Facilities

 

(A)   The facility shall be located at least 150 feet from property planned, zoned, or occupied for residential use, and operations shall take place within a fully enclosed building or within an area enclosed by a solid wood or masonry fence at least six feet in height.

 

(B)   Setbacks from property lines shall be those provided for the land use district in which the facility is located. If the setback is less than 25 feet, the facility shall be buffered by a landscape strip at least 10 feet wide along each property line.

 

(C)   If the facility is located within 500 feet of property planned, zoned, or occupied for residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7 pm and 7 am. The facility shall be administered by on-site personnel during the hours the facility is open.

 

(D)   Noise levels shall not exceed 65 dBA as measured at the property line of an existing residence or Land Use District allowing residential land uses and shall not exceed 70 dBA at any point.

 

(E)   Sign criteria shall be those provided or the zoning district in which the facility is located and the provisions specified in Chapter 7, Division 7 of the City Code. In addition, the facility shall be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation.

 

(F)    Any containers or enclosures provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials shall be located at least 50 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use, shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and shall be secured from unauthorized entry or removal of materials.

 

(G)   Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material. The containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited. The facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers.

 

(H)   No dust, fumes, smoke, vibration, or odor above ambient level may be detectable on neighboring properties.

 

(I)    Power-driven processing shall be permitted, provided all noise level requirements are met. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding, and sorting or source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials.

 

(J)    A light processing facility shall be no large than 45,000 square feet and shall have no more than an average of two outbound truck shipments of material per day and may not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers.

 

(K)   A processing facility may accept used motor oil for recycling from the generator in accordance with Section 25250.11 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

(L)   All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition or may be baled or placed on pallets. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of non-flammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the Community Development Director. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, shall be visible above the height of the fencing.

 

(M)  The site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and shall be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis, and shall be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present.

 

(N)   Space shall be provided on site for the anticipated peakload of customers to circulate, park, and deposit recyclable materials. A minimum of six parking spaces or on-site, drive-through stacking capacity for 10 vehicles shall be provided.

 

(O)   One parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the processing center. Parking requirements shall otherwise be as mandated by the zone in which the facility is located.

 

(c)    Site Clean-Up Required

The operator and host business of any recycling collection or processing facility shall, on a daily basis, remove any and all recyclable materials or solid wastes which have accumulated or are deposited outside the containers, bins, or enclosures intended as receptacles for such materials. Upon the failure to remove said materials, the City may deem them to be abandoned and may enter the site to remove the materials. The property owner(s) of the premises and the operator of the facility shall be liable for the full cost of any such clean up work done by the City. (Amended by Ord. 186 § 10, 1998)

 

84.0630 Private Kennels.
(a)    The establishment of private kennels shall be subject to the following regulations.

 

(1)    Notice shall be given in accordance with Staff Review With Notice procedure.

 

(2)    Any action to approve a request for a private kennel as an established Rural Living Use in a Rural Living and Land Use District shall not be effective until written evidence is received by the Community Development Director that the applicant has applied for and obtained all required permits from the San Bernardino County Public Health Department, Office of Preventive Veterinary Services.

 

(b)    Conditions

Any action to approve a request for a private kennel permit as an accessory use shall include the following conditions.

 

(1)    The establishment of the private kennel must comply with all provisions of the City Code, Title 3, Division 2, Chapter 3, Commercial Kennels.

 

(2)    The keeping of the animals must comply with all City Code requirements including, but not limited to, setbacks from property lines and other dwellings.

 

(3)    A minimum lot size/parcel size of 2.5 acres per parcel shall be required with a maximum of 15 dogs per parcel permitted.

 

(4)    Private kennels shall be required to be inspected by the Department of Public Health quarterly. One annual inspection shall be conducted jointly by the Department of Public Health and the Community Development Department. Written reports from the Department of Public Health must be submitted to the City after each quarterly inspection.

 

(5)    Noise shall be attenuated to 55 dBA from the property line.

 

(6)    The permit application may be denied if two or more contiguous property owners submit substantive objection in writing to the City.

 

(7)    All direct and indirect glare from the source shall not cause glare upon adjacent property owners.

 

(8)    All fencing shall comply with the City Code, Title 3, Division 2, Chapter 3. The special use permit may require the use to be fully screened from adjacent properties.

 

(9)    One sign not to exceed 12 square feet in area stating “Private Kennel” with a 24-hour emergency phone number must be posted at all entries to the parcel.    

 

84.0635 Special Uses.
(a)    Any use that is the subject of an approved Conditional Use Permit in accordance with the provisions of Division 3 may also be made subject to the issuance of a Special Use Permit.

 

(b)    Special Use Permits may be issued for limited time periods. New applications may be required for Special Use Permit renewal.

 

84.0640 Hazardous Waste Facilities.
All specified hazardous waste facility applications shall be subject to a Special Use Permit with a copy of the disclosure statement required by Health and Safety Code Section 25200.4. The purpose of the Special Use Permit shall be to evaluate the operation and monitoring plan of the facility, to ensure the facility has adequate measures for monitoring on-going impacts to air quality, groundwater, and environmentally-sensitive resources, to evaluate the types and quantities of wastes that will be treated or disposed of at the facility, and to require periodic inspections of the facility to ensure conditions of approval are implemented and monitored.

 

 

 

84.0645 Accessory Structures.
(a)    Any newly constructed detached carport or private garage as defined in Division 12 of the Development Code that is greater than 1,200 square feet in area, or more than 20 feet in height, or of an unconventional design (commercial or industrial) that may be incompatible with the surrounding residential area shall be subject to Planning Commission review and approval of a Special Use Permit prior to the issuance of building permits. This Special Use Permit shall be a one-time permit that will remain valid for the life of the structure.

 

(b)    Any newly constructed detached accessory structure, barn, workshop, or guest housing as defined in Division 12 of the Development Code that is greater than 1,200 square feet in area, or more than 20 feet in height, or of an unconventional design (commercial or industrial) that may be incompatible with the surrounding residential area shall be subject to Planning Commission review and approval of a Special Use Permit prior to the issuance of building permits. This Special Use Permit shall be a one-time permit that will remain valid for the life of the structure.

 

(c)    Findings

        Prior to acting upon an application for a Special Use Permit for a detached carport, private garage, or other detached accessory structure, the reviewing authority shall find that all of the following are true.

 

(1)    The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate said use and all yards, building coverage, setback, parking area, and other requirements of the Code.

 

(2)    The proposed accessory structure is subordinate in size, location, and appearance to the primary residential unit.

 

(3)    Issuance of the permit shall not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and district in which the use is located.

 

(4)    The appearance of the detached accessory structure and the method of construction are compatible with the surrounding built environment. (Amended by Ord. 227 § 3, 2004)

 

 

 

84.0650 Custom Home Design Review.
(a)    All new construction on existing parcels within the Custom Home (CH) Overlay District shall be subject to the review and approval of a Special Use Permit by the Planning Commission whenever unconventional designs are proposed (i.e., dome houses, “themed” structures, metal buildings or components, etc.).

 

(b)    Findings

        Prior to acting upon an application for a Special Use Permit for design review, the reviewing authority shall find that all of the following are true:

 

(1)    The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate said use and all yards, building coverage, setback, parking area, and other requirements of the Code.

 

(2)    The proposed residential structure meets or exceeds all of the Development Standards of the Custom Home (CH) Overlay District.

 

(3)    The issuance of a building permit will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity in which the use is located.

 

(4)    The appearance of the structure and the methods of construction are compatible and consistent with the surrounding built environment. (Added by Ord. 239 § 2, 2005)

 

 

 

CHAPTER 7 TEMPORARY USES
84.0701 General Provisions.
(a)    The uses described in this chapter shall be permitted in any land use district subject to the issuance of a Temporary Use Permit (TUP) in accordance with the provisions of Division 3 and as otherwise specified by this chapter. In order to establish such a use, a person must submit a permit application and remit the appropriate fees to the Community Development Department or the Office of Building and Safety and then obtain approval of the permit and any allowed extension thereof.

 

(b)    Permit and permit extension actions may be appealed or referred to the next succeeding reviewing authority as specified by Division 3 of the Development Code. Such appeals shall consider compliance of the proposed action with the provisions of this chapter.

 

(c)    All temporary uses shall be subject to the following, where applicable.

 

(1)    The valid TUP issued by the Community Development Director or Building Official shall be prominently displayed in a manner so as to be visible at all times from the exterior of the structure or vehicle so permitted and subject to inspection.

 

(2)    The structure or vehicle so permitted shall provide evidence of approval by the State Division of Housing as prescribed in the California Health and Safety Code or the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development.

 

(3)    Installation of a structure or vehicle so permitted shall comply with all the requirements and regulations of the Development Code, Office of Building and Safety, and the Community Development Department and applicable state and federal regulations.

 

(4)    The owner of the use requiring the Temporary Use Permit shall submit a letter to the Reviewing Authority setting forth in detail the primary use or the use to which the structure or vehicle is to be put and the length of time such temporary use will be required, together with a statement of such future plans as will eliminate the necessity for the temporary use.

 

(5)    A temporary occupancy use shall be located on the same parcel or on a contiguous parcel under the same ownership or control as the primary construction project, property being protected, or other primary use for which the Temporary Occupancy Use Permit was requested and approved.

 

(d)    A Temporary Use Permit may be issued for the interim operation of any use requiring a Conditional Use Permit for a period of time not to exceed one year, provided such permit does not authorize the construction or establishment of any new permanent structures and the Planning Agency makes the findings required for approval of a Conditional Use Permit. The Temporary use Permit application shall be filed concurrently with an application for Conditional Use Permit, where appropriate.

 

(e)    A Temporary Use Permit may be issued for the interim operation of an exterior storage area or short-term exterior sales display area for a period of time not to exceed 30 days in any land use district.

 

84.0705 Temporary Residential Quarters.
Manufactured homes and self-contained recreational vehicles may be used for temporary residential quarters, subject to a Temporary use Permit issued in accordance with the provisions of Division 3. Such temporary residential quarters shall be allowed only in the following instances.

 

(a)    Temporary residential quarters for individuals involved in the construction of the first permanent dwelling unit on the same parcel shall be permitted. Such a TUP shall be valid only if there is a current and valid Building Permit issued by the Building Official or a valid Mobilehome Setdown Permit issued by the Community Development Department for the permanent dwelling unit.

 

(b)    Temporary residential quarters for security personnel engaged in the short-term protection of a legally established and permitted commercial, commercial agricultural, industrial, or institutional use, or for construction projects which have current and valid permits issued by the Office of Building and Safety shall be permitted.

 

TUPs for temporary security quarters or extension thereof shall not be granted for any period of time to exceed five years from the date the original TUP was issued. If security quarters are needed for a longer term than three years, a caretaker’s residence should be established in accordance with the provisions of the applicable land use district.

 

(c)    The provisions of this section shall not be construed to limit the authority of a public school, pursuant to law, to provide a manufactured home on school property for the purpose of housing a person or persons employed by the district as a watchman or caretaker of school property on a twenty-four hour basis.

 

(d)    Any permit issued pursuant to this section in conjunction with a construction project shall become invalid upon cancellation or completion of the building permit for which the use has been approved or the expiration of the time for which the approval has been granted.

 

84.0710 Temporary Nonresidential Quarters.
(a)    Manufactured homes, commercial coaches, self-contained recreational vehicles, mobile office vehicles, and appropriate structures constructed in accordance with the Uniform Building Code may be used for temporary nonresidential quarters, subject to the issuance of a Temporary Use Permit in accordance with the provisions of Division 3. Such temporary nonresidential quarters may be used to provide temporary office, retail, meeting assembly, wholesale, manufacturing and/or storage space for commercial, commercial agricultural, industrial, or institutional uses for a specified temporary period of time. Such quarters shall only be an interim substitute until permanent structures can be constructed or repaired, or until a short-term need has been satisfied.

 

(b)    The City Planner shall determine through the Land Use Compliance Review that the proposed use has adequate access, circulation, parking, fencing, lighting, signage, landscaping, and appropriate buffering from abutting uses as required by this Code and the applicable land use district.

 

(c)    A TUP for temporary nonresidential quarters and extension(s) thereof, shall not be granted for any period of time to exceed five years from the date the original TUP was issued.

 

84.0715 Temporary Construction Office Quarters.
Manufactured homes, commercial coaches, self-contained recreational vehicles, mobile office vehicles, and appropriate structures constructed in accordance with the Uniform Building Code may be used for temporary construction office quarters subject to a Temporary Use Permit.

 

Any permit issued pursuant to this section in conjunction with a construction project shall become invalid upon cancellation or completion of the building permit for which this use has been approved, or the expiration of the time for which the approval has been granted.

 

84.0720 Temporary Real Estate Model Home/Sales Office.
(a)    Dwelling units may be used for temporary real estate model home/sales offices located in residential developments and subdivisions subject to the issuance of a Temporary Use Permit.

 

(b)    Said model home sales office may be used only for conducting the necessary activities related to the initial sale or initial lease of the land or structure located within the residential development or subdivision in which the sales office is located, or such adjacent residential developments or subdivisions that are a part of or a continuation of the same development.

 

(c)    At least one model home shall be fully landscaped with drought-tolerant xeriscape materials.

 

84.0725 Temporary On-Your-Lot Builder Model Home/Sales Office.
Single family dwelling units may be used for temporary on-your-lot builder model homes/sales offices subject to a Temporary Use Permit and the provisions of this chapter, including the following.

 

(a)    Intent

The provisions of this section are intended to regulate the use of a single family dwelling unit when used as a temporary sales office and model home for the sale of construction services to build single family residential units on vacant lots. These provisions are not intended to allow a permanent or temporary real estate office involved in real estate sales other than those involving lots sold in conjunction with the construction services being offered.

 

(b)    Findings

Prior to the issuance of a Temporary Use Permit, the reviewing authority shall find and justify the following to be true.

 

The proposed On-Your-Lot Builder Model Home/Sales Office structure will not have an adverse effect on adjacent properties.

 

(c)    Conditions

Prior to approving the request for or request to extend a Temporary Use Permit for an On-Your-Lot Builder Model Home/Sales Office, the proposed use shall comply with the following.

 

(1)    The On-Your-Lot Builder Model Home/Sales Office shall be used only for the sale of construction services to build single family residential dwelling units on vacant lots and related real estate sales. All real estate sales shall be limited to the sale of vacant lots in conjunction with the sale construction services for the same lot. All real estate sales shall be an accessory and subordinate use to the primary use of construction service or sales.

 

(2)    Two accessory freestanding or monument signs shall be permitted, and they shall neither exceed 32 square feet nor 12 feet in height. Such signs shall only be permitted on the same tract as the model home/sales office and shall be kept in good repair at all times. A freestanding sign shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet between the bottom edge of the sign and the ground. The leading edge of such a sign shall be no closer than one foot from the planned right-of-way. All signs shall comply with the provisions of Development Code Division 7, Chapter 7, that are not in conflict with this subsection.

 

(3)    Also, each site shall be allowed to have a maximum of six flags that are each a maximum 12 square feet in area and a maximum 12 feet in height. Such flags shall be maintained in good repair at all times. For the purpose of this section, this shall mean no weathered, faded, or tattered flags are allowed.

 

(4)    One “open house sign” no larger than 24″ x 18″ on poles no higher than four feet tall may be displayed. Also, no more than two pennants may be displayed. Pennants shall be no greater than 2′ x 3′ mounted on poles no higher than four feet tall. Hours of open house sign and pennant flag displays shall be no earlier than sunrise and no later than sunset.

 

(5)    Other than as allowed by this section, moveable or portable signs, off-site directional signs, plastic banners, balloons, streamers, propellers, or other similar apparatus which are primary placed and intended to attract the attention of the general public shall not be permitted.

 

(6)    An annual inspection by the Community Development Department shall be made in order to ensure compliance with any conditions of approval.

 

(7)    A minimum of two paved and two other alternate parking spaces shall be provided. The Community Development Director shall approve alternate parking spaces subject to surfacing requirements and possible alternate locations (e.g., on-street parking) where it is deemed necessary and appropriate.

 

(8)    At least one model home shall be fully landscaped with drought-tolerant xeriscape materials.

 

(9)    A Temporary Use Permit for other On-Your-Lot Builder Model Home/Sales Offices may be transferred to another party. Such a transfer shall not entitle the new owner to use such a permit for a longer time period than ten years from the issuance of the original permit. The Community Development Department shall be notified of any transfer of ownership.

 

(10)  Agreement to Terminate a Temporary Use

Prior to the issuance of the permit for the first year and as a condition of that permit approval, the permittee shall enter into an agreement with the City, which shall be recorded in the official records of the City by the County Recorder. The agreement will establish the responsibility of the permittee to comply with the provisions of this chapter. This will include acknowledgement that the permittee shall terminate the model home/sales office no later than ten years from the date of the initial permit and restore the structure to a use allowed by the current Land Use District on the subject property.

 

(d)    Existing Uses

All existing On-Your-Lot Builder Model Home/Sales Offices shall be required to obtain a Temporary Use Permit for their use. Such permits, together with approved annual extensions, will allow these uses to continue for an additional five years from the effective date of this section without penalty, provided such uses comply with the provisions and conditions established by or under the authority granted by this section. (Amended by Ord. 186 §§ 5—7, 1998; Ord. 210 § 23, 2001)

 

84.0735 Temporary Signs.
Temporary signs shall be allowed subject to a Temporary Sign Permit issued in accordance with the provisions of Division 7, Chapter 7, regarding Temporary Signs.

 

84.0740 Temporary Transportable Treatment Unit.
A Temporary Transportable Treatment Unit (TTTU) may be used for treating hazardous waste or groundwater contamination subject to a Temporary Use Permit issued in accordance with the provisions of Division 3. Such temporary transportable treatment units shall be allowed if one of the following conditions applies.

 

(a)    The site where a TTTU will be located and operated complies with the siting criteria and procedures identified in the City of Yucaipa Hazardous Waste Management Plan.

 

(b)    The Community Development Director shall determine through the Land Use Compliance Review that the proposed TTTU use will not create additional health risks as demonstrated by a site-specific, health-risk assessment.

 

(c)    Any permit issued pursuant to this section in conjunction with a TTTU shall become invalid upon violation of a permitting requirement or completion of the project or the expiration of the time for which the approval has been granted.

 

(d)    An annual inspection by the Community Development Department shall be made in order to ensure compliance with any conditions of approval.

 

(e)    A TUP for a temporary transportable treatment unit and extension(s) thereof shall not be granted for any period of time to exceed five years from the date the original TUP was issued.

 

CHAPTER 8 NON-CONFORMING USES
84.0801 General Provisions.
The regulations in this chapter shall apply to all existing non-conforming buildings and uses.

 

84.0805 Continuation of Non-Conforming Uses.
(a)    Uses existing under valid land use permits issued in conformance with the provisions of the Development Code shall be considered conforming uses, except that this shall not preclude their becoming non-conforming due to reclassification of land use districts under this Code.

 

(b)    Any legal non-conforming building may be continued and maintained, provided there are no structural alterations, except as provided below in Sections 84.0810(b) and 84.0815.

 

(c)    Any legal non-conforming use may be continued, provided there is no increase of the space devoted to such use.

 

84.0810 Termination of Non-Conforming Use.
(a)    Any part of a building or land occupied by a non-conforming use which is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions of this Code as they apply to the particular district shall thereafter be used or occupied only by a conforming use.

 

(b)    Any part of a building or land occupied by a non-conforming use, which use is discontinued for 180 days or more shall thereafter be used in conformity with the provisions of this Section. The provisions of this section shall not prevent the reconstruction, repairing, or rebuilding and continued use of any non-conforming buildings or buildings damaged by any natural or man-made catastrophe subsequent to the effective date of this Code, wherein the cost of such reconstruction, repairing, or rebuilding does not exceed 100% of the reasonable value of such building or buildings constituting a single enterprise at the time such damage occurred.

 

84.0815 Removal or Alteration of Non-Conforming Uses.
(a)    Every legal non-conforming use which was designated or intended for a use not presently permitted in the district where it is located shall be completely removed or altered to conform to the requirements for the uses permitted in such district within a time fixed by the Planning Agency. Such time for removal or alteration may not be fixed for a date before the expiration of the normal life of any building as determined by the Planning Agency. Such determination of the normal life of a non-conforming building and the fixing of time for its removal or alteration may only be made after notice to the owner.

 

(b)    An order for removal or alteration shall require such action on a date no less than five years from the time such an order is made. It shall be the duty of the Planning Agency to give the owner of the affected use or building written notice thereof immediately upon the order becoming final and again not less than 60 or more than 180 days prior to the date such removal or alteration is required to be completed. If the Planning Agency fails to give this second notice within the above time period, the owner shall be given 60 days from the notice’s actual postmark date.

 

(c)    A residential structure which complied with any applicable development standards at the time of its construction and which is utilized for residential purposes in a Land Use District which allows such residential uses is not subject to provisions of this chapter, even though it does not comply with the residential design standards established by the Land Use Districts or the Alternate Housing Standards Overlay District.

 

84.0820 Non-Conforming Commercial Chicken Ranch.
(a)    Any commercial chicken ranch legally existing at the time of a district change to a residential district may thereafter continue in operation and expand the flock to the full limit and extent of chicken houses, cages, brooders, and similar appurtenant structures existing on the premises at that time, provided that a Certificate of Land Use Compliance is recorded, including an existing use site plan prior to the effective date of the district change.

 

(b)    In the event such a commercial chicken ranch desires the addition of chicken houses, cages, brooders, or similar structures beyond those existing as enumerated above, an approved Conditional Use Permit is required, including findings for alteration of a nonconforming use.

 

84.0825 Other Non-Conforming Uses.
(a)    The legal non-conforming use of land where no structure is existing at the time the Development Code became effective, may continue for a period of not more than 10 years here from, provided the following conditions apply.

 

(1)    The non-conforming use of land will not in any way be expanded or extended, either on the same or on adjoining property.

 

(2)    The non-conforming use of land existed at the time the Development Code became effective. If thereafter discontinued or changed, it may not be reestablished; any future use of such land shall be in conformity with the provisions of the Development Code.

 

(b)    Any legal non-conforming commercial primary or accessory signs existing at the time this Code became effective may be continued, although such use does not conform with the provisions thereof, provided, however, that all such non-conforming signs and their supporting members shall be completely removed by their owners not later than five years from the effective date of this Code.

 

(c)    The foregoing provisions shall also apply to all buildings and land uses which hereafter become non-conforming due to any reclassification of districts under this Code.

 

84.0830 Alteration of Non-Conforming Uses.
(a)    A legal non-conforming use may only be altered after review and approval of a Conditional Use Permit with the additional findings required for such non-conforming use alterations.

 

(b)    Any alteration required by governmental or court action shall be exempt from these conditions.

 

(c)    Restrictions and conditions affecting a non-conforming use shall apply to the existing use, land, and structures and shall not be affected by ownership changes.

 

(d)    Notwithstanding the provisions regarding Conditional Use Permit or variance, the Building Official may allow the construction of an additional modification to a legally existing structure within a current yard setback area, as established by an applicable residential Land Use District, when such legally existing building is within the yard setback area, and provided such additional modification does not exceed the projection of the existing structure into such current yard setback area and does not come closer than three feet to any property line.

 

(e)    The requirement for a Conditional Use Permit shall not apply to non-conforming residential uses, where such uses are being expanded or modified by no more than 25% of the floor space or ground area existing at the time such use became a non-conforming use.

 

 

(f)    The requirement for a Conditional Use Permit shall not apply to any non-conforming use or structure which is being expanded, altered, or modified to more closely approximate or exceed the standards of this Code with which it does not currently conform.

 

 

CHAPTER 9 PROHIBITED USES
84.0901 Purpose.
This chapter establishes express prohibitions on certain uses in all zones in the City. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to limit the effect or scope of the City’s permissive zoning scheme. The purpose of this chapter is to declare and clarify that these uses are not permitted and are not within the scope of any permitted use defined in this Code. No use prohibited in this chapter shall be allowed in any zone in the City. (Added by Ord. 341 § 3, 2016)

 

84.0905 Marijuana Uses Prohibited.
A.    Commercial marijuana activity is prohibited in all zones and all specific plan areas in the City. No person shall establish, operate, maintain, conduct or allow commercial marijuana activity anywhere within the City. The City shall not approve any application for a building permit, conditional use permit, variance, or any other entitlement authorizing the establishment, operation, maintenance, development, or construction of any commercial marijuana activity. The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply to any conduct allowed under local law pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1.

B.     A property owner shall not rent, lease or otherwise permit any business that engages in commercial marijuana activity to occupy real property in the City. A property owner shall not allow any person or business to establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or engage in commercial marijuana activity on any real property owned or controlled by that property owner that is located in the City.

C.     In addition to any other enforcement authorized under Chapter 2 of Division 1 of the City Development Code, the City Attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties against any person or entity that violates this section. In any civil action brought pursuant to this section, a court of competent jurisdiction may award reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs to the prevailing party.

D.    Notwithstanding the penalties set forth in Chapter 2 of Division 1 of the City Development Code, this Chapter 9 does not authorize a criminal prosecution, arrest or penalty inconsistent with or prohibited by Health and Safety Code Section 11362.71 et seq., or 11362.1 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time. In the event of any conflict between the penalties enumerated under Chapter 2 of Division 1 of the Development Code and any penalties set forth in State law, the maximum penalties allowable under State law shall govern. (Added by Ord. 341 § 3, 2016); (Amended by Ord. 354 § 4, 2017)

DIVISION 5 OVERLAY DISTRICTS
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
85.0101 Intent.
(a)    This chapter provides land use regulations as part of the Official Land Use Plan of the City of Yucaipa for the incorporated areas of said City.

 

(b)    Overlay districts are established to reorganize and map environmental hazard constraints, environmental resource amenities, or community concerns which should be taken into consideration when land development is being proposed. Overlay districts establish regulations in addition to those imposed by the land use district. Overlay districts shall be designated where development within a land use district is affected by or would affect such environmental hazard constraints, environmental resource amenities, or community concerns.

 

 

 

(c)    When an overlay district is mapped over any land use district, the development standards used for that site shall be those as set forth in the overlay district and/or the land use district, whichever is more restrictive.

 

(d)    The procedures for using overlay districts shall be outlined in this chapter.

 

(e)    When appropriate, variances from standards set forth in the overlay districts may be granted.

 

85.0105 Purpose and Format.
(a)    Overlay districts are established for the following purposes.

 

(1)    To preserve and protect valuable resources of land, natural land formations and land uses which have been identified as needing such protection

 

(2)    To identify natural or man-made conditions which are a potential threat to public health and safety and to formulate requirements to mitigate such threats

 

(b)    Each overlay district section contains the following subsections: “Intent,” “Locational Requirements,” and “Development Standards.” The “Intent” and “Locational Requirements” sections provide necessary information for locating overlay districts. The “Development Standards” section provides the necessary regulatory guidance for land uses within an overlay district that are in addition to those required by the applicable land use district.

 

85.0110 Overlay Designations.
(a)    When an overlay district is established in conjunction with a land use district, it shall be designated on the appropriate overlay map or appropriate land use district map.

 

(b)    The following symbols appear on the official land use or overlay maps to identify the various overlay districts.

 

Symbol

Overlay District

AA

Additional Agriculture

AP

Agricultural Preserve

AH

Alternate Housing Standards

BR

Biotic Resources

CH

Custom Home

CR

Cultural Resources

FR1, FR2

Fire Safety

FP1, FP2, FP

Flood Plain Safety

GH

Geologic Hazard

MR

Mineral Resources

NH

Noise Hazard

PR

Paleontologic Resources

SR

Scenic Resource

MHP

Mobilehome Park

SP

Specific Plan

 

(Amended by Ord. 145 § 2, 1995; Ord. 239 § 2, 2005)

 

85.0115 Overlay District Application.
The regulations and development standards established by an overlay district shall be imposed in addition to those established by the underlying land use district, shall prevail when they are more restrictive, and shall overlay all land use districts on all parcels or portions thereof which are encompassed or circumscribed by one or more overlay districts. Land use districts may augment and strengthen the standards and provisions specified by an overlay district. Overlay districts may be added as a suffix or a series of suffixes to the primary land use district (e.g., RL-AP) when designated on a land use district map. Each overlay district, however, is an independent, individual land use regulation, which is adopted or amended independent of the land use district.

 

(a)    The boundaries of established districts are shown and delineated on the Land Use and Overlay District Maps entitled “Official Land Use Plan,” as amended and as certified by the City Clerk and on file with the Community Development Department, which are hereby adopted as part of the Official Land Use Plan of the City of Yucaipa.

 

(b)    Changes, additions, and amendments to the Official Land Use Plan shall be determined and defined from time to time by ordinances adopting “sectional” land use district maps covering portions of Yucaipa, each of which shall become, upon final adoption and certification by the City Clerk, a part of the Official Land Use Plan for the City.

 

(c)    Unless otherwise noted, land use and overlay district boundaries shall extend to street right-of-way centerlines.

 

85.0120 Implementation Review.
The following shall apply to all land use applications and development permits which are submitted for property within an overlay district.

 

 

The accepting authority shall require a Land Use Compliance Review when the review process for a land use application or development permit does not provide an adequate review or implementation mechanism to properly address the protection or preservation measures and standards specified by an overlay district.

 

 

 

85.0125 Permitted Uses.
The uses permitted on a parcel which has an overlay district shall be those uses allowed by the primary land use district subject to the provisions of all applicable overlay district provisions, as well as those of this Code. Where the regulations or standards established by an overlay district conflict with provisions of a primary land use district or other provisions of this Code, the more stringent regulations or standards shall govern.

 

85.0130 Establishment and Change of an Overlay District.
The provisions of each section of this chapter shall provide the criteria for the establishment or change of the applicable overlay district boundary. Each overlay district is an individual land use designation that is a separate and independent designation from the primary land use district and remains with the property irrespective of the underlying land use district unless specifically changed. A change in the primary underlying land use district does not change an overlay district designation.

 

85.0135 Overlay District Map Amendments.
The City Council may act upon changes in classification of property regarding one or more adopted overlay district(s) and upon amendments to the text of the overlay districts at any time pursuant to the provisions of Division 3, Chapter 2 of this Code.

 

85.0140 District Boundary Uncertainties.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on the overlay district maps, the following rules shall apply.

 

(a)    Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.

 

(b)    In unsubdivided property and where a district boundary divides a lot, the locations of such boundaries, unless indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.

 

(c)    Where any uncertainty exists, the Planning Commission shall determine the location of boundaries.

 

(d)    Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverts shall apply to such vacated or abandoned street or alley.

 

85.0145 Official Land Use Plan Relationship to Code.
The overlay district maps, as part of the Official Land Use Plan, classifications, and boundaries of overlay districts and all notations, references, and other information shown thereon, after final adoption in the manner required by law, shall thereafter be as much a part of the Development Code as if all the matters and information set forth by said maps were fully described herein.

 

CHAPTER 2 HAZARD PROTECTION
ARTICLE 1 FIRE SAFETY (FR) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.020201 Intent.
The Fire Safety Overlay District is created to provide greater public safety in areas prone to wildland brush fires by establishing additional development standards for these areas.

 

85.020205 Locational Requirements.
The Fire Safety Overlay District shall be designed in high fire hazard areas as mapped on the City General Plan Hazards Maps with the locations derived from the California Department of Forestry and U.S. Forest Service.

 

85.020210 General Provisions.
(a)    The provisions of this section shall apply to all phases of a development project.

 

(b)    A notice of all land use applications and/or development permits that would lead to the construction of structures or the subdivision of land within the Fire Safety Overlay District shall be filed with the responsible fire authority by the Community Development Department.

 

(c)    All proposed land use applications that would lead to the construction or expansion of a structure or the subdivision of land shall be submitted to the responsible fire authority or review and recommendation. Any recommendations received shall be indicated in any staff report and/or presentation for the proposed development and shall be incorporated into the conditions of approval where possible.

 

(d)    All proposed development must meet all other applicable standards set forth by the responsible fire authority.

 

(e)    The development standards established by a land use district and any applicable overlay district shall apply, except where a planning area provision provides that a different standard shall apply.

 

(f)    When an addition, alteration, enlargement or reconstruction of a structure equals or exceeds 50% of the existing structure or 25% of the roof for the roofing requirements only, the provisions of Subsections 85.020220(a)(b)(1)(C) and 85.020225(a) regarding construction requirements shall apply to the entire structure and/or the whole roof as applicable. Such structures and/or roofs shall be entirely retrofitted to comply with the provisions of this section.

 

85.020215 Division of Review Areas.
The Fire Safety Overlay District is divided into two review areas, each of which represents a different level of wildland hazard. A different set of requirements is applied in each review area. The provisions for these requirements are cumulative in that all of the requirements that are specified for Fire Safety Review Area 2 shall also apply to Fire Safety Review Area 1, in addition to those specified for only Fire Safety Review Area 1.

 

(a)    Fire Safety Review Area 1 (FR1)

Fire Safety Review Area 1 includes wildland areas that are marginally developable, areas which are not likely to be developed, and the area of transition between wildlands and areas that are partially developed or are likely to be developed in the future. The area of transition is often characterized by an abrupt slope change. Natural hazards are prevalent throughout Area 1, especially in areas with natural ungraded slops greater than 30%. Area 1 includes areas of very high to extreme fire hazard.

 

(b)    Fire Safety Review Area 2 (FR2)

Land within Area 2 is relatively flat and is either partially or completely developed, or, if it is not developed, is usually suitable for development. Present and future development within Area 2 is exposed to the impacts of wildland fires and other natural hazards primarily due to its proximity to Area 1.

 

85.020220 Area FR1 and FR2 Requirements.
(a)    Construction Requirements

 

(1)    Roof coverings shall be either non-combustible or fire-retardant with a minimum Class A rating, as defined in the Uniform Building Code. Class A wood shake or shingle roof coverings shall have passed a 10-year natural weathering test, and proof of such test shall be provided to the Building Official prior to the issuance of a building permit.

 

(2)    Every chimney used in conjunction with any fireplace or any heating appliance in which solid or liquid fuel is used shall be maintained with a spark arrester. An approved spark arrester shall mean a device constructed of stainless steel, copper, or brass, woven galvanized wire mesh, 12-gauge minimum of three-eights (3/8) inch minimum to one-half (1/2) inch maximum openings, mounted in or over all outside flue openings in a vertical and near vertical position, adequately supported to prevent movement and visible from the ground.

 

(3)    Louvers, ventilators, or openings in walls, roofs, attics, and underfloor areas having headroom less than four feet in height which are not fitted with sashes or doors shall be covered with wire screen. The screen covering such openings shall be of galvanized metal or copper and shall have a maximum mesh of one-quarter (1/4) inch.

 

(4)    Eave-type attic ventilators are prohibited.

 

(5)    The space between rafters at exterior walls shall be solidly filled with tight-fitting wood blocks at least one and one-half (1 1/2) inches thick.

 

(6)    Fuel tanks (e.g., liquefied petroleum tanks) shall be located at least 10 feet away from any structure and in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code, the Table of Projections, and the Storage Standards specified by Fire Hazard Performance Standards in Chapters 5 and 9 in Division 7 of this Title.

 

(7)    All non-accessory buildings shall have reflective and non-combustible building address numbers with at least three-inch high lettering visible from the road on which the structure fronts.

 

(8)    All buildings on lots which abut a National Forest that were created after March 9, 1988 shall be set back at least 30 feet from the boundary of the San Bernardino National Forest.

 

(9)    Structures in areas with slopes exceeding 30% and 30 feet in height shall comply with the following.

 

(A)   Where structures are proposed or within 200 feet of slopes that are greater than 30% prior to grading and where such slopes are at least 30 feet in height, the vegetation on such slopes shall be treated in such a manner that it becomes a fuel modified area. Such fuel modified areas shall be maintained for either the entire slope, or 100 feet, or to the property line, whichever distance is less.

 

(B)   Where grading is utilized which does not conform to the natural slope and the graded area is adjacent to natural ungraded slopes which are greater than 30% and which are greater than 30 feet in height, structures shall be set back at least 30 feet from the edge(s) of the graded area adjacent to such natural ungraded slopes.

 

(10)  All areas used for the storage of firewood or other flammable materials shall either be at least 30 feet away from all structures, or wholly enclosed within a structure.

 

(11)  Fire hydrants shall be identified by a method specified by the Fire Authority.

 

(12)  There shall be vehicular access at least 12 feet in width to within at least 10 feet of any static water source including pools, lakes, swimming pools, reservoirs, and water storage tanks. Access shall be either to a plumbed outlet with two and one-half (2 1/2) inch National Hose Thread Fitting, or directly to the source. This requirement shall be waived if the fire authority determines that the water source is sufficiently below the elevation of existing or proposed roads or driveways to make drafting of water from the source through a plumbed outlet infeasible, and that direct vehicular access to the water source would require an impractical extension of a road or driveway.

 

(b)    Building Separations.

 

(1)    Building Separation Standards.

 

(A)   All buildings on parcels created after the effective date of this section and all other parcels with lot widths 60 feet or greater shall have exterior wall separations of at least 30 feet.

 

(B)   All buildings on parcels created prior to the effective date of this section with lot widths less than 60 feet shall have interior side yard setbacks of 20% of the lot width, provided that such interior side yards shall not be less than five feet and need not exceed 15 feet. In no case shall exterior wall separations be less than 10 feet for all buildings, including those on adjoining parcels.

 

(C)   When exterior walls of residential and accessory buildings or portions thereof are within 15 feet of interior side or rear lot lines, or the exterior wall separation is less than 30 feet, the following shall apply: 1) the outside of all such exterior walls or portions thereof shall be covered with materials which are approved for exterior locations and are of fire-resistive construction as defined in the Uniform Building Code; 2) all exterior doors made of wood or wood portions shall be solid core wood; and 3) windows, sliding glass doors or glass inserts in doors shall be constructed of approved dual-pane glass.

 

(2)    Intent of Standards

The intent of the exterior wall separation standards is to reduce the exposure and risk from adjacent structural fires and to reduce the potential spread of fire from structure to structure.

 

(3)    Alternate Measures (Exterior Wall Separation)

Pursuant to Section 85.020230 of this section and dependent upon site specific conditions, the following measures or combinations thereof may be substituted for the exterior wall separation requirements for all buildings specified in Subsection 85.020220(b)(1)(A) above, provided that in no case shall such exterior wall separations be less than 10 feet.

 

(A)   The expansion of fuel modified areas around the perimeter of the development project beyond that required through the provisions of this section or other parts of the City Code

 

(B)   A substantial transfer of density from steeper slopes, including areas with slopes less than 30% if they exist on site, to less steep areas within the development project

 

(C)   Clustering of structures away from the development perimeter and away from fire hazard areas

 

(D)   The provisions of more fire-resistive construction standards than normally required through the provisions of the Fire Safety (FR) Overlay District and otherwise required through the Uniform Building Code or Uniform Fire Code

 

(E)   Other alternate measures if approved by the Planning Agency pursuant to the provisions of Section 85.020230 of this Article

 

(c)    Project Design Requirements

 

(1)    All development projects and each phase thereof, except for a development project located exclusively on a cul-de-sac, shall have a minimum of two points of vehicular ingress and egress, designed to City road standards, with a minimum width of 26 feet of all weather surface as defined in the Uniform Fire Code, from existing and surrounding streets. One such point of vehicular access may be an emergency access route with an all-weather surface, if the Planning Agency makes and justifies all of the following findings.

 

(A)   Two points of non-emergency access shall be physically infeasible.

 

(B)   Provisions shall be made to reasonably ensure that the emergency access will be maintained.

 

(C)   Based on the review and consideration of the Fire Authority’s recommendation, the emergency access route will provide adequate vehicular ingress and egress during emergencies.

 

(2)    All development projects shall provide 6-inch or larger circulating (loop) water mains as required by the Uniform Fire Code and proper hydrant location and spacing, and shall have sufficient water storage capacity to provide the minimum fire flow duration requirements (gallons per minute [GPM] for a minimum number of hours or portions thereof) as specified by the minimum system standards established by the Fire Authority. Circulating (loop) mains are not required for cul-de-sacs and are not required for subdivisions that exclusively take all access from cul-de-sacs. In areas not served by water purveyors, on-site fire flow and water storage requirements will be as specified by the Uniform Fire Code.

 

(3)    All public or private streets within or bordering a development project shall have noncombustible and reflective street name signs designed to City standards and visible at all street intersections.

 

(4)    Fuel Modification Areas

 

(A)   A permanent fuel modification area may be required around development projects or portions thereof that are adjacent or exposed to hazardous fire areas for the purpose of fire protection. The recommended width of the fuel modification area shall be determined by the responsible Fire Authority in conjunction with the County Fire Warden, but in no case shall it be less than 100 feet in width as measured from the development perimeter. The width of the fuel modification area shall be determined based upon the following factors.

 

(I)    The natural ungraded slope of the land within the project and in the areas adjacent to the project

 

(II)   Fuel Loading

 

(III)  Access to the project and direct access to the fuel-modified area

 

(IV)  The on-site availability of water that can be used for fire fighting purposes

 

(V)   Adequate provisions shall be made for the continual maintenance of such areas and, where feasible, such areas shall be designated as common open space rather than private open space.

 

(VI)  Fuel modification areas shall also incorporate soil erosion and sediment control measures to alleviate permanent scarring and accelerated erosion.

 

(B)   When development projects are phased, individual phases may be required to provide temporary fuel modification areas where the development perimeter of a phase is contiguous to a subsequent phase of a project which in its undeveloped state is a hazardous fire area. The need for a temporary fuel modification area shall be determined by the responsible fire authority in conjunction with the County Fire Warden and shall be based upon the same considerations described in Subsection (c)(4)(A) of this section for permanent fuel modification areas.

 

(d)    Erosion and Sediment Control

All development projects, building permits, grading and any other significant land disturbing activity shall install erosion control measures in compliance with the provisions established by the Development Code for such erosion control measures.

 

85.020225 Additional Area 1 (FR1) Requirements.
The following requirements apply only to Area 1, in addition to those specified for both Areas 1 and 2.

 

(a)    Construction Requirements

 

(1)    The outside of all exterior walls shall be covered with materials which are approved for exterior locations and listed as one-hour, fire-resistive construction as defined in the Uniform Building Code. All exterior doors made of wood or wood portions shall be solid core wood.

 

(2)    All windows, sliding glass doors or glass inserts in doors shall be constructed of approved dual-pane glass.

 

(3)    Cantilevered or standard type decks shall be constructed with the following: 1) a minimum of at least one and one-half (1 1/2) inch wood decking; and/or 2) protected on the underside with materials approved for one-hour, fire-resistive construction; and/or 3) be of noncombustible materials, as defined in the Uniform Building Code.

 

(4)    Patio covers attached or within 10 feet of a residential structure with plastic, bamboo, straw or fiberglass, or wood lathe lattice made of materials which are one half (1/2) inch or less in width shall be prohibited.

 

(5)    Exposed piping, except for plumbing vents above the roof, shall be noncombustible as defined in the Uniform Building Code.

 

(6)    A minimum of two, three quarter (3/4) inch faucets with hose connections each served by a three quarter (3/4) inch waterline and installed prior to any pressure reducing device shall be available per structure separated by at least one-third (1/3) of the perimeter of the structure. Such faucets should be on the side(s) of a structure facing fire hazardous areas wherever possible.

 

(7)    All fences required adjacent to fuel modification areas or wildland areas as conditions of approval for a development project shall be constructed of noncombustible materials as defined in the Uniform Building Code. All other fences, including those on the interior of such development project, are not subject to this requirement.

 

(8)    Private driveways or access roadways for residential units shall not exceed 150 feet in length, unless approved by the fire authority pursuant to Section 10.207 of the Uniform Fire Code.

 

(9)    Roof coverings shall be either non-combustible or shall be fire retardant material not composed of organic fiber with a minimum Class A rating, as defined in the Uniform Building Code.

 

(10)  Unenclosed or projecting roof-ceiling or floor-ceiling assemblies which contain concealed space shall have the ceiling protected on the exposed surface with materials approved for one-hour construction.

 

(b)    Project Design Requirements

 

(1)    Every development project application submitted to the Office of Planning shall be reviewed by Office of Planning staff through a pre-application conference with the project proponent prior to the acceptance of the application for filing.

 

(2)    A slope analysis shall be filed with all development project land use applications. The slope analysis shall include the following information.

 

(A)   A topographic map of the proposed project area and all adjoining properties within 150 feet at a scale of not less than one inch to 200 feet. The contour interval shall not be more than two feet, except that the contour interval may be five feet if the general natural ungraded slope is more than 10%. Contour lines are to be obtained by aerial or field survey, done under the supervision of a licensed Land Surveyor or Registered Engineer.

 

(B)   The natural, ungraded slope categories to be computed are zero to less than 15%, 15 to less than 25%, 25 to less than 40%, and 40% or greater.

 

(C)   The area, in acres, shall be tabulated for each category.

 

(3)    A preliminary grading plan shall be filed with all development project land use applications, although preliminary grading plan requirements may be waived by the City Planner if it is determined through the required preapplication conference that such requirements are unnecessary due to site specific soils, topographic or other physical conditions, or due to the specific design of the project. The preliminary grading plan shall include the following.

 

(A)   A topographic map of the proposed project area and all adjoining properties within 150 feet at a scale of not less than one inch to 200 feet shall be prepared. The contour interval shall not be more than two feet, although the contour interval may be five feet if the natural ungraded slope is more than 10%. Contour lines shall be obtained by aerial or field survey, performed under the supervision of a licensed Land Surveyor or Registered Engineer.

 

(B)   Contours of the finished graded slope shall be shown at intervals similar to those on the topographic base map.

 

(C)   Street grades, slope ratios, flow lines, pad elevations, maximum elevation of top and minimum elevation of toe of finished slopes over five feet in vertical height, the maximum heights of those slopes and approximate total cubic yards of cut and fill shall be shown on the preliminary grading plan.

 

(D)   Compliance with Chapter 70 of the current edition of the Uniform Building Code, as adopted by the City of Yucaipa, is required.

 

(E)   In the event no such grading is proposed, a statement to that effect shall be placed on the required topographic map described in Subsection 85.020225(b)(3)(A) above, and this map shall delineate the boundary of an adequately sized building pad, driveway and septic system (if proposed) for each parcel proposed.

 

(4)    All subdivisions on sites with natural slopes greater than 30% shall be submitted with a Conditional Use Permit for the development of such proposed lots. This provision shall not apply if all of the areas on the site with natural ungraded slopes over 30% are permanently restricted from structural development.

 

(5)    Residential density bonuses, if any, shall only be permitted through Planned Developments.

 

(6)    Perimeter Access to Fuel Modified and Fire Hazard Areas

 

(A)   Standards

Development projects shall provide for adequate vehicular access for fire fighting vehicles to the development perimeter of the project along the portion of the development perimeter that is adjacent to either an existing or proposed fuel modified area or a fire hazard area. Provisions shall be made and shall be required, where necessary, through conditions of development project approval for the continual maintenance of the areas intended to provide such access. Perimeter access shall be provided either through one of the following two measures or through alternate measures pursuant to Section 85.020230 of this Article.

 

(I)    An existing or proposed road along the development perimeter or portion thereof that is exposed to a fire hazard or fuel modified area and which is accessible to fire fighting equipment shall be provided. Such a road shall be capable of supporting fire fighting equipment, shall be at least 20 feet in width and shall not exceed a grade of 14%. The conditions of approval for the development project shall require provisions to ensure that the roadway will be maintained if it is not within the publicly-maintained road system.

 

(II)   Development projects shall provide accessways at least 12 feet in width, with a grade not to exceed 14% and capable of supporting fire fighting vehicles, between the development perimeter and proposed or existing streets. Accessways shall be spaced at intervals of no more than an average of 350 feet along each street. The conditions of approval for the development project shall require specific provisions to ensure that accessways will remain unobstructed and will be maintained. Where feasible, accessways may not be paved and shall be designed so as not to detract from the visual quality of the project.

 

(B)   Intent of Standards

The intent of the standards described in Subsection 85.020225(b)(6) is to permit fire fighting vehicles to have adequate access into areas between fire hazardous areas or fuel modified areas and the development perimeter so that a wildland fire can be contained at the development perimeter and prevented from spreading to structures. An additional intent of these standards is to prevent structural development from becoming a barrier between fire fighting equipment and personnel and the development perimeter.

 

(C)   Alternate Measures

Pursuant to Section 85.020230 of this Article and dependent upon site specific conditions, alternate measures which meet the intent of the standard in Subsection 85.020225(b)(6)(A) above for providing perimeter access to fuel modified and fire hazard areas may be utilized.

 

(7)    Lengths of Cul-de-sacs

 

(A)   Standard cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 350 feet in length, except that they may be extended as allowed by this subsection.

 

(B)   Exception may be made for parcels of less than five acres in area. Cul-de-sacs may exceed 350 feet in length but shall not exceed 600 feet in length, if one of the following conditions applies.

 

(I)    Alternate measures shall be utilized pursuant to the provisions of Section 85.020230 of this Article.

 

(II)   Based upon consideration of the recommendation of the Fire Authority, the Planning Agency determines that the cul-de-sac is situated and designed such that the parcels taking access from it are not contiguous to or exposed to either undeveloped fuel modified areas along the development perimeter of the project or to fire hazard areas, and that the extension of the cul-de-sac will not increase the exposure of buildings to wildland fires.

 

(C)   Exceptions may be granted for parcels greater than five acres in area. Cul-de-sacs may exceed 600 feet in length if all parcels that take access from the cul-de-sac are five acres or greater in area and the following conditions apply.

 

(I)    The proposed cul-de-sac shall not be within or adjacent to areas that are zoned for or subdivided to parcels of five acres or less.

 

(II)   Alternate measures shall be utilized pursuant to the provisions of Section 85.020230 of this article.

 

(D)   Intent of Standard

The intent of limiting cul-de-sac lengths is to limit the exposure of development and human activity to hazardous fire areas where one, rather than two points of access are provided, especially when such cul-de-sacs are directly exposed to fire hazard areas. The provision of only one point of access increases exposure to fire and inhibits the fighting of wildland fires due to the following factors.

 

(I)    If the single access point becomes blocked, structures exposed to fire cannot be protected by fire fighting vehicles.

 

(II)   Fire fighting vehicles can be trapped on a cul-de-sac if the single access is blocked.

 

(III)  In order for fire fighting vehicles to turn around, they usually must travel to the end of the cul-de-sac where adequate room for turning is available.

 

(IV)  All vehicles evacuating a cul-de-sac during a fire will be traveling in the opposite direction of fire fighting vehicles moving into a cul-de-sac, impeding the ingress of the fire fighting vehicles as well as the egress of the evacuees.

 

(V)   Development of individual cul-de-sacs which intrude into and are generally surrounded by rugged wildland terrain have greater exposure to wildland fire because the fire may come from several directions at once.

 

(E)   Alternate Measures

Pursuant to Section 85.020230 of this Article and dependent upon site specific conditions, one of the following measures or combinations thereof may be used to mitigate the effect of creating cul-de-sacs up to 600 feet in length with parcels of less than five acres in area.

 

(I)    The total number of dwelling units which have access to the cul-de-sac shall be limited to no more than 15, and the further subdivision of parcels and construction of additional independent residential units which have access to the cul-de-sac shall be restricted. Such restrictions shall be imposed through the conditions of approval of the development project.

 

(II)   A continuous perimeter access road at least 20 feet in width shall be provided along the portion of the cul-de-sac exposed to fire hazard or fuel modified areas such that it is driveable under normal conditions by fire fighting vehicles, provides adequate maneuvering space for such vehicles, and is designed such that at least one point of access to the perimeter access road is taken from roads other than the cul-de-sac in question.

 

(III)  The cul-de-sac road shall have a paved width of at least 40 feet with posted no parking for its entire length. There shall be at least one area approximately at the midpoint of the cul-de-sac that serves the same function of a cul-de-sac bulb in allowing fire fighting vehicles adequate room to turn around. This measure may only be utilized if the expansion of the road width will not contribute to slope stability hazards either on or off-site.

 

(IV)  Other alternate measures may be approved by the Planning Agency pursuant to Section 85.020230 of this article.

 

85.020230 Alternate Hazard Protection Measures.
(a)    Applicability

The following provisions shall apply only to the standards and requirements of Subsections 85.020220(b) regarding building separations, 85.020225(b)(6) regarding perimeter access and 85.020225(b)(7) regarding the length of cul-de-sacs.

 

(b)    Intent

The intent of this subsection is to allow greater design flexibility than would otherwise be permitted in order to provide a more efficient and effective achievement of the purposes of the Fire Safety (FR) Overlay District. Design flexibility is provided by allowing the substitution of alternate measures for the established standards or requirements if it is found that they provide the same or a greater level of protection from wildland fires and other natural hazards, and that they will fulfill the same purpose as the established standard or requirement.

 

(c)    Substitution of Alternative Measures for Standards and Requirements

 

(1)    If alternative measures are proposed, the Fire Authority shall determine, with specific consideration of the effect of the proposed alternative measures, whether the proposed development project has adequate provisions for fuel modification and management, including the ongoing maintenance of fuel modified areas.

 

(2)    If the Fire Authority makes a positive determination pursuant to subsection 85.020230(c)(1) of this Article, then alternate measures may be substituted for the established standards and requirements if the Planning Agency, with consideration of the recommendation of the Fire Authority, finds and justifies all of the following.

 

(A)   Alternative measure(s) have been substituted which meet the intent of and which serve the same purpose as the established standard or requirement.

 

(B)   The alternative measure(s) that have been substituted provide the same or a greater level of protection or are as effective as the established standard or requirement.

 

(C)   There are clear and substantial reasons for utilizing the alternative measure(s) because they provide for a more efficient and economic use of the site, or provide for a superior physical design, and are consistent with the intent of the Fire Safety (FR) Overlay District. Article 3

 

 

 

ARTICLE 2 FLOODPLAIN SAFETY (FP) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.020301 Intent.
     The Floodplain Safety Overlay District is established to provide greater public safety, promote public health, and minimize public and private economic losses due to flood conditions by establishing regulations for development and construction within flood-prone areas. (Added by Ord. 237-2006 § 2, 2006)

 

85.020302 Statutory Authorization.
     The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Yucaipa does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Added by Ord. 237-2006 § 2, 2006)

 

85.020303 Definitions.
     Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Article its most reasonable application.

 

“Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this Article.

 

“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade - i.e., below ground level - on all sides.

 

“Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

 

“Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

 

“Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

 

“Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

 

“Flood, flooding, or flood water” means:

 

1.     A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and

 

2.     The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.

 

“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

 

“Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

 

“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents (refer to FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93 for guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing).

 

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “Regulatory Floodway.”

 

“Hardship” as related to Section 85.020335, Variance Procedure, of this Article, means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The City requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

 

“Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

 

“Historic structure” means any structure that is

 

1.     Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

 

2.     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

 

3.     Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

 

4.     Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

 

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see “Basement” definition).

 

1.     An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

a.     The wet floodproofing standard in Section 85.020325(a)(3)(C);

 

b.     The anchoring standards in Section 85.020325(a)(1);

 

c.     The construction materials and methods standards in Section 85.020325(a)(2); and

 

d.     The standards for utilities in Section 85.020325(b).

 

2.     For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see “Basement” definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.

 

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

 

“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

 

“New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

 

“New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community.

 

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is

 

1.     Built on a single chassis;

 

2.     400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

 

3.     Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

 

4.     Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

 

“Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, Al-A30, AE, A99, AH, VI-V30, VE or V.

 

“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 190 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

 

“Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

 

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

 

“Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development off a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

 

1.     Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

 

2.     Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

 

“Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this Article. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Amended by Ord. 313 § 8, 2011; added by Ord. 237-2006 § 2, 2006)

 

85.020305 Locational Requirements.
 

(a)    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in San Bernardino County and incorporated areas Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated January 17, 1997, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated January 17, 1997, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this ordinance and may be supplemented by studies for other areas that allow implementation of this Article and are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator. The FIS and FIRM are on file in the office of the Floodplain Administrator at 34272 Yucaipa Boulevard, Yucaipa.

 

(b)    The Flood Insurance Study establishes the minimum areas in which the Floodplain Safety Overlay Districts may be located. Additional areas may be added after studies for such areas are prepared by the Flood Control District or other governmental agencies such as the Corps of Engineers.

 

(c)    The Floodplain Safety Overlay District shall be designated on the Yucaipa Land Use Plan by the symbols FP 1, FP2, or FP3. (Added by Ord. 237-2006 § 2, 2006)

 

85.020310 Boundary Changes.
The following shall apply when an application is made to reduce or change a Floodplain Safety (FP) Overlay District boundary.

 

(a)    Additional Application Requirements

An applicant shall submit the following when requesting a change or reduction in a Floodplain Safety Overlay District boundary where no change has been made in the base flood elevation designated by the applicable FEMA map.

 

(1)    Copy of the recorded deed to the property.

 

(2)    If the property is recorded on a final or parcel map, a copy of the recorded map.

 

 

(3)    A topographic map indicating present ground elevations, date of fill, and the contours before the fill was placed.

 

(4)    If a structure is involved, a topographic map indicating structure location and ground elevations including the elevations of the lowest floor and the highest adjacent grade to structure.

 

(5)    Data to substantiate the base flood elevation and hydraulic calculations where base flood elevations have not previously been established.

 

(6)    If fill material is proposed to elevate proposed construction pads one foot above the base elevation, an analysis shall be provided to demonstrate that the fill will not settle and is protected from erosion, scour, or differential settlement as described below.

 

 

(A)   Fill compacted to 95% per ASTM (American Society of Testing Materials) Standard D-698.

 

(B)   Fill slopes of granular material no steeper than a ratio of 1.5 horizontal to 1 vertical, unless substantiating data is provided.

 

(C)   If flow velocities are greater than five feet per second, slopes shall be armored with stone or rock protection.

 

(7)    Levee Systems Standards

All proposals to recognize levees as providing protection from 100-year floods shall provide an analysis which certifies the following.

 

(A)   Appreciable erosion of the levee embankment will not occur during the base flood.

 

(B)   Seepage during loading conditions associated with base flood will not affect embankment or foundation stability.

 

(C)   There shall be three feet of freeboard provided above the water surface level of the base flood. An additional one foot is necessary within 100 feet of structures such as bridges. There shall be no settlement that would result in the loss off this freeboard within the minimum standard.

 

(D)   Facilities to eliminate flooding due to interior drainage are adequate. All openings must be provided with closure devices.

 

(E) The operation and maintenance plan provided is sufficient to insure continuation of the protection afforded by the levee as designed and constructed.

 

(8)    All information, maps, and certification required by subsections (a) (3) through (a) (8) of this section above shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or, if appropriate, by a licensed Land Surveyor.

 

(b)    Base Flood Elevation Adjustments

 

(1)    An applicant may request the Flood Plain Management Administrator to apply to the Federal Emergency Management Administration for an adjustment to the designated Base Flood elevation and/or other designations on the FIRM or Flood Boundary Maps.

 

(2)    The applicant shall be responsible for the payment of all expenses incurred by the City to have the Floodplain Management Administrator request and substantiate the proposed adjustment to the maps by the required office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

 

(3)    All proposals to revise base flood elevations shall comply with the following requirements.

 

(A)   Revised elevations must match old elevations within one-half (0.5) foot at points of transition.

 

(B)   Maps shall not be revised when discharges change as a result of the use of an alternative methodology of data for computing flood discharges unless that change is statistically significant as measured by a confidence limits analysis of the new discharge estimates.

 

(C)   In order for an alternative hydraulic or hydrologic methodology to be accepted, any computer program used must be accepted for general use by a governmental agency or notable scientific body, must be well. documented including a user’s and programmer’s manual, and must be available to the general user.

 

(D)   Unless the basis of the request is the use of alternative hydraulic methodology or the requester can demonstrate that the data of the original hydraulic computer model is unavailable or its use is inappropriate, the analysis shall be made using the same hydraulic computer model used to develop the base flood elevations shown on the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and updated to show present conditions in the Floodplain.

 

(E)   Copies of the input and output data from the original and revised hydraulic analysis shall be submitted.

 

(F)    Delineations of floodplain boundaries for a flooding source with established base flood elevations must provide both the 100 and 500-year floodplain boundaries. For flooding sources without established base flood elevations, only 100-year floodplain boundaries need be submitted. These boundaries should be shown on a topographic map of suitable scale and contour interval.

 

(c)    Findings

The Planning Agency shall determine, in addition to other required findings, that the proposed change to a Floodplain Safety (FP) Overlay District boundary is consistent with the intent of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations and the intent of the Floodplain Safety (FP) Overlay District provisions. (Added by Ord. 237-2006 § 2, 2006)

85.020315 General Provisions.
The following provisions shall apply to all identified areas with potential flood hazards within the City of Yucaipa.

 

(a)    Compliance

No structure or land use shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the provisions of this Article and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this Article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall be subject to the penalties established by this Code. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

 

(b)    Abrogation and Greater Restrictions

The provisions of this Article are not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing casements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Article and another section, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, the more stringent regulations or standards shall govern.

 

(c)    Interpretation

In the interpretation and application of this Article, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.

 

(d)    Implementation

The requirements of this Article shall be integrated into the processing and review of all land use applications and development permits where specific flood hazard review and flood protection recommendations are made by the City. (Added by Ord. 237-2006 § 2, 2006)

 

85.020320 Review Area Procedures and Construction Standards.
The Floodplain Safety Overlay District (FP) shall be subdivided into three review areas as follows.

 

(a)    Floodplain Review Area 1 (FP 1)

FP1 shall include all areas subject to a 100-year flood as defined by the Federal Flood Insurance Regulations. In such areas the following shall apply.

 

(1)    New construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall be constructed so that the lowest floor shall be one foot or more above the base flood elevation and will not result in any significant increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge.

 

(2)    Review Procedures

Projects proposed in this overlay district shall be subject to a Land Use Compliance Review and a Flood Hazard Development Review. These reviews shall ensure that the proposed project complies with this Code regarding flood protection measure.

 

(3)    Development Restriction

In areas where no regulatory floodway has been designated, no new construction, substantial improvement or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within any areas designated by FEMA as Al through A30, inclusive, or AE on the FIRM or Flood Boundary Maps, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.

 

(b)    Flood Plain Review Area 2 (FP2)

FP2 shall include all areas between limits of the 100-year flood and subject to a 500-year flood, and certain areas subject to I00-year flooding with an average depth of less than one foot or where the contributing drainage areas are less than one square mile, or areas protected by levees from the base flood. In such areas the following shall apply.

 

(1)    New construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall be so constructed that the floor shall be one foot above the existing natural ground level.

 

(2)    Review Procedure

Projects proposed in this area shall be subject to Land Use Compliance Review. This review shall ensure that the proposed project complies with this Code regarding flood protection measures.

 

(c)    Flood Plain Review Area 3 (FP3)

FP3 shall include all areas of shallow flooding with undetermined, but possible flood hazards as determined by the City, the Flood Control District, or other governmental agency.

 

(1)    Field Investigation Required

Before a building permit can be issued on any affected lot, a field investigation shall be made of the lot to determine if the proposed construction will have any substantial detrimental effect on the drainage way. An applicant for the building permit on an affected lot or parcel shall first apply for the required field investigation and shall pay the appropriate fee. The following shall be included in the application for field investigation.

 

(A)   A corner record, record of survey, parcel map, final map, or a past survey that is approved by the City Engineer as being in conformance with the Land Surveyors Act shall be submitted.

 

(B)   A plot plan showing the proposed structures and grading by size, location and orientation shall be submitted.

 

(2)    Prior to the inspection of the site by the Building Inspector, the applicant shall locate the proposed construction on the site by the use of stakes, strings, line marks, or similar method(s).

 

(3)    The applicant shall then meet with the inspector, on the site if necessary, to discuss the final building location and any mitigating measures required by the Building Official to maintain the natural drainage way in its existing condition.

 

(4)    The final building plans which are submitted for approval shall show the approved location and mitigating measures. (Added by Ord. 237-2006 § 2, 2006)

 

85.020325 Development Standards.
 

(a)    Standards of Construction.

The following provisions shall apply in all areas of special flood hazards.

 

(1)    Anchoring

All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to the foundation to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. If a structure is elevated on fill as specified in Subsections 85.020325 (a) (2) (E) and 85.020325 (a) (3) (A) of this section, the anchoring requirement shall be satisfied. Other alternative anchoring techniques which are effective may be considered.

 

 

(2)    Construction Materials and Methods

 

(A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. This would include, but not be limited to, water resistant lumber, floor coverings, adhesives, paints, masonry construction and finishes, water proof electrical systems, and mechanical footings, or other acceptable materials measures.

 

(B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. This would include, but not be limited to, elevation of the structure, parallel alignment of structure with water flow, increase of structural designs to withstand hydrologic and hydrolographic sources, and increase of depth of footings.

 

(C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

 

(D)   Require that within the Floodplain Safety Overlay District, adequate drainage paths be provided around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.

 

(E)   If fill is placed to elevate pads one foot above base elevation, it must be demonstrated that fill will not settle and is protected from erosion, scour, or differential settlement as described below.

 

(I)    Fill shall be compacted to 95% per ASTM (American Society of Testing Materials) Standard D-698.

 

(II) Fill slopes of granular material shall be no steeper than one-half foot horizontal to one foot vertical ratio unless substantiating data for steeper slopes and such slopes are approved by the City.

 

(III)  If flow velocities are greater than five feet per second, fill slopes shall be armored with stone or rock slope protection.

 

 

 

(3)    Elevation and Floodproofing

 

(A)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, elevated to one foot above base flood elevation in Floodplain Review Area 1, and one foot above ground level in Floodplain Review Area 2. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including the basement, shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the City Building Official to be properly elevated above the floodplain elevation at the time of certification. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the Flood Plain Management Administrator. In instances where the base flood elevation data has not been provided on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the provisions of Subsection 82.0601 (b) of the City Development Code shall apply. The administrator may further exempt proposed single family residences from this requirement when the base flood elevation data has not been provided on the FIRM.

 

(B)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot higher than the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or at least two feet if no depth number is specified. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or licensed land surveyor, or verified. by the City Building Official to be properly elevated above the floodplain elevation as derived from the adopted FEMA map, applicable to subject area at the time of certification. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Management Administrator.

 

(C)   Nonresidential construction shall be elevated in conformance with Subsection (a) (3) of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, and shall conform to all of the following.

 

(I)    Nonresidential construction shall be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below the base flood level, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.

 

(II)   Nonresidential construction shall have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.

 

(Ill)  Nonresidential construction shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect to the effect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the Floodplain Management Administrator.

 

(D)   All new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures shall be required to fully enclose structural areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding, and such areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either fulfill condition I or II below.

 

(I)    Designs shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or an architect.

 

(II)   Designs shall provide a minimum of two openings, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom off all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

 

(III) Designs shall be verified by the Floodplain Administrator or his or her designees complying with floodproofing standards approved by the Federal Insurance Administration.

 

(b)    Utility Standards

 

(1)    All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from systems into flood waters.

 

(2)    On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

 

(3)    All public utilities and facilities such as electricity, telephone, cable TV, gas etc., shall utilize floodproofing measures in their location and construction to minimize flood damage.

 

(c)    Land Use Application Review Requirements

 

(1)    All preliminary proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

 

(2)    All final plans shall provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads above the floodplain elevation as derived from the FEMA map adopted at the time of certification. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or licensed land surveyor and shall be submitted to the Floodplain Management Administrator. The entire site need not be elevated; only the building pads need be elevated, and other means of conducting storm flows through the site shall be provided.

 

(3)    All proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

 

(4)    All proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

 

(5)    All proposals shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards and not deflect flood flows onto other properties.

 

(d)    Manufactured Homes Standards

All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to manufactured homes shall be subject to all the provisions of Section 85.020325 of this Article.

 

(1)    Nonresidential construction shall be elevated in conformance with Subsection 85.020325(a)(3) of this section.

 

(2)    All manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to a permanent foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring shall include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.

 

(e)    Floodway Standards

Floodway areas are located within special flood hazard areas and are established as specified in Subsections 85.020305(a) and (b) of this Article. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply.

 

(1)    Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, stockpiling, and other development, are prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided, demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

 

(2)    If Subsection 85.020325(e)(1) of this Article is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 85.020325 of this Article. (Amended by Ord. 313 § 9, 2011; added by Ord. 237-2006 § 2, 2006)

 

85.020330 Exceptions.
The following structures and land uses are exempt from the requirements and standards established by this Article:

 

(a)    Existing, legally-constructed structures for human habitation within the Floodplain Safety Overlay District shall be considered legal nonconforming uses and subject to the privileges and regulations thereof.

 

(b)    Structures for human habitation for which there was a valid building permit in effect at the time this section. became effective shall be exempt from the requirements and standards established by this section.

 

(c)    The reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places shall be exempt from the requirements and standards established by this section.

 

(d)    Replacement of utilities, including septic systems, in compliance with health and safety codes shall be exempt from the flood elevation requirements of this Code and shall otherwise be subject to the legal non-conforming use provisions of this Code. (Added by Ord. 237-2006 § 2, 2006)

 

85.020335 Variance Procedure.
 

(a)    The variance criteria set forth in this section of the Article are based on the general principle of zoning laws that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this Article would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or to the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

 

It is the duty of the City to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the Floodplain Safety Overlay District are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this Article are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.

 

(b)    In passing upon requests for variances, the City shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this Article, and the following:

 

(1)    Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands and injure others;

 

(2)    Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

 

(3)    Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

 

(4)    Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

 

(5)    Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

 

(6)    Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

 

(7)    Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

 

(8)    Relationship of the proposed use to the general plan and floodplain management program for that area;

 

(9)    Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

 

(10)  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

 

(11)  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.

 

(c)    Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official, that:

 

(1)    The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for each $100 of insurance coverage; and

(2)    Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the San Bernardino County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

 

(d)    The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency.

 

(e)    Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the procedures of Chapter 6 of Division 2 of this Code and Section 85.020325 of this Article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

 

(f)    Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

 

(g)    Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

 

(h)    Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary,” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this Article. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the City need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of this Article.

 

(i)     Variances shall only be issued upon a:

 

(1)    Showing of good and sufficient cause; and

 

(2)    Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” (as defined in Section 85.020303 of this Article) to the applicant; and

 

(3)    Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a public nuisance, cause fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

 

(j)     Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Subsections 85.020335(e) through (i) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

 

(k)    Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection 85.020335(b) and the purpose of this Article, the City may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this Article. (Amended by Ord. 313 § 10, 2011; added by Ord. 237-2006 § 2, 2006)

 

 

 

 

ARTICLE 3 GEOLOGIC HAZARD (GH) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.020401 Intent.
The Geologic Hazard (GH) Overlay District is created to provide greater public safety by establishing review procedures and setbacks for areas that are subject to potential geologic problems such as groundskeeping, earthquake faults, liquefaction, and subsidence.

 

85.020405 Locational Requirements.
(a)    The Geologic Hazard Overlay District shall be designated in areas which are on or adjacent to active earthquake fault traces. This overlay district shall implement the requirements of the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Act of 1972.

 

(b)    The Geologic Hazard Overlay District shall be designated in areas where landslides, mudslides, and subsidence are prevalent and in areas with volcanic activity.

 

(c)    The Geologic Hazard Overlay District shall be designated in areas where liquefaction of the soil is associated with earthquake activity.

 

(d)    The Geologic Hazard Overlay District shall be designated by the symbol (GH) on the city of Yucaipa Official Land Use Plan.

 

85.020410 Geologic Reports.
(a)    A detailed geologic study prepared by a registered geologist shall be submitted with all land use applications and development permits proposed within the Geologic Hazard Overlay District that would lead to the construction of roads or structures or the subdivision of land. Said geologic report shall confirm the presence or absence of hazardous faults and, if applicable, the boundaries of existing or former marsh areas. Further, said report shall establish appropriate construction setbacks. Exemptions to the requirement for a geologic study include the following.

 

(1)    One, single-family, wood frame dwelling not exceeding two stories

 

(2)    Single-family, wood frame dwellings located within a division of land for which an approved geologic report was prepared

 

(3)    A non-residential, accessory use

 

(4)    The alterations or additions to any structure where the value or area does not exceed 50% of the structure

 

85.020415 Development Standards.
When a land use is proposed within a Geologic Hazard Overlay District, the following standards shall apply.

 

(a)    Development of all structures used for human occupancy, other than single family, wood frame structures, shall take place 50 feet or further from any active earthquake fault traces. Active fault traces are those delineated on the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Maps or on maps contained within the City’s General Plan.

 

(b)    Development of all structures used for critical facilities shall take place 150 feet or further from any active earthquake fault trace as indicated within the City’s General Plan. Critical facilities shall include dams, reservoirs, fuel storage facilities, power plants, nuclear reactors, police and fire stations, schools, hospitals, rest homes, nursing homes, and emergency communication facilities.

 

(c)    Utility lines and streets shall not be placed within the construction setback area of a hazardous fault, except for crossing which can be made perpendicular to the fault trace or as recommended by the project geologist and approved by the reviewing authority.

 

(d)    Development restricted areas are encouraged for use as recreation and common open spaces.

 

(e)    The following conditions may apply to areas subject to periodic landslides, subsidence, and soil liquefaction.

 

(1)    Siting

All facilities and streets should be sited so as to minimize the erosion potential.

 

(2)    Vegetation

Natural vegetation shall be retained and protected where possible. Where inadequate vegetation exists, additional landscaping shall be provided. Any additional landscaping shall be compatible with the local environment and capable of surviving with a minimum of maintenance and supplemental water.

 

(3)    Exposure of Bare Land

When land is exposed during development, only the smallest practicable land portion as an increment of a development project shall be exposed at any one time; the duration of time that the exposure remains unprotected shall be the shortest practical time period, and such exposure shall be protected with temporary vegetation or mulching where practical.

 

(4)    Run-Off

The development should be designed to minimize water run-off. Provisions should be made to effectively accommodate any increased run-off.

 

(5)    Special Measures

Measures shall be taken to offset the possible affects of landslides. A detailed geologic report identifying these measures shall be required prior to the issuance of building permits.

 

(6)    All proposed facilities located within liquefication and landslide hazard areas shall be constructed in a manner to minimize or eliminate subsidence damage.

 

ARTICLE 4 NOISE HAZARD (NH) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.020501 Intent.
The Noise Hazard (NH) Overlay District is created to provide greater public safety by establishing land use review procedures and requirements for land uses in areas with identified high noise levels.

 

85.020505 Locational Requirements.
(a)    The Noise Hazard Overlay should be applied to those areas where the Average Day-Night Sound Level (Ldn) is 65 decibels, 65 dBA, or greater.

 

(b)    The Noise Hazard Overlay District shall be designated by the symbol (NH) on the City of Yucaipa Official Land Use Plan.

 

85.020510 Development Standards.
When a land use application or development permit is proposed within the Noise Hazard Overlay District, the following standards shall apply with respect to residential uses.

 

(a)    Noise levels shall be identified. An acoustical report shall be performed to identify noise impact, and any recommendation for noise attenuation or other mitigation measures shall be incorporated into the design standards or conditions of approval, as applicable.

 

(b)    Interior noise levels in all single family and multi-family residences and educational institutions shall not exceed 45 dBA Ldn emanating from sources outside of the residential building.

 

(c)    Exterior noise levels in all single family residential land use areas and multi-family residential land use areas should not exceed 65 dBA Ldn. Exterior noise levels shall not exceed 70 dBA for any residential use areas.

 

(d)    Ability to mitigate exterior noises to the levels of 65 dBA Ldn and 70 dBA Ldn shall be considered by the reviewing authority when determining the actual Ldn level with which the land uses must comply.

 

(e)    In areas where noise exceeds the noise standard, measures shall be taken to mitigate noise levels. An acoustical report identifying these mitigation measures shall be required and reviewed by the Community Development Department prior to issuance of any required development permits or approval of land use applications.

 

(f)    All other structures shall be sound attenuated against the combined input of all present and projected exterior noise to not exceed the following criteria.

 

12-Hour Equivalent Sound Level (Interior)

Typical Uses

dBA Ldn

Educational, Institutions, Libraries, Churches, etc

45 dBA

General Office, Reception, etc.

50 dBA

Retail Stores, Restaurants, etc.

55 dBA

Other Areas for Manufacturing, Assembly, Test,

Warehousing, etc.

65 dBA

 

In addition, the average of the maximum levels on the loudest of intrusive sounds occurring during a 24-hour period shall not exceed 65 dBA interior.

 

ARTICLE 5 HAZARDOUS WASTE (HW) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.020601 Intent.
The Hazardous Waste (HW) Overlay District is created to accomplish the following.

 

(a)    Ensure that hazardous waste facilities are sited in areas that protect public health, safety, welfare, and the environment.

 

(b)    Buffer hazardous waste facilities so that incompatible uses cannot be permitted in the future.

 

(c)    Identify permitted uses within the overlay.

 

(d)    Outline the permit review procedures.

 

85.020605 Locational Requirements.
(a)    The Hazardous Waste Overlay District shall be applied to those areas where a Hazardous Waste Facility is being approved concurrently.

 

(b)    The Hazardous Waste Overlay District shall be designated by the symbol (HW) on the city of Yucaipa’s Official Land Use Plan.

 

(c)    The Hazardous Waste Overlay District may most appropriately be located in the following land use district.

 

(1)    Community Industrial (IC)

This district is intended for treatment, incineration, recycling, storage, and transfer facilities. Incineration facilities shall not, however, be located in areas where emissions from the facility could directly impact food crops or livestock.

 

(d)    Siting Criteria for Hazardous Waste Facilities

Refer to Table 5-2 of Chapter 5 of the City of Yucaipa Hazardous Waste Management Plan.

 

(e)    A Risk Assessment evaluating a proposal for a Hazardous Waste Facility shall determine the appropriate location for the overlay district for the facility.

 

85.020610 Development Standards.
(a)    Review procedures include State and County processes. The types of applications required for local evaluation of a specified hazardous waste facility proposal include both discretionary and ministerial permits. The required Yucaipa permits or processes include the following.

 

(1)    General Plan Amendment to apply the Hazardous Waste (HW) Overlay District to the proposed site and respective buffer

 

(2)    Conditional Use Permit

Refer to Article 1 of Chapter 3 of Division 3 of this Title for the procedures for this permit.

 

(3)    Special Use Permit

This permit is issued by the San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health Services and is required as a condition of approval of the Conditional Use Permit.

 

(4)    Ministerial Permits from the Yucaipa Office of Building and Safety for building, grading, flood control, etc.

 

For a complete discussion of the local application review process, refer to Section 5.3.3 and Table 5-4 of Chapter 5 of the City of Yucaipa Hazardous Waste Management Plan.

 

(b)    The following list of use classifications has been determined to be compatible with a hazardous waste facility. These use classifications are permitted within a HW Overlay District.

 

(1)    Repair Services I, II and III

(2)    Open Lot Services I and II

(3)    Manufacturing Operations I and II

(4)    Wholesale/Warehouse Services I and II

(5)    Contract/Construction Services

(6)    Transportation Services I and II

(7)    Salvage Services

 

(c)    The following uses are specifically prohibited from the HW Overlay District.

 

(1)    Residential uses of any type

(2)    Agricultural uses of any type

(3)    Facilities with a high concentration of people/immobile population such as schools, hospitals, auditoriums, amphitheaters, jails, etc.

 

 

 

CHAPTER 3 RESOURCE PRESERVATION
ARTICLE 1 AGRICULTURAL PRESERVE (AP) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.030101 Intent.
(a)    The preservation of agricultural land uses is important to the economic well-being of the City.

 

(b)    The Agricultural Preserve (AP) Overlay District is created to protect vital agricultural uses by limiting land use activity to those uses which are compatible with and supportive of agriculture and related uses and/or agricultural by-products.

 

(c)    The Agricultural Preserve Overlay District identifies those properties within an established agricultural preserve. Such properties may be subject to a Land Conservation Contract which has been executed between the landowner and the State. Such agreements offer tax advantages to the landowner and include an enumerated list of the allowed uses for the commercial production of plant and animal products which have been found to be compatible with agriculture.

 

85.030105 Locational Requirements.
(a)    The Agricultural Preserve Overlay District shall be applied to those areas which are contained within an Agricultural Preserve as defined in the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 (Williamson Act), Government Code Section 51200, et seq., and as designated upon the land use maps of the City’s General Plan.

 

(b)    The Agricultural Preserve Overlay District shall be designated to the following land use districts only: Rural Living (RL) and Floodway (FW).

 

(c)    The Agricultural Preserve Overlay District shall be designated by the symbol (AP) on the City of Yucaipa Official Land Use Plan.

 

85.030110 Development Standards.
When an Agricultural Preserve Overlay District is established, it shall be in conformance with the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 (Williamson Act), Government Code Section 51200, et seq. Land and land uses proposed within an agricultural preserve must be an agricultural use or be compatible with agricultural uses. Refer to subsection 83.040220(a)(2)(C) in Division 3 of this Code for parcel size limitations.

 

(a)    The following list of uses has been determined to be compatible.

 

(1)    Agricultural use, described as any use of land for the purpose of producing an agricultural commodity, consisting of any and all plant and animal products for commercial purposes, provided such use is permitted by the applicable land use district and not prohibited by other law or ordinance.

 

(2)    A stand for the display and sale of agricultural commodities produced on the premises or other premises within the preserve.

 

(3)    Gas, electric, water, communication utility facilities, and public service facilities of like nature, operated by a public agency or mutual water company.

 

(4)    Public highways.

 

(5)    Fire protection works and facilities.

 

(6)    Flood control works, including channel rectification and alteration.

 

(7)    Public works required for fish and wildlife enhancement and preservation.

 

(8)    Improvements for the primary benefit of the land within the preserve.

 

(9)    State improvements described in Subsection 51293.(d) of the California Government Code.

 

(10)  Single dwelling units for the use only of an owner or manager of land within the agricultural preserve, or a person employed on said land, if such use is permitted by the applicable land use district, but not exceeding three dwellings for each parcel of not less than 10 acres.

 

(11)  Farm labor camps, including temporary trailer housing, subject to the provisions of this Title and all other applicable laws.

 

(12)  Drying, packing, or other processing of an agricultural commodity usually performed on the premises where it is produced.

 

(13)  Any use existing on the date the land is included within an agricultural preserve, although any such use since discontinued for two years shall not be resumed unless permitted under these rules.

 

(14)  Any use required to be permitted by an amendment to the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 hereafter adopted.

 

(15)  “Open space uses” as defined in California Government Code Section 51201.

 

(16)  Churches whose total square footage (of all structures on site) does not exceed 12,000 square feet and the minimum parcel size is 10 acres, unless the parcel was created prior to January 1, 1991, in which case the minimum parcel size shall be five acres.

 

(17)  Agriculturally oriented schools with an approved Conditional Use Permit.

 

(18)  Resource Recovery Systems which are designed for the use of animal or plant products or waste for no less than 75% of their fuel or material source (percent measured as British Thermal Unit heat content for energy generation or percent of volume of materials consumed for agricultural products averaged over the current year of operation) for the production of a commodity for the primary benefit of the agricultural community or for the generation of electrical energy, unless prohibited by other law or ordinance shall be permitted. Any temporary or permanent use of more than 25% non-animal or plant products or waste (percent measured as described above) by such an approved project is subject to approval by the City Planning Commission, and their finding that an adequate animal or plant product or waste supply is not available to maintain the approved design output capacity of the project due to interruptions of delivery or elimination of the source beyond the feasible control of the applicant. Such Planning Commission approval to exceed 25% non-animal or plant product or waste shall apply only as long as an adequate animal or plant product or waste supply is not available and subject to prohibition by other law or ordinance. Sludge materials shall not be permitted as an alternative source.

 

(19)  Recreational uses as defined by California Government Code subsections 51201(e) and (n), subject to Conditional Use Permit.

 

(b)    Any use may be determined to be a compatible use in all agricultural preserves by the City Council, after public hearing on 10 days’ published notice and such other notice, if any, as may be specified. Thereafter, such use shall be deemed a compatible use in any agricultural preserve, providing that it is not inconsistent with uses listed in Subsection 85.030110(a) above.

 

 

ARTICLE 2 BIOTIC RESOURCES (BR) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.030201 Intent.
The purpose of the Biotic Resources (BR) Overlay District is to implement General Plan policies regarding the protection and conservation of beneficial rare and endangered plants and animal resources and their habitats which have been identified within incorporated areas of the City.

 

85.030210 Locational Requirements.
The Biotic Resources Overlay District shall be applied to incorporated areas of the City which have been identified by a City, County, State or Federal agency as habitat for species of unique, rare, threatened, or endangered plants or animals, or their habitats as listed in the General Plan.

 

85.030215 Designation.
The Biotic Resources Overlay District shall be designated by the symbol (BR) on the City of Yucaipa Official Land Use Plan.

 

85.030220 Development Standards.
When a land use is proposed or an existing land use is increased by more than 25% within a Biotic Resources Overlay District, the applicant shall have a report prepared identifying all biotic resources located on the site, as well as those on adjacent parcels, which could be impacted by the proposed development. The report shall outline mitigating measures designed to reduce or eliminate impacts to the identified resource(s), and shall be submitted along with the application for the proposed development. The report shall be prepared by an appropriate expert such as a qualified biologist, botanist, herpetologist or other professional “life scientist.”

 

The conditions of approval of any land use application shall incorporate the identified mitigating measures to protect and preserve the habitats of the identified plants and/or animals.

 

 

ARTICLE 3 CULTURAL RESOURCES PRESERVATION (CP) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.030301 Intent.
(a)    The identification and preservation of important archaeological and historical resources is necessary, as many such resources are unique and non-renewable.

 

(b)    Preservation of such cultural resources provides a greater knowledge of City history, thus promoting City identity and conserving historic and scientific amenities for the benefit of future generations.

 

85.030305 Locational Requirements.
The Cultural Resources Preservation (CP) Overlay District may be applied to those areas where archaeological and historic sites which warrant preservation are known or are likely to be present.

 

Specific identification of known cultural resources is indicated by listing in one or more of the following inventories.

 

(a)    California Archaeological Inventory

 

(b)    California Historic Resources Inventory

 

(c)    California Historical Landmarks

 

(d)    California Points of Historic Interest

 

(e)    National Register of Historic Places

 

85.030310 Designation.
The Cultural Resources Preservation Overlay District shall be designated by the symbol (CP) on the Yucaipa Natural Resource Overlay Map.

 

85.030315 Development Standards.
When a land use is proposed within a CP Overlay District, the following studies and actions shall be taken as specified.

 

(a)    The presence (or absence) of archaeological and historical resources within a given project area shall be determined through an appropriate investigation by qualified personnel. A report documenting the results of such investigation shall be submitted with project application.

 

(b)    Data recovery or protection measures shall be developed and implemented for identified cultural resources determined to be important by a qualified archaeologist or historian. Such measures may include, but are not limited to the following.

 

(1)    Site recordation

 

(2)    Mapping and surface collection of artifacts, with appropriate analysis and curation

 

(3)    Excavation of sub-surface deposits when present, along with appropriate analysis and artifact curation

 

(4)    Preservation in an open space easement and/or dedication to an appropriate institution with provision for any necessary maintenance and protection

 

(c)    Archaeological and historical resources which are determined by qualified professionals to be extremely important should be preserved as open space or dedicated to a public institution when possible.

 

 

ARTICLE 4 MINERAL RESOURCES (MR) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.030401 Intent.
(a)    The extraction of mineral resources may be important to the economic well-being of the City and the needs of society.

 

(b)    Certain privately-owned land areas of the City may contain significant amounts of mineral resources. Mineral Resources Overlay Districts are created to protect these resources for present and future extractions. Since mineral extraction must take place on the physical site where the minerals naturally occur, special controls are needed to minimize conflicts with other land uses. The Mineral Resources Overlay District functions as a “holding district” since the land will be redesignated and reclaimed for other land uses when mining operations cease. Also, the district will insure that land disturbances are minimized through regulations and through the prohibition of any other land uses in these districts which are incompatible with mining.

 

(c)    Once the mining activity ceases, the mined lands shall be reclaimed for new uses in order to prevent or minimize adverse effects on the environment and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

 

85.030405 Objectives.
The Mineral Resources Overlay District shall have the following objectives.

 

(a)    Adverse environmental effects shall be prevented or minimized.

 

(b)    Mined lands shall be reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternative land uses.

 

(c)    The production and conservation of minerals is encouraged, but the mining industry shall also preserve areas relating to environmental and recreational amenities if such amenities are located within the mining locale.

 

(d)    Residual hazards to the public health and safety shall be eliminated.

 

85.030410 Locational Requirements.
The Mineral Resources Overlay District shall be applied on the following areas.

 

(a)    Areas with existing major surface mining activities

 

(b)    Areas where mining activity is expected to take place in the future

 

(c)    Areas adjacent to current or proposed mining activity to prohibit the intrusion of incompatible uses

 

85.030415 Designation.
The Mineral Resources Overlay District shall be designated by the symbol (MR) on the City of Yucaipa Land Use Plan.

 

85.030420 Development Standards.
(a)    Mineral Resources Overlay Districts shall be free from any land use that is incompatible with mining activity.

 

(b)    When mining activity ceases, the land owner and/or mining company shall be responsible for the reclamation of the site.

 

(c)    Reclamation shall include, but not be limited to, the reasonable mitigation or elimination of residual hazards.

 

(d)    Incompatible land uses shall be suitably buffered from mining activity. Appropriate transition measures shall be taken in order to insure compatibility between mining activity and surrounding land uses.

 

85.030425 Required Information.
A Mining/Reclamation Plan describing the phasing of reclamation in relation to the phases of the mining operation shall be submitted for land areas which are to be included within a Mineral Resources Overlay District, subject to the provisions of this Code regarding surface mining and land reclamation and the California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (SMARA).

 

ARTICLE 5 PALEONTOLOGIC RESOURCES (PR) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.030501 Intent.
(a)    The identification and preservation of significant paleontologic (fossil) resources is necessary as many such resources are unique and non-renewable.

 

(b)    Preservation of such paleontologic resources provides a greater knowledge of City natural history, thus promoting City identity and conserving scientific amenities for the benefit of future generations.

 

85.030510 Locational Requirements.
The Paleontologic Resources (PR) Overlay District may be applied to those areas where paleontologic resources are known to occur or are likely to be present.

 

Specific identification of known fossil occurrences or potential paleontologic sensitivity is indicated by listing in the locality files of one or more of the following institutions.

 

(a)    San Bernardino County Museum

 

(b)    University of California

 

(c)    Los Angeles County Museum

 

85.030515 Designation.
The Paleontologic Resources Overlay District shall be designated by the symbol (PR) on the City of Yucaipa Natural Resource Overlay Map.

 

85.030520 Development Standards.
When a land use is proposed within a PR Overlay District, the following criteria shall be used to evaluate the project’s compliance with the intent of the overlay.

 

(a)    In areas of potential but unknown sensitivity, field surveys prior to grading shall be required to establish the need for paleontologic monitoring.

 

(b)    Projects which require grading plans and which are located in areas of known fossil occurrences within the overlay district, or that have been demonstrated to have fossils present in a field survey, shall have all mass grading monitored by trained paleontologic crews working under the direction of a qualified professional in order that fossils exposed during grading can be recovered and preserved. Fossils include large and small vertebrate fossils; the latter are recovered by screen washing of bulk samples.

 

(c)    All recovered specimens shall be prepared to the point of identification and adequately curated into retrievable collections of an institution with appropriate staff and facilities for their scientific information potential to be preserved.

 

(d)    A report of findings with an itemized accession inventory shall be prepared as evidence that monitoring has been successfully completed. A preliminary report shall be submitted and approved prior to the granting of building permits, and a final report shall be submitted and approved prior to the granting of occupancy permits. The adequacy of paleontologic reports shall be determined in consultation with the Curator of Earth Science at the San Bernardino County Museum.

 

(e)    In no event shall the City require the applicant to pay more for mitigation [Subsections 85.030520(b)(c) and (d) above] within the site of the project than the following amounts.

 

(1)    One half of one percent (.005) of the projected cost of the project, if the project is a commercial or industrial project

 

(2)    Three fourths of one percent (.0075) of the projected cost of the project for a housing project consisting of one unit

 

(3)    If a housing project consists of more than one unit, three fourths of one percent (.0075) of the projected cost of the first unit plus the sum of the following

 

(A)   $200 per unit for any of the next 99 units

 

(B)   $150 per unit for any of the next 400 units

 

(C)   $100 per unit for units in excess of 500

 

ARTICLE 6 SCENIC RESOURCES (SR) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.030601 Intent.
The intent of the Scenic Resources Overlay District is to provide development standards that will protect, preserve, and enhance the aesthetic resources of the City. Design considerations can be incorporated in many instances to allow development to coexist and not substantially interfere with the preservation of unique natural resources, roadside view, and scenic corridors of such natural resources. It is also the intent of the Scenic Resources Overlay District to implement State and Federal programs and regulations regarding scenic highway routes.

 

85.030605 Locational Requirements.
The Scenic Resources Overlay District may be applied to the following areas.

 

(a)    Areas with unique views of the City’s mountain, and valley areas or any other aesthetic natural land formations

 

(b)    An area extending 200 feet on both sides of the ultimate road right-of-way of State, County and City-designated Scenic Highways as set forth in the County of San Bernardino’s and the City of Yucaipa’s General Plan; the area covered may vary to reflect the changing topography and vegetation along the right-of-way

 

(c)    The Scenic Resources Overlay District shall be designated by the symbol (SR) on the City of Yucaipa Official Land Use Plan.

 

85.030610 Development Standards.
When a land use is proposed within an (SR) Overlay, the following criteria shall be used to evaluate the project compliance with the intent of the overlay.

 

(a)    Building and Structure Placement

The building and structure placement should be compatible with and should not detract from the visual setting, nor should it obstruct significant views.

 

(b)    Review Area

Intensive land development proposals including, but not limited to, residential facilities, commercial activities, and mobilehome parks shall be designed to blend into the natural landscape and maximize visual attributes of the natural vegetation and terrain. The design of said development proposals shall also provide for maintenance of a natural open space parallel to and visible from the right-of-way.

 

(c)    Access Drives

Right-of-way access drives should be minimized. Developments involving concentrations of commercial activities should be designed to function as an integral unit, with common parking and right-of-way access drives.

 

(d)    Landscaping

The removal of native vegetation, especially timber, shall be minimized. Replacement vegetation and landscaping shall be compatible with the local environment and, where practicable, capable of surviving with a minimum of maintenance and supplemental water. Landscaping and plantings should not obstruct significant views, either when installed or when they reach mature growth.

 

(e)    Roads, Pedestrian Walkways, Parking, and Storage Areas

Any large-scale development should restrict the number of access points by providing common access roads. Parking and outside storage areas should be screened from view to the maximum extent feasible from either the Scenic Highway or the adjacent scenic or recreational resource by existing topography, by the placement of buildings and structures, or by landscaping and plantings which are compatible with the local environment and, where practicable, are capable of surviving with a minimum of maintenance and supplemental water.

 

(f)    Above-Ground Utilities

Utilities shall be constructed and routed underground except in those situations where natural features prevent the underground siting or where safety considerations necessitate above-ground construction and routing. Above-ground utilities shall be constructed and routed to minimize detrimental effects on the visual setting of the designated area. Where it is practical, above-ground utilities shall be screened from view from either the Scenic Highway or the adjacent scenic or recreational resource by existing topography, or by the placement of buildings and structures.

 

(g)    Grading

The alteration of the natural topography of the site shall be minimized and shall avoid detrimental effects to the visual setting of the designated area and the existing natural drainage system. Alterations of the natural topography should be screened from view from either the scenic highway or the adjacent scenic or recreational resource by landscaping and plantings which harmonize with the natural landscape of the designated area, and which are capable of surviving with a minimum of maintenance and supplemental water.

 

(h)    Timber harvesting within or adjacent to the right-of-way shall be limited to that which is necessary to maintain and enhance the quality of the forest.

 

(i)     Storage Area

Outside storage areas associated with commercial activities shall be completely screened from view of the right-of-way with landscaping and plantings which are compatible with the local environment and are capable of surviving with a minimum of maintenance and supplemental water.

 

(j)     Primary freestanding signs greater than 18 square feet are prohibited in the Scenic Resources Overlay District.

 

 

ARTICLE 7 HILLSIDE (H) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.030701 Intent.
The purpose of the Hillside Overlay District is to implement General Plan policies regarding the protection of hillside resources to protect features that help define the City’s character in areas designated for protection by the General Plan. (Added by Ord. 349 § 1, 2016)

 

85.030705 Locational Requirements.
The Hillside Overlay District is appropriate when it will regulate eligible development in hillside areas designated for protection by the General Plan through the development standards set forth in the Development Code. (Added by Ord. 349 § 1, 2016)

 

85.030710 Designation.
The Hillside Overlay District shall be designated on the City of Yucaipa General Plan Hillside Overlay District Map. Prominent Ridgelines identified by City of Yucaipa Ordinance No. 81 shall also be designated on the City of Yucaipa General Plan Hillside Overlay District Map. (Added by Ord. 349 § 1, 2016)

 

85.030715 Development Standards.
All new construction and entitlements on property located within the Hillside (H) Overlay District shall comply with all provisions specified by Chapter 11 (Regulation of Hillside and/or Ridgeline Developments) of Division 7 (General Design Standards) of the Development Code. (Added by Ord. 349 § 1, 2016)

 

 

CHAPTER 4 LAND USE MODIFICATIONS
ARTICLE 1 ADDITIONAL AGRICULTURE (AA) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.040101 General Provisions.
(a)    Intent

        The Additional Agriculture (AA) Overlay District creates, preserves, and improves areas for small and medium-scale agricultural enterprises utilizing productive agricultural lands for raising, some processing, and sale of plant crops, animals, or their primary products. It is an overlay district where agricultural uses exist compatibly with a variety of rural residential lifestyles.

 

(b)    Locational Requirements

        The Additional Agriculture Overlay District is appropriate when it will serve to protect and enhance an area which is a neighborhood or community that is substantially occupied by rural-type, single family homes on large parcels and is predominantly used for small-scale, commercial agricultural activities.

 

(c)    Designation

        The Additional Agriculture Overlay District shall be designated by the symbol (AA) on the City of Yucaipa Official Land Use Plan.

 

 

(d)    Development Standards

        This section establishes regulations to allow animal raising as a primary use of land. All animal raising land uses shall comply with public health laws regarding proper care and maximum number of animals.

 

85.040120 Additional Agriculture.
The following permitted land use categories shall be responsive to the agricultural needs of the community or region.

 

(a)    Permitted Additional Animals

 

Animal Type

Min. Lot Area

Max. Density/Sq Ft

Dogs and cats and other non-farm animals

1 acre

4 per parcel

Fish raising

(max. pond size)

1/2 surface acre

6 per parcel

Aviary, apiary, or similar small animal farms

1 acre

1 farm per parcel

Rabbits and chinchillas

1 acre

50 per 10,000 (200 maximum)

Poultry (female)

1 acre

99 per 5 acres

Poultry (male)

5 acres

99 per 5 acres

 

1 acre

2 species per parcel

 

10 acres

2 species per 5 acres

Sheep, female goats and similar livestock

1/2 acre

1 per 4,000

Sheep, female goats and similar livestock

2 1/2 acres

1 per 3,000

Male adult goats

1 acre

1

 

5 acres

1 per 5 acres

 

 

(4 maximum)

Cattle

1 acre

1 per 10,000

Cattle

2 1/2 acres

1 per 7,000

Horses

1/2 acre

1 per 10,000

Horses

2 1/2 acres

1 per 7,000

Hogs (5 maximum)

1 acre

1 per 20,000

Hogs (9 maximum)

2 1/2 acres

1 per 14,000

 

(b)    Additional Animal Uses Subject to a Conditional Use Permit

 

(1)    Commercial kennels and catteries; minimum parcel size of two acres

 

(2)    Agricultural Support Services

 

(3)    Animal raising of densities greater than or the raising of animal types different than those permitted by this section (commercial poultry ranches restricted to a minimum of 10 acres)

 

(4)    Cow and goat dairies, parcel shall be 10 acres or more

 

(5)    Hog ranches and calf-growing ranches, parcel shall be five acres or more

 

ARTICLE 2 ALTERNATE HOUSING STANDARDS (AH) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.040201 General Provisions.
(a)    Intent

The Alternate Housing (AH) Standards Overlay District is intended to provide an alternative to the residential standards as specified by Division 8 of this Code.

 

(b)    Locational Requirement

The Alternate Housing Standards Overlay District may overlay any district which provides for single family residential uses. An Alternate Housing Standards Overlay District shall encompass a minimum area of 40 acres.

 

(c)    Designation

The Alternate Housing Standards Overlay District shall be designated by the symbol (AH) on the City of Yucaipa Official Land Use Plan.

 

85.040210 Development Standards.
Homes installed on property designated with an AH overlay district shall comply with the construction standards specified by subsections 88.0101(a)(e)(f) and (g) and the following standards.

 

(a)    The minimum floor area shall be 725 square feet, measured from the exterior of the structure.

 

(b)    The minimum floor width shall be 14 feet, measured from the exterior of the structure.

 

(c)    In lieu of the eave and gable requirement, the following may be utilized.

 

(1)    An attached patio or porch covering a minimum of 50 square feet and,

 

(2)    A full rain gutter system

 

 

ARTICLE 3 MOBILEHOME PARK (MHP) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.040301 General Provisions.
(a)    Intent

The Mobilehome Park Overlay District is intended to promote the maintenance and viability of existing mobilehome parks through appropriate zoning. It is an overlay district where mobilehome parks are established as the primary land use in order to limit the conversion of existing affordable housing to other land uses.

 

The Senior Mobilehome Park Overlay District is intended to preserve a variety and balance of housing types within the City, and it provides assurances that existing senior mobilehome parks within the Mobilehome Park Overlay District will remain exclusively available to seniors.

 

(b)    Locational Requirements

The Mobilehome Park Overlay District may overlay any property which provides for mobilehome park developments.

 

(c)    Designation

The Mobilehome Park Overlay District shall be designated by the symbol (MHP1) on the City of Yucaipa Official Land Use Plan. The (MHP1) designation applies to all of the forty-two (42) mobilehome parks that exist in the City of Yucaipa as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.

 

The Senior Mobilehome Park Overlay District shall be designated by the symbol (MHP2) on the City of Yucaipa Official Land Use Plan. The (MHP2) designation applies to all of the twenty-two (22) senior mobilehome parks that exist in the City of Yucaipa as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.

 

The Mobilehome Park Overlay District 3 shall be designated by the symbol (MHP3) on the City of Yucaipa Official Land Use Map. The (MHP3) designation applies to all mobilehome parks designated by the City Council of the City of Yucaipa eligible for conversion to another use. (Amended by Ord. 289 §§ 5, 6, 2009; Ord. 344 § 2, 2016)

 

85.040305 Development Standards.
(a)    Mobilehomes installed on property designated with an MHP overlay shall comply with the construction standards specified by Section 88.0101(a).

 

(b)    Conversion of a mobilehome park to another use shall require approval of a Relocation Impact Report, including Relocation Plan, in accordance with Article 3.5 of this chapter, and compliance with all applicable development standards and entitlement procedures of this Code for the proposed conversion of use. Only properties designated as MHP3 shall be eligible for conversion to another use pursuant to Article 3.5. If a proposed conversion of use of MHP3-designated property requires a subdivision of land, such property shall not be converted to another use without also first complying with Section 83.040205(a)(2)(K) of Article 2 of Chapter 4 of this Code. Upon approval of a Relocation Impact Report, with Relocation Plan, pursuant to Article 3.5 for an MHP3-designated property, such property shall continue to be maintained, operated and developed in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 3 of Division 8 of Division 3 of this Code and Chapter 15.20 of the Municipal Code until implementation of a conversion project. All other property designated with an MHP1 or MHP2 overlay shall not be converted to other uses without first obtaining a General Plan Land Use District Change in accordance with Section 83.020105 of this Code and complying with all other applicable provisions of this Code for the proposed use.

 

(c)    Property designated with an MHP overlay shall be developed in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 3 of Division 8 of this Code.

 

(d)    No Senior Mobilehome Park located within the MHP2 District shall convert to a non-senior mobilehome park. (Amended by Ord. 289 § 7, 2009; Ord. 344 § 3, 2016)

 

85.040310 Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following meanings for the purposes of this article:

 

(a)    “Concessions” or “incentives” mean any concession or incentive issued or awarded to a project by the City by virtue of the project qualifying as a senior housing project. Concessions and incentives shall include, but are not limited to: (1) receipt of a density bonus, incentive, or lower parking requirements consistent with Government Code Section 65915(b)(3); (2) any preference received on account of qualifying as “housing for older persons” under Federal law, having been “designed to meet the physical and social needs of senior citizens” under State law, or qualifying as a “senior citizen housing development” as defined under Civil Code Section 51.3 or 51.11, or similar authority; (3) any development which received any benefit pursuant to Section 65995 et seq. (relating to lowered developer fees to fund school construction); or (4) any other reduction in design or development standards, financial assistance, or other development related concession or incentive that the project received from the City on account of the project intending to become, or for actually becoming a senior housing project.

 

(b)    “Convert” or “conversion” means changing from a senior mobilehome park to a mobilehome park that could not qualify as a senior mobilehome park.

 

(c)    “Mobilehome” is a structure designed for human habitation and for being moved on a street or highway under permit pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 35790. Mobilehome does not include a recreational vehicle, as defined in Civil Code Section 799.4, or a commercial coach, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18218. For the purposes of this section, the term “mobilehome” includes “manufactured home.”

 

(d)    “Mobilehome park” is an area of land where two or more mobilehome or manufactured home sites are located to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation. This definition shall include rental mobilehome parks where mobilehome spaces are rented or held out for rent. Mobilehome park shall also include a mobilehome subdivision, condominium, or stock cooperative in which specific ownership rights are acquired by the space occupants within the mobilehome park.

 

(e)    “Senior mobilehome park” means a mobilehome park in which at least eighty (80) percent of the spaces are occupied by, or intended for occupancy by, at least one person who is fifty-five (55) years of age or older, or in which one hundred (100) percent of the spaces are occupied or intended for occupancy by persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older, or that, at the time of initial City approval, which approval occurred subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, received a concession or incentive from the City. (Added by Ord. 289 § 8, 2009)

 

85.040315 Land Use Regulations.
At least eighty (80) percent of the spaces in mobilehome parks in the Senior Mobilehome Park Overlay District shall be occupied by at least one person fifty-five (55) years of age or older. If an existing mobilehome park met this qualification on January 1, 2009, and fell below the eighty (80) percent requirement between that date and the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, the Senior Mobilehome Park Overlay District shall be applied to that mobilehome park and that park shall be required to operate as a senior mobilehome park by renting spaces and mobilehomes only when at least one occupant of the mobilehome is fifty-five (55)  years of age or older. The signage, advertising, park rules, regulations, rental agreements and leases for spaces in a senior mobilehome park in the MHP2 Overlay District shall state that the park is a senior park. (Added by Ord. 289 § 9, 2009)

 

85.040320 Limitations on Rentals.
Spaces and mobilehomes in a mobilehome park in the Senior Mobilehome Park Overlay District shall be rented only to occupants who meet the age requirement set forth in Section 85.040315, provided, however, that if the occupants of a space or mobilehome who do not meet this requirement rented the space or mobilehome before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, they shall be allowed to remain, and provided further that when such occupants cease to occupy a space or mobilehome, the mobilehome and space cannot thereafter be rented except to occupants who meet that age requirement. (Added by Ord. 289 § 10, 2009)

 

 

ARTICLE 3.5 CONVERSION OF MOBILEHOME PARK TO OTHER USES
85.0403501 Purpose.
The City of Yucaipa General Plan preserves the City’s mobilehome park inventories through policies establishing mobilehome park overlays and classifications contained in the City of Yucaipa Official Land Use Plan and Land Use Map. The City’s rent stabilization program for mobilehome parks also helps preserve long-term affordability of housing for seniors and families. This article establishes procedures and requirements for the proposed closure of a mobilehome park or other conversion of an existing mobilehome park to another use. The purpose of this article is to ensure that any proposed mobilehome park conversion is preceded by adequate notice, and that the social and fiscal impacts of the proposed conversion on park residents are adequately identified and mitigated through reasonable relocation and other assistance, consistent with the provisions of this article, the City’s General Plan, California Government Code Sections 65863.7, 65863.8 and 66427.4, and Civil Code Section 798.56. (Added by Ord. 344 § 4, 2016)

 

85.0403505 Applicability and Scope.
(a)    Eligible Parks. This article applies only to those mobilehome parks located on real property bearing the land use designation of MHP3 on the City of Yucaipa Official Land Use Map as provided in Section 85.040301 of the Development Code. Parks bearing the land use designation of MHP1 or MHP2 shall not be eligible for conversion pursuant to this article unless the applicant first obtains a reclassification of the land use designation to MHP3 in accordance with all other requirements of the code and the City’s General Plan.

 

(b)    Except as provided in subsection (c), this article shall apply to all of the following actions affecting an eligible park:

 

(1)    The closure of the mobilehome park or any part thereof;

 

(2)    The cessation of use of the subject land as a mobilehome park; and

 

(3)    The change of use or other conversion of the mobilehome park or any part thereof to another use.

 

(c)    In addition to subsection (a), this article shall not apply to any of the following:

 

(1)    The conversion of a rental mobilehome park to resident ownership. For resident-initiated conversions of rental mobilehome parks to resident ownership the provisions of Article 13 of Chapter 4 of Division 3 and the Subdivision Map Act shall apply. For park owner-initiated applications for conversion of a rental park to resident ownership, the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act shall apply.

 

(2)    The closure or cessation of use of a mobilehome park resulting from the entry of an order for relief in bankruptcy, if a court of competent jurisdiction has determined that the conversion of the mobile home park is necessary and such court has taken further action which would preclude the payment of relocation assistance benefits. (Added by Ord. 344 § 4, 2016)

 

85.0403510 Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following definitions shall apply:

 

(a)    Absentee mobilehome owner or absentee owner: A person who owns a mobilehome in a mobilehome park and does not reside in such mobilehome.

 

(b)    Affected mobilehome owners and residents: Resident mobilehome owners, mobilehome tenants and absentee mobilehome owners whose mobilehomes will be displaced by the conversion of a mobilehome park.

 

(c)    Comparable housing: A house, apartment complex or condominium that is substantially equivalent or better in terms of size (floor area and number of bedrooms), age, condition, location, price or rent level and amenities to the mobilehome that would be displaced by the mobilehome park conversion of use.

 

(d)    Comparable mobilehome: A mobilehome that is substantially equivalent or better in terms of size (floor area and number of bedrooms), age, condition, location, rental price, and amenities to the mobilehome that would be displaced by conversion of the mobilehome park.

 

(e)    Comparable mobilehome park: Any other mobilehome park substantially equivalent or better in terms of park age, condition, size (acreage and number of spaces), amenities, rental prices, rent control or rent stabilization, and other relevant factors to the mobilehome park that would be displaced by the mobilehome park conversion.

 

(f)    Conversion applicant or applicant: A mobilehome park owner who proposes to carry out a mobilehome park conversion of use.

 

(g)    Conversion or conversion of use: A mobilehome park closure, cessation of use or other change of use of a mobilehome park to another land use as defined in Section 85.0403505(b) of this article.

 

(h)    Conversion permit: A discretionary permit to implement a conversion of use of a mobilehome park.

 

(i)     Development Opportunity Reserve or DOR: An increase in residential density or commercial square footage for an eligible park site in return for a conceptual development plan, including a memorandum of understanding (“MOU”), that provides enhanced architecture and design.

 

(j)     Director or Director of Development Services: The Director of Development Services of the City of Yucaipa.

 

(k)    Disabled household: A household in which a resident is a person with a medical condition or physical or mental impairment that substantially limits at least one of the person’s major life activities, as defined in the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, as now in effect or subsequently amended.

 

(l)     Legal owner: Any person or entity having a legal interest in a mobilehome, such as a lender or mortgagor.

 

(m)   Memorandum of Understanding or MOU: An agreement between the City and a conversion applicant to implement a Development Opportunity Reserve as part of a conversion of use project.

 

(n)    Mobilehome: Mobilehome shall have the meaning set forth in the Mobilehome Residency Law, Civil Code Section 798, et seq., as now in effect or subsequently amended. Mobilehome includes, but is not limited to, a manufactured home, as defined in Section 798.3 of the Civil Code, Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code, and a mobilehome as defined in Section 18008 of the Health and Safety Code, but does not include a recreational vehicle as defined in Civil Code Section 799.29, a commercial modular as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18001.8 or factory-built housing as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 19971, or as said statutes may be amended from time to time.

 

(o)    Mobilehome Improvements: Any lawfully constructed improvements or renovations to the mobilehome or improvements to the mobilehome space made by the current resident, including, but not limited to, carports, roof, porches, patios, awnings, pop-out rooms, recreational equipment, barbecue equipment, landscaping, and similar amenities and repairs.

 

(p)    Mobilehome Park: As defined in Yucaipa Development Code Section 812.13080.

 

(q)    Mobilehome Park Conversion of Use or Conversion: Any closure or cessation of use of land as a mobilehome park or other conversion of use, as provided in Section 85.0403505(b) of this article.

 

(r)    Mobilehome park conversion to ownership: The conversion of an existing rental mobilehome park to resident ownership, including, but not limited to, a condominium mobilehome park or a community mobilehome park.

 

(s)    Mobilehome Park Overlay District 1 or MHP1: The Mobilehome Park Overlay District established pursuant to Division 5 of the Development Code, and as designated on a particular parcel or parcels of land by the symbol “MHP1” on the City of Yucaipa Official Land Use Plan as provided in Section 85.040301 of the Development Code.

 

(t)     Mobilehome Park Overlay District 2 or MHP2: The Senior Mobilehome Park Overlay District established pursuant to Division 5 of the Development Code, and as designated on a particular parcel or parcels of land by the symbol “MHP2” on the City of Yucaipa Official Land Use Plan as provided in Section 85.040301 of the Development Code.

 

(u)    Mobilehome Park Overlay District 3 or MHP3: The Mobilehome Park Overlay District established pursuant to Division 5 of the Development Code, applicable to all mobilehome parks designated by the City Council of the City of Yucaipa for reuse to another use, and as designated on a particular parcel or parcels of land by the symbol “MHP3” on the City of Yucaipa Official Land Use Plan as provided in Section 85.040301 of the Development Code.

 

(v)    Mobilehome Space: A mobilehome unit, lot or other portion of a mobilehome park designated or used for the occupancy of one mobilehome.

 

(w)   Park Owner: A person or entity that owns a mobilehome park or a person or entity authorized to act on behalf of the owner of a mobilehome park.

 

(x)    Relocation Impact Report or RIR: A report meeting the requirements of this article, describing the impacts of a mobilehome park conversion on affected resident mobilehome owners and residents; and including a Relocation Plan describing the relocation assistance measures that will be taken to mitigate adverse impacts of such conversion.

 

(y)    Relocation Specialist: A person with verified professional qualifications demonstrating: familiarity with the region’s housing market; competency in assisting residents to evaluate, select and secure placement in replacement housing; ability to facilitate the moving of residents’ personal property, residential unit, and/or accessories, as appropriate; knowledge of qualifications for and availability of various housing types and programs; experience in mobile home sales and relocation including assistance in adequacy and location of replacement housing, relocation costs and mitigation of the impact of relocation on affected mobilehome park owners and residents; and ability to assist residents in applying for available housing programs or assistance, including, but not limited to, developers, real estate agents, appraisers and other persons with experience in mobile home sales and relocation.

 

(z)    Resident Mobilehome Owner: The registered (title) owner of the mobilehome in a mobilehome park who resides at such mobilehome.

 

(aa)  Resident Mobilehome Tenant: A person who rents or leases a mobilehome in a mobilehome park and resides at such mobilehome. (Added by Ord. 344 § 4, 2016)

 

85.0403515 General Conversion Requirements.
(a)    Any person who files a conversion permit application with the City for approval of a mobilehome park conversion of use, and any other related discretionary permit to implement a conversion of use, shall concurrently file with the City a Relocation Impact Report that complies with this article. No conversion permit application shall be considered or deemed complete or processed for consideration or approved unless and until such Relocation Impact Report is filed and approved in accordance with this article. An applicant may also apply for City Council approval of a Development Opportunity Reserve (DOR) and Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) prepared in accordance with this article, but a DOR/MOU shall not be approved or made effective unless a Relocation Impact Report, has first been approved by the City Council in accordance with the requirements of this article. No Relocation Impact Report or DOR/MOU shall be approved if the subject property bears the land use designation of MHP1 or MHP2. All applications shall be on City-approved forms.

 

(b)    The conversion application shall include a Relocation Impact Report (RIR) that complies with the requirements of this article and state law. The RIR shall be prepared by a relocation specialist on behalf of the applicant as part of the conversion permit application. The RIR shall address the impact of the conversion of the mobilehome park on its mobilehome owners and residents and shall contain a relocation plan addressing the availability of replacement housing for existing mobilehome owners and residents of the mobilehome park and relocation costs, consistent with Sections 65863.7 and/or 66427.4 of the California Government Code and this article. The application shall also contain pre-conversion questionnaires completed by the affected mobilehome owners and residents. The relocation specialist shall be a person with verified professional qualifications demonstrating: familiarity with the region’s housing market; competency in assisting residents to evaluate, select and secure placement in replacement housing; ability to facilitate the moving of residents’ personal property, residential unit, and/or accessories, as appropriate; knowledge of qualifications for and availability of various housing types and programs; and ability to assist residents in applying for available housing programs or assistance.

 

(c)    An application for approval of a Development Opportunity Reserve (DOR) and Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) may be included with the conversion of use application. The DOR/MOU shall include a description of the proposed future uses, residential densities, commercial square footage, and design in accordance with Section 85.0403535, and consistent with the requirements of the underlying land use district, any applicable Specific Plan and this article.

 

(d)    Upon filing an application for approval of an RIR and related conversion permit application, the Director of Development Services shall inform the conversion applicant in writing of the requirements of Civil Code Section 798.56 and Government Code Section 65863.7 and of all applicable City requirements which impose on the applicant the duty to notify the existing mobilehome park owners and residents and prospective residents concerning the proposed conversion. The Director of Development Services shall specify in writing to the conversion applicant the information that must be submitted in order to adequately notify all existing homeowners and residents and other notices as required by the California Government Code, the California Civil Code, and this article.

 

(e)    No conversion permit application shall be deemed complete, and no hearing on any conversion permit application shall take place, until the Relocation Impact Report, relocation plan and verification that affected mobilehome owners and residents have been properly notified pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.56 and have been reviewed by the Director of Development Services for substantial conformance with the requirements of this article.

 

(f)    No DOR/MOU application shall be deemed complete and processing for consideration along with a conversion permit application will not commence until the DOR/MOU application have been reviewed and verified by the Director for substantial conformance with the requirements of this article.

 

(g)    All notices required by this article shall be delivered by personal delivery or certified mail to the occupant of the mobilehome, absentee owners and legal owners of the mobilehome located on each mobilehome space within the mobilehome park. (Added by Ord. 344 § 4, 2016)

 

85.0403520 Relocation Impact Report Content.
(a)    Relocation Impact Report (RIR). The conversion applicant shall file a RIR on the impact of the proposed mobilehome park conversion of use upon the affected mobilehome owners and residents of the Mobilehome Park as part of the application for approval of the RIR and conversion permit to the City.

 

(b)    At a minimum the RIR shall include the following information and documentation, and any other information and documentation deemed necessary and appropriate by the Director of Development Services:

 

(1)    A detailed description of the proposed use to which the mobilehome park is to be converted;

 

(2)    The proposed timetable for implementation of the conversion and development of the site;

 

(3)    Legal description of the mobilehome park;

 

(4)    Age of the mobilehome park;

 

(5)    The total number of mobilehome spaces in the park, number of spaces occupied by mobilehomes, and number of spaces occupied by recreational vehicles;

 

(6)    An illustrative map of all spaces, roads, improvements, common areas and amenities in the park;

 

(7)    For each mobilehome space in the mobilehome park:

 

(A)   The age, size, number of bedrooms, manufacturer and date of manufacture of the mobilehome on the space,

 

(B)   The number of occupant(s) of the mobilehome, if the occupant(s) are absentee owner(s), resident mobilehome owner(s) or mobilehome tenant(s) as defined in Section 85.0403510, their ages, and their length of residency in the mobilehome, and whether the mobilehome constitutes each person’s primary place of residence,

 

(C)   The name, mailing address and telephone number of each absentee mobilehome owner, resident mobilehome owner, mobilehome tenant, and legal owner of the mobilehome,

 

(D)   The total monthly space rent and other charges currently charged for each space with detail showing the space rent, utility charges, and any other costs paid by the resident(s), and whether the space is a month-to-month space subject to rent control under Chapter 15.20 of the Municipal Code or a long-term lease in excess of twelve (12) months duration,

 

(E)   The purchase date, purchase price paid by the current resident mobilehome owner(s) or absentee mobilehome owner(s) for the mobilehome, and the amount and terms of any outstanding mortgage loans or other financing obligation for the mobilehome,

 

(F)    Any lawfully constructed or installed mobilehome improvements that have been paid for by the affected mobilehome owner(s) or resident(s), whether each improvement is movable, and the costs of each improvement,

 

(G)   The In-Place Fair Market Value of each mobilehome in the mobilehome park. In-Place Fair Market Value shall include, but is not limited to, any accessory structures whose installation has been approved by mobilehome park management, such as a porch or a carport, and shall be determined by assuming the continuation of the mobilehome park in a safe, sanitary and well-maintained condition. These values shall be determined by appraisals by a qualified appraiser to be chosen by the park owner from a list provided by the Director of Development Services, and considering values of comparable homes in comparable parks. The appraisal shall be made no more than sixty (60) days prior to its submittal to the City. The conversion applicant shall pay all costs and expenses associated with the appraisal, including, but expressly not limited to, any appraisal fees. The conversion applicant shall not be required to provide appraisal information for park-owned units,

 

(H)   Any other special or unique circumstances that may restrict potential relocation areas for affected mobilehome park owners and/or residents on a case-by-case basis, which may include, but are not limited to, disability or other special needs, which restrict potential relocation areas for the affected mobilehome owners and/or residents,

 

(I)    Any available, alternate housing opportunities known to the affected mobilehome owners and/or residents that would be acceptable as a relocation option to each individual and approximate cost to accomplish a relocation to the alternate housing;

 

(8)    An estimate of the relocation cost considering all of the costs related to moving and installing the displaced mobilehomes on an available receiving site, including, but not limited to, tear down, transportation, and set up of mobilehomes (including all costs of utility hook-ups), providing rental subsidies, or purchasing the mobilehome unit as described in Section 85.0403530. Estimates from at least two moving companies shall be submitted with the application. Relocation cost shall not include the cost and expenses associated with the appraisal, including, but not limited to, any appraisal fees, which shall be paid by the conversion applicant;

 

(9)    A list of comparable parks within a fifteen (15) mile radius and for each such park, the space rents and the qualifications for residency in each park (e.g., age restrictions, no pets), rental rates (e.g., first and last months’ rent, security deposits, availability of rent control), whether the park has any vacant space and will accept homes being relocated and if so, any restrictions, such as size and age, on the relocated homes that would be accepted;

 

(10)  Itemization of the cost of comparable mobilehomes within a fifteen (15) mile radius, including, but not limited to, the purchase price of each substantially equivalent or better mobilehome in a comparable mobilehome park as well as the rental rate for each substantially equivalent (or better) mobilehome in a comparable mobilehome park, first and last months’ rent, security deposits and substantially equivalent or higher rent or mortgage payments at the comparable mobilehomes. For comparable mobilehomes, the itemization shall state the rental rate for each space and whether the owner of that mobilehome park has agreed in writing to accept affected mobilehome owners and residents that are displaced by the proposed mobilehome park conversion;

 

(11)  Itemization of the cost of comparable housing within a fifteen (15) mile radius, including, but not limited to, the purchase price of each substantially equivalent (or better) condominium, or the monthly rent for and other costs of moving into a comparable apartment or condominium, including such items as first and last months’ rent, security deposits and the rental rate for each substantially equivalent or better, or mortgage payments at the comparable housing;

 

(12)  Proposed measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of the park conversion on the affected mobilehome owners and residents in the park pursuant to Section 85.0403530;

 

(13)  A copy of any agreement reached with any affected mobilehome owner or resident relating to the park owner’s purchase of the mobilehome, relocation of the affected mobilehome owners or residents, and/or the provision of relocation assistance. The Director may waive the requirement to include any or all of the information required by this section where an affected mobilehome owner or resident and the conversion applicant have reached a final, mutually acceptable agreement as to the relocation assistance to be provided;

 

(14)  Copies of the pre-conversion questionnaires completed by the affected mobilehome park owners and residents in accordance with the requirements of Section 85.0403525 of this article;

 

(15)  Any other information the Director may deem necessary to facilitate the Planning Commission’s and City Council’s consideration of appropriate conditions to mitigate the adverse impacts of a park closure or conversion on affected mobilehome owners and residents. (Added by Ord. 344 § 4, 2016)

 

85.0403525 Pre-Conversion Questionnaire.
(a)    Prior to the applicant filing a conversion use permit application with the City, the relocation specialist shall distribute a pre-conversion questionnaire to the affected mobilehome owners and residents. The affected mobilehome owners and residents shall have no less than thirty (30) days from the date of certified mailing or personal delivery to complete and return the pre-conversion questionnaire to the relocation specialist.

 

(b)    The Director shall provide a standard pre-conversion questionnaire for use by the relocation specialist. At a minimum, the pre-conversion questionnaire shall include questions requesting the affected mobilehome owners and residents to provide the information required in order for the applicant to prepare a RIR in accordance with Section 85.0403520(b) of this article.

 

(c)    Prior to or concurrent with the distribution of the pre-conversion questionnaire, the applicant shall provide notice to affected mobilehome owners and residents of the applicant’s intention to seek City approval for a mobilehome park conversion of use in accordance with this article. The notice shall, at a minimum, include an explanation, in general terms, of the nature and timeframes of the proposed conversion, shall advise affected mobilehome owners and residents that information will be sought from them to assist in determining appropriate relocation assistance, shall include a copy of the tenants’ rights under the Government Code and Mobilehome Residency Law (California Civil Code Section 789 et seq.), as amended from time to time, and shall advise the residents that they will be provided with notices of the application for approval of the RIR and conversion permit in accordance with the requirements of this article and state law.

 

(d)    The notice shall also include the name, qualifications and contact information for the relocation specialist used by the applicant.

 

(e)    Completed pre-conversion questionnaires submitted to the relocation specialist shall be treated as confidential, and disclosure of information provided therein shall be limited to those individuals and uses necessary to accomplish the purpose of this article, including the applicant, as deemed appropriate by the relocation specialist, and the City.

 

(f)    Neither the completed pre-conversion questionnaire form nor any personal information provided in response thereto shall be considered public information and the City shall not publicly disclose any such information, except as necessary to facilitate the evaluation of the adequacy of the report herein or as may be required by law.

 

(g)    Any affected mobilehome owner or resident may decline to provide any information requested, but the City Council’s determination of the reasonableness of the level of relocation assistance proposed by the applicant will be based on information provided in response to the pre-conversion questionnaire, and the level of assistance deemed reasonable in an individual case may be limited, or the relocation assistance requirement may be eliminated, based on the owner’s or resident’s verified refusal to provide information necessary to make such a determination. (Added by Ord. 344 § 4, 2016)

 

85.0403530 Relocation Plan.
In accordance with Government Code Sections 65863.7 and 66426.4, now in effect or as subsequently amended, the conversion applicant shall provide relocation assistance to mitigate any adverse impacts of a mobilehome park conversion on affected mobilehome owners and residents in a manner that does not exceed the reasonable cost of relocation. This section establishes minimum relocation assistance for affected mobilehome owners and residents, which shall be set forth in the Relocation Plan. The conversion applicant and any person eligible for relocation assistance may agree to other mutually satisfactory relocation assistance that meet or exceed these requirements.

 

(a)    Eligibility for Relocation Assistance. Affected mobilehome owners and residents are entitled to relocation assistance if they have not given notice to terminate their lease or other rental agreement as of the date of submittal of the conversion of use application, including the filing of the RIR with the City.

 

(b)    Reasonable Cost of Relocation. Reasonable cost of relocation includes a moving allowance and other applicable types of relocation assistance as defined in this section and based on the RIR and evidence presented at the public hearings on the proposed conversion of use.

 

(c)    Moving Allowance for Eligible Residents. For all eligible residents, relocation assistance shall include a moving allowance to move to another park or other replacement housing up to a distance of fifteen (15) miles. Moving allowance includes:

 

(1)    The cost to move furniture and personal belongings.

 

(2)    Rent for first and last month at the new location.

 

(3)    Required security deposit at the new location.

 

(4)    Temporary lodging, if necessary, up to two months.

 

(5)    Assistance for Disabled Households. For eligible disabled households, relocation assistance may include an additional sum toward the cost of obtaining any assistance needed to enable the resident to move.

 

(6)    Accessibility Improvements for Affected Mobilehome Owners and Residents. For eligible affected mobilehome owners and residents, relocation assistance may include payment of the cost to reinstall or replace any accessibility improvements made to the mobilehome such as wheelchair ramps, lifts, and grab bars.

 

(d)    Mobilehome Relocation Costs for Mobilehome Owners. For any mobilehome owner whose mobilehome can be relocated, and in addition to the moving allowance provided in subsection (c), relocation assistance may include the lowest of three estimates obtained by the conversion applicant with the Director of Development Services approval, from licensed mobilehome movers to physically relocate the mobilehome up to a maximum distance of fifteen (15) miles. The mobilehome owner is responsible for additional costs to move the mobilehome to a location farther than fifteen (15) miles. The estimates shall include the cost of disassembly of the mobilehome, transportation to the new site, reinstallation including, but not limited to, connection to utility hook-ups, permits, replacement or reconstruction of blocks, skirting, shiplap siding, process, decks and awning, earthquake bracing if necessary, insurance coverage during transport, including the cost of any upgrades to comply with applicable building, plumbing, electrical and health and safety codes.

 

(e)    Sale at In-Place Market Value for Mobilehome Owners. In addition to the moving allowance provided in subsection (c), for any eligible mobilehome owner whose home cannot be relocated to a comparable park within fifteen (15) miles or another park chosen by the mobilehome owner, the City shall require the conversion applicant to purchase the mobilehome at In-Place Market Value. The conversion applicant shall hire a qualified appraiser from a list provided by the City to determine the In-Place Market Value of the mobilehome. If the affected mobilehome owner disputes the appraised value of his or her mobilehome, the affected mobilehome owner may hire an appraiser from the City’s list to obtain an appraisal, at their own expense. To be considered, the mobilehome owner shall obtain and submit the appraisal to the Director of Development Services ten (10) days prior to the City Council Hearing. The City Council will review and consider the two appraisals.

 

(f)    Limitations on Imposed Conditions. The conditions imposed in connection with approval of a RIR shall not exceed the reasonable costs of relocation. Conditions shall only be imposed in order to ensure that the conversion applicant adequately mitigates adverse impacts of the mobilehome park conversion on affected mobilehome owners and residents. (Added by Ord. 344 § 4, 2016)

 

85.0403535 Relocation Plan Development Opportunity Reserve and Memorandum of Understanding.
An application for a Development Opportunity Reserve (DOR) and Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to implement the DOR for the proposed conversion of use of an eligible park may be submitted concurrently with, or subsequent to the approval of, a Relocation Impact Report and conversion permit. The proposed DOR/MOU shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of this section and the applicable land use district and/or Specific Plan, and shall be submitted for review and approval by the City Council.

 

(a)    Purpose. The purpose of the DOR/MOU is to provide a potential developer with the opportunity to obtain early input from the City Council on the concept of a future development project for the reuse of an eligible park which, in return for providing enhanced architecture and project design, the applicant may seek a greater residential density and/or commercial square footage than otherwise allowed under the regulations of the applicable land use district when formal land use permits or other entitlements are submitted for discretionary review and action. A DOR/MOU does not constitute a commitment to specific density, or to a future specific project or land uses, and all future discretionary entitlement permits and approvals shall be required, including, but expressly not limited to, compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act.

 

(b)    Development Opportunity Reserve General Requirements

 

(1)    Residential Projects. There is hereby established a Development Opportunity Reserve which constitutes a fixed reserve of dwelling units with a minimum density of sixteen (16) dwelling units per acre and a maximum density of twenty-four (24) dwelling units per acre (“Dwelling Unit Reserve”) for each eligible park. The Dwelling Unit Reserve applies to a property in a qualitative manner on a project by project basis. The greater the project’s quality in design, the greater the density the project can obtain as approved by the City Council, up to the maximum density of twenty-four (24) dwelling units per acre. The underlying base residential density, as established by the applicable land use district or Specific Plan land use provisions, would still apply to maintain the existing property’s current dwelling unit yield; and the Dwelling Unit Reserve shall not allow an increase above the underlying base residential density until an actual development proposal which adopts the Dwelling Unit Reserve as part of the discretionary project approvals is formally adopted by the City.

 

(2)    Commercial Projects. There is hereby established a Development Opportunity Reserve of a combined maximum of two hundred forty-five thousand (245,000) square feet of commercial uses for all eligible parks (“Commercial Square Footage Reserve”). At no time shall the total square footage of commercial uses for all eligible parks exceed the Commercial Square Footage Reserve. The commercial square footage for proposed commercial uses for an eligible park shall be determined by the City Council on a project by project basis, and as each commercial development or use is approved through discretionary project approvals, the Commercial Square Footage Reserve for all eligible parks shall be correspondingly reduced. An eligible park shall also be subject to all other requirements of the applicable commercial land use district and/or Specific Plan for the subject property. The Commercial Square Footage Reserve incorporated into a DOR/MOU shall not allow an increase above the maximum square footage allowed under the applicable land use district and/or Specific Plan until an actual development proposal is approved by the City which adopts the square footage and other characteristics set forth in the DOR/MOU.

 

(3)    Mixed Use Projects. For any mixed use project, the density of proposed residential uses shall not exceed the Dwelling Unit Reserve allowed under subsection (b)(1); and the square footage of any proposed commercial uses shall not exceed the maximum square footage allowed under subsection (b)(2) based on the available Commercial Square Footage Reserve in combination with the proposed mixed use project and all other approved commercial projects.

 

(4)    The DOR application shall also include a proposed Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) that complies with subsection (c) of this section.

 

(5)    The Dwelling Unit Reserve Amount, and/or the Commercial Square Footage Reserve, shall be adjusted by the City Council as part of its Development Opportunity Reserve approval action pursuant to Section 85.0403550.

 

(c)    Memorandum of Understanding Requirements. The Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) shall include a conceptual development plan which addresses, at a minimum, all of the following:

 

(1)    Potential future uses of the subject property;

 

(2)    The specific number of residential dwelling units proposed and the maximum density for any potential future residential uses for the conversion site, based on the Dwelling Unit Reserve and the requirements of this Code;

 

(3)    The commercial square footage proposed for any potential future commercial uses for the conversion site, based on Commercial Square Footage Reserve, and the maximum floor area ratio for each lot or parcel based on the underlying land use district;

 

(4)    Conceptual architectural design of potential future residential and/or commercial uses.

 

(d)    Procedures

 

(1)    The application for a DOR/MOU shall be reviewed by Staff for completeness, and submitted for City Council review and approval. A DOR/MOU application may be submitted with an application for approval of a Relocation Impact Report and conversion permit. No DOR/MOU application shall be effective until the City Council has approved a Relocation Impact Report and conversion permit for the eligible park.

 

(2)    The City Council will evaluate the DOR/MOU application and may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the DOR/MOU in accordance with Section 85.0403550 of this article.

 

(3)    Following City Council approval of a Relocation Impact Report, DOR/MOU, and conversion permit, the applicant may complete any other appropriate land use entitlement application process for formal project review by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the requirements of this Code.

 

(e)    Entitlement Procedures for Reuse—Conversion Permit

 

(1)    In addition to the requirement for approval of a Relocation Impact Report, with Relocation Plan, the conversion of use of an eligible park requires that the applicant also obtain approval of a conversion permit for the proposed new uses or development. The conversion permit shall be subject to the same procedures and findings for approval of a Conditional Use Permit set forth in Article 1 of Chapter 3 of Division 3 of the Development Code.

 

(2)    Residential development proposed as part of a conversion permit and evaluated in accordance with the procedures and findings for approval of a Conditional use Permit and consistency with the Property Development Standards required by Section 84.0335(b) of Chapter 3 of Division 4 (High Density Multiple Residential (RM-24) District), and shall also be designed consistent with the provisions of Chapter 13 of Division 8 of the Development Code (High Density Multiple Residential Design Standards).

 

(3)    Commercial development proposed as part of a proposed conversion of use permit and evaluated subject to the procedures and findings for approval of a Conditional Use Permit shall be designed consistent with the Property Development Standards required by Section 84.0350(d) of Chapter 3 of Division 4 (General Commercial (CG) District).

 

(4)    A mixed-use (Residential and Commercial) project proposed as part of a conversion of use permit and evaluated subject to a Conditional Use Permit shall be designed using a combination of the standards required in subsections (e)(1) and (2). The dominant use of each mixed-use building shall determine the applicable development standards for that building. In the case of ambiguity, the most restrictive development standards shall apply. (Added by Ord. 344 § 4, 2016)

 

85.0403540 Eminent Domain.
In the event there is an exercise of eminent domain by the City which has the effect of a mobilehome park conversion, relocation assistance benefits shall be provided by the City to affected mobilehome owners and residents pursuant to the provisions of this article or the law of eminent domain, whichever provides the maximum benefit. (Added by Ord. 344 § 4, 2016)

 

85.0403545 Protections.
(a)    Before entering a rental agreement, the park owner shall advise each prospective mobilehome owner and mobilehome tenant, in writing, that a proposed Relocation Impact Report and conversion permit application has been filed and that the prospective mobilehome owner or tenant will not be entitled to any relocation assistance under this article.

 

(b)    Any mobilehome owner or tenant already leasing or renting a space in the park, or residing in a mobilehome in the park, on the date the application for approval of a Relocation Impact Report is filed shall be eligible for relocation assistance.

 

(c)    No park owner shall require any mobilehome owner or tenant to waive his or her rights to relocation assistance as a condition of leasing or renting a space in the park, except: (1) when the mobilehome owner or tenant moves into the park after the date the conversion application is filed; and (2) prior to the new mobilehome owner’s or tenant’s execution of the lease or other rental agreement, the park owner gave written notice to that new mobilehome owner or tenant that the conversion application has been filed. Any such waiver will only be valid if the park owner completes the conversion hearing process within one year.

 

(d)    No mobilehome owner shall be required to remove his or her mobilehome and no tenant shall be required to vacate a mobilehome until all of the following conditions have been satisfied:

 

(1)    The park owner has given the six months’ notice of closure required by Civil Code Section 798.56 and that six-month period has elapsed;

 

(2)    The City’s decision approving the conversion is final; and

 

(3)    The park owner has provided the relocation assistance required by the City as a condition of conversion.

 

(e)    An application for conversion of a park does not relieve a mobilehome owner or tenant from his or her obligation to pay rent.

 

(f)    Unless a Relocation Impact Report with Relocation Plan and conversion permit have been approved by the City and a certificate of acceptance has been recorded, as required by this article, no mobilehome park owner, agent or representative shall do any of the following:

 

(1)    Perform or carry out a mobilehome park conversion of use.

 

(2)    Display a sign in the mobilehome park or distribute any notice to any resident mobilehome owners, mobilehome tenants or absentee mobilehome owners of the park announcing that the mobilehome park or any part thereof is closing, may be closing or has been closed, or that the land will no longer be used for a mobilehome park.

 

(3)    Display a sign announcing a new use for the mobilehome park property.

 

(g)    Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to preclude any notification to resident mobilehome owners, resident mobilehome tenants, or absentee owners, as may be required by state law, nor shall this section preclude notification to mobilehome owners, resident mobilehome tenants or absentee owners, that information is being requested in anticipation of the filing of a development application or request for approval of a park closure or other mobilehome park conversion of use. Notification to prospective mobilehome owners and tenants regarding the existence or status of any application or approval process affecting the mobilehome park shall not be considered a violation of this section. (Added by Ord. 344 § 4, 2016)

 

85.0403550 City Council Hearing and Action.
(a)    Upon the filing of a complete application for approval of a Relocation Impact Report and conversion permit, and any related DOR/MOU application, and verification to the City for review, the Director shall schedule a public hearing before the City Council on all of the applications. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with Section 83.010330 of this Code and shall also be provided as set forth in subsection (b).

 

(b)    At least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing date, the Director shall also perform the following actions:

 

(1)    Mail a notice of the public hearing and a copy of the Relocation Impact Report to affected mobilehome owners and residents, and to all legal owners of mobilehomes in the mobilehome park. The notice shall contain a general explanation of the matters to be considered by the City Council. The copy of the Relocation Impact Report shall include the Relocation Plan, the appraisal of the mobilehome owned or resided in by that particular notice recipient and the pre-conversion questionnaire completed by that notice recipient.

 

(2)    Inform the conversion applicant in writing of the provisions of Civil Code Section 798.56 regarding the conversion applicant’s duty to notify affected mobilehome owners and residents of the proposed conversion. Such writing shall specify the manner in which the conversion applicant shall verify that affected mobilehome owners and residents have been notified of the proposed conversion.

 

(3)    The conversion applicant shall pay all costs associated with providing notice, including any publishing and postage expenses.

 

(c)    The City Council shall conduct a public hearing to review the proposed conversion permit, RIR with Relocation Plan, and any proposed DOR/MOU. The City Council shall may consider all relevant evidence presented at the public hearing and shall render its findings and decision within ninety (90) days therefrom, unless a shorter period of time is required by state law, such as the processing time imposed by the Subdivision Map Act. Such hearing shall not be held before the conversion applicant has satisfactorily verified that affected mobilehome owners and residents have been notified of the proposed conversion pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.56.

 

(d)    The City Council’s decision shall be in the form of a written resolution approving, conditionally approving or disapproving the Relocation Impact Report, including Relocation Plan, and conversion permit. If the application also includes a proposed DOR/MOU, the City Council resolution shall also approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the DOR/MOU. The City Council resolution shall include conditions to provide reasonable measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of the mobilehome park conversion on the affected mobilehome owners and residents; and conditions for approval of any proposed DOR/MOU.

 

(e)    The City Council shall not approve the proposed RIR and Relocation Plan, unless the City Council makes all of the following findings:

 

(1)    The RIR contains the information and documentation required by this article and state law.

 

(2)    The RIR and its relocation plan contain reasonable measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of the mobilehome park conversion on affected mobilehome owners and residents, and the City Council.

 

(3)    The proposed mobilehome park conversion is consistent with the General Plan, and any applicable Specific Plan, or any similar state law or City Ordinance.

 

(4)    The conversion applicant has complied with all notice requirements as provided for in Government Code Section 65863.7(b) and (c), and Civil Code Section 798.56, and this article, and each affected mobilehome owner and resident has had adequate notification of the proposed conversion.

 

(5)    The RIR accurately represents the total reasonable costs associated with the relocation of affected mobilehome park owners and residents pursuant to Government Code Section 65863.7(e).

 

(6)    The City Council has imposed conditions to ensure that the conversion applicant shall be subject to, and shall take reasonable measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of the mobilehome park conversion on the affected mobilehome owners and residents.

 

(f)    The City Council shall not approve a proposed Development Opportunity Reserve and Memorandum of Understanding unless the City Council makes all of the following findings:

 

(1)    For residential projects (including any mixed use projects containing a residential portion), the proposed residential density is within the range allowed under the Dwelling Unit Reserve set forth in Section 85.0403535(b)(1).

 

(2)    For commercial projects (including any mixed use projects containing a commercial portion), the proposed maximum square footage of commercial uses does not exceed the Commercial Square Footage Reserve available for the commercial uses in combination with all other existing and proposed commercial uses as provided in Section 85.0403535(b)(2), and further does not exceed the maximum floor area ratio(s) applicable pursuant to the underlying land use district and any applicable Specific Plan.

 

(3)    The conceptual architecture and project design contains enhanced elements that would justify approval of increased residential density and/or commercial square footage.

 

(4)    The applicant has submitted a signed covenant, as part of the DOR/MOU, that acknowledges the City’s approval of the DOR/MOU does not constitute a binding commitment by the City to allow any specific development of the subject property, or vest any rights in the applicant to develop the subject property in accordance with the MOU/DOR, and that the applicant shall be required to submit and obtain approval of formal land use permits and other entitlement applications in order to develop the subject property.

 

(g)    If an application includes applications for land use permits or other entitlements to implement a proposed conversion, such as a conditional use permit, those other entitlement applications shall be processed, reviewed, noticed and decided in accordance with the usual procedures set forth in this Code, including, but not limited to, any necessary review, noticing and/or action by the Planning Commission. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a tentative map or tentative parcel map application is filed concurrently with the conversion application and DOR/MOU application, the tentative map or tentative parcel map application shall be concurrently processed for hearing by the Planning Commission in accordance with the requirements of this Code, but the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation on the proposed tentative map or tentative parcel map that shall subsequently be heard and decided by the City Council concurrently with the conversion application and DOR/MOU application. (Added by Ord. 344 § 4, 2016)

 

85.0403555 Certificate of Acceptance.
Upon City approval of a conversion application and Relocation Impact Report, the applicant shall record a certificate of acceptance on the title of the mobilehome park property. City approval of a conversion application including Relocation Impact Report shall not be effective until proof of recordation of a certificate of acceptance has been delivered to the Director. If the applicant included a proposed DOR/MOU, City approval of the DOR/MOU shall not be effective until the applicant has delivered the signed and notarized covenant required pursuant to Section 85.0403550(f)(4) of this article. The Director shall provide the certificate of acceptance form and covenant form for use by the applicant. (Added by Ord. 344 § 4, 2016)

 

85.0403560 Building Permits.
No building permit shall be issued for conversion of a mobilehome park property until the conversion applicant has filed with the Director of Development Services a written statement confirming full performance of the mitigation measures set forth in, and the conditions imposed in connection with, the approved Relocation Impact Report and any other conditions imposed on the conversion of use. Such statement shall specify in itemized form the name of each affected resident mobilehome owner and resident and the date and type of relocation assistance provided to such person. The statement shall be executed under penalty of perjury. (Added by Ord. 344 § 4, 2016)

 

85.0403565 Expiration of Approvals.
Except as otherwise provided in the resolution of approval, the City Council approval of a conversion application and DOR/MOU approval shall expire under the following circumstances:

 

(a)    Expiration for failure to submit Certificate of Acceptance. An approved conversion, with Relocation Impact Report and any DOR/MOU shall expire thirty (30) days after adoption of the resolution of approval, unless proof of recordation of a certificate of acceptance is delivered to the Director prior to such date, or unless such thirty (30) day recording period is extended by the Director for good cause due to delays in recording beyond the reasonable control of the applicant.

 

(b)    Expiration for Failure to Implement Project

 

(1)    An approved RIR, conversion permit, and any DOR/MOU, shall expire two years after the date they are approved by the City Council. The Director of Development Services may deny or grant a request for an extension of time of the approval. The Director of Development Services may upon request grant an extension of time up to one year, based upon a showing that good faith progress has been made toward fulfilling the conditions of approval or some intervening event not the fault of the park owner has prevented timely compliance with the conditions of approval and RIR including relocation plan, and/or the DOR/MOU. The conversion applicant or affected mobilehome owners or residents may appeal the Director’s decision on a request for an extension to the City Council.

 

(2)    If the City Council approves an extension following an appeal, the City Council may impose conditions as deemed necessary to mitigate any adverse impacts resulting from an extension of a conversion use permit, including the RIR, relocation plan, and DOR/MOU. The City Council may grant multiple extensions but no single extension shall have a duration in excess of one year.

 

(c)    Upon the City’s approval of an extension of an approved RIR, conversion permit, and DOR/MOU, with additional conditions, the applicant shall record a certificate of acceptance on the title of the mobilehome park property. City approval of an extension shall not be effective until proof of recordation of a certificate of acceptance has been delivered to the Director. An approved extension of a conversion permit, RIR with Relocation Plan, and any MOU/DOR, shall expire thirty (30) days after adoption of the resolution approving the extension, unless proof of recordation of a certificate of acceptance is delivered to the Director prior to such date, or unless such thirty (30) day recording period is extended by the Director for good cause due to delays in recording beyond the reasonable control of the applicant. (Added by Ord. 344 § 4, 2016)

 

85.0403570 Processing Fees.
The City Council may, by resolution, establish fees and deposits for the administration of this article. (Added by Ord. 344 § 4, 2016)

 

ARTICLE 4 SPECIFIC PLAN (SP) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.040401 General Provisions.
(a)    Intent

The Specific Plan Overlay District is intended to promote the maintenance and viability of certain neighborhoods through appropriate zoning. It is an overlay district where special standards are established in order to promote the development of integrated land uses exhibiting an excellence of design greater than otherwise could be achieved using conventional development standards.

 

(b)    Locational Requirements

The Specific Plan Overlay District may overlay any property.

 

(c)    Designation

The Specific Plan Overlay District shall be designated by the symbol (SP) on the City of Yucaipa Official Land Use Plan. (Ord. 145 § 2, 1995)

 

85.040405 Development Standards.
(a)    Property designated with an SP overlay shall be developed in accordance with the requirements of the applicable Specific Plan that has been adopted for that property. (Ord. 145 § 2, 1995)

 

 

 

ARTICLE 5 CUSTOM HOME (CH) OVERLAY DISTRICT
85.040501 General Provisions.
(a)    Intent

        The Custom Home Overlay District is intended to promote the compatibility and viability of certain rural residential neighborhoods through appropriate zoning and development standards. It is an overlay district where special design standards are established in order to promote and maintain the development of rural residential land uses exhibiting an excellence of design greater than otherwise could he achieved using conventional development standards. Subdivisions that consist of noticeably similar dwellings that are located at the minimum building setback lines are not appropriate in these areas.

 

(b)    Locational Requirements

        The Custom Home Overlay District is appropriate when it will serve to protect and enhance a rural residential neighborhood that is substantially occupied by custom-caliber single-family homes on parcels of land that are least 20,000 sq. ft. in area.

 

(c)    Designation

        The Custom Home Overlay District shall be designated by the symbol (CH) on the City of Yucaipa Official Land Use Plan. (Added by Ord. 239 § 2, 2005)

 

85.040510 Development Standards.
All new construction on property located within a Custom Home (CH) Overlay District shall comply with the development standards specified by Development Code Sections 88.0115, 88.0120, 88.0125, 88.0130, and the following standards:

 

(a)    All dwellings shall have a minimum floor area of 2,200 square feet of habitable space, measured from the exterior of the structure.

 

(b)    All dwellings shall have a minimum street frontage of sixty (60) feet, measured from the exterior of the structure.

 

(c)    All dwellings shall have a minimum 600 square foot fully enclosed garage that can accommodate at least three (3) vehicles, and garages shall be side-entry, or located behind the dwelling, on at least fifty (50) percent of the units.

 

(d)    In the RL District, the minimum side yard setbacks shall be twenty (20) feet, and unless precluded by topographic constraints, the minimum front yard setback shall be forty (40) feet.

 

(e)    In the RS District, the minimum side yard setbacks shall be ten (10) feet, and unless precluded by topographic constraints, the minimum front yard setback shall be thirty-five (35) feet.

 

(f)    Minimum front yard setbacks on adjacent parcels shall vary by a minimum of ten (10) feet on at least fifty (50) percent of the units.

 

(g)    Floor plans and elevations for subdivisions shall be varied as follows:

 

Number of Lots

Minimum Number
of Floor Plans/Lot*

Minimum Number of Architectural Styles/Plan**

2—4

2

2

5—10

4

3

11—20

5

4

21—40

6

5

41—60

7

5

61—80

8

5

81—100

9

5

Over 100

1 Additional for Each 20 Lots Over 100

5

 

 

 

 

*The following may be counted as additional floor plans:

1.   Reverse footprints.

2.   Alternate orientation of 90 degrees or greater.

3.   Alternate garage orientation (i.e. side entry or detached).

 

**   Reverse footprints shall not count as additional architectural styles. Variations in design elements, which create significant differences in streetscape appearance, shall count as additional architectural styles. Appropriate styles may include, but not be limited to: California Ranch, Cape Cod, Craftsman, Mediterranean, Monterey, Neocolonial, Prairie, Spanish Colonial, Southwestern, or Tudor.

 

 

 

 

(h)    Similar floor plan and elevation schemes shall be separated by at least five (5) lots, including the units across the street, from one another.

 

(1)    Similar color schemes shall be separated by at least five (5) lots, including the units across the street, from one another.

 

(j)     Architectural treatments that are consistent with the architectural style shall be provided to all side and rear elevations that are adjacent to streets.

 

(k)    New construction on existing parcels shall be subject to the review and approval of a Special Use Permit for design review by the Planning Commission whenever unconventional designs are proposed (i.e. dome houses, “themed” structures, metal buildings or components, etc.).

 

(1)    Roofing materials shall consist of a variety of styles and colors that are consistent with the architectural style of the dwelling unit. (Added by Ord. 239 § 2, 2005)

DIVISION 6 PLANNING AREAS
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
86.0101 Intent.
This division provides land use regulations as part of the Official Land Use Plan of the City of Yucaipa for the incorporated area in said City. The purpose of these regulations is to respect and preserve the distinct planning areas within the City.

 

86.0105 General Use Provisions.
Except as otherwise provided in the Development Code, when a building, structure or land use is within the incorporated portion of the City the following shall apply:

 

(a)    Buildings or structures shall be erected, reconstructed, structurally altered, enlarged, moved, and/or maintained only in compliance with the provisions of this Division of the Development Code.

 

(b)    Land uses, buildings or structures shall only be designed, occupied, and used in compliance with the provisions of this Division of the Development Code.

 

86.0110 Planning Areas Map.
The Planning Areas Map showing the Official Land Use Plan, classifications, and boundaries of planning areas and all notations, references, and other information shown thereon, after final adoption in the manner required by law, shall thereafter be as much a part of the Development Code as if all the matters and information set forth by said maps were fully described herein.

 

86.0115 Planning Areas Boundaries.
The boundaries of such areas shown on any Planning Areas Map adopted by the Development Code and General Plan or amendment thereto are hereby adopted and approved. The regulations of the Development Code governing the use of land, buildings, structures, the height of buildings and structures, the sizes of yards about buildings and structures, and other matters as hereinafter set forth, are hereby established and declared to be in effect upon all land included within the boundaries of each and every area shown upon the Planning Areas Map.

 

(a)    The boundaries of established areas are shown and delineated on the Planning Areas Map entitled “Official Land Use Plan” as amended and as certified by the City Clerk and on file with the Community Development Department, which are hereby adopted as the Official Land Use Plan of the City of Yucaipa.

 

(b)    Changes, additions, and amendments to the Official Land Use Plan shall be determined and defined from time to time by ordinance adopting Planning Areas Maps covering portions of the City of Yucaipa, each of which shall become, upon final adoption and certification by the City Clerk, a part of the Official Land Use Plan for the City.

 

(c)    Unless otherwise noted, planning areas boundaries shall extend to street right-of-way centerlines.

 

86.0120 Planning Areas Boundary Uncertainties.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any areas shown on the Planning Areas Maps, the following rules shall apply.

 

(a)    Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.

 

(b)    In subdivided property and where an area boundary divides a lot, the locations of such boundaries, unless indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.

 

(c)    Where any uncertainty exists, the Planning Commission shall determine the location of boundaries.

 

(d)    Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverts shall apply to such vacated or abandoned street or alley.

 

86.0125 Planning Areas Map Amendment.
The City Council may act upon changes in classification of property from one or more adopted planning areas to other adopted planning areas and upon amendments to the text of planning areas at any time.

 

CHAPTER 2 DUNLAP ACRES
86.0201 General Provisions.
Dunlap Acres should receive landscape treatments to enhance the rural village character of the area. Appropriate design elements include deciduous flowering trees, evergreen windrows, split-rail fencing and plantation-type tree massings. Large spreading canopy street trees should be used extensively to establish unity in the residential areas where a wide variety of architectural treatments prevail.

 

CHAPTER 3 CENTRAL CORE
86.0301 General Provisions.
The Central Core area is the most intensively used area of the City, and the landscape treatment here should reflect this condition. Landscape features should be arranged in more formal patterns than elsewhere in the City. Hardscape elements should also be more refined and more apparent. Design elements appropriate to this area include a variety of distinctive street trees, decorative lighting, enhanced paving, flowering accents and the generous use of evergreens to help set the theme for the rest of the City and frame the City’s picturesque mountain backdrop. Traditional plant material such as the cedars, Texas Umbrella, fruit trees, Date Palms, California Pepper, Eucalyptus and Juniper which have been established in the older areas of the Central Core area should be preserved whenever possible and reinforced with similar plantings.

 

CHAPTER 4 WILDWOOD CANYON
86.0401 General Provisions.
Wildwood Canyon has a strong existing natural scenic quality which should be enhanced and reinforced with naturalistic landscaping. Oaks, sycamore, native shrubs and ground covers and rock outcroppings are appropriate for this area. Man-made elements should be rustic in appearance and kept to a minimum.

 

 

CHAPTER 5 NORTH BENCH
86.0501 General Provisions.
North Bench is an area of large, estate-type residential use. This is compatible with the transitional landscape theme for the area. The transitional concept attempts to create a zone between the naturally landscaped mountains north and east of the City and the more domesticated landscapes of the Central Core and Dunlap Acres. Design elements in the North Bench area should include flowering deciduous trees and vertical coniferous evergreens, as well as rustic fencing and hardscape, but with a distinctly untamed, naturalistic appearance.

DIVISION 7 GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
87.0101 Intent.
The provisions of this Division are intended to specify design standards that generally apply to all land use districts. The standards of this Division elaborate upon and otherwise augment the development standards specified by individual land use districts.

 

87.0105 Modification of Standards.
The provisions of this Division shall prevail should they conflict with the provisions of a land use district, a planning area, or a Specific Plan, unless such district, area, or plan standard specifically overrides or modifies the provisions of this Division by specific reference. An overlay district, Planned Development, or Variance may modify the provisions of this Division.

 

CHAPTER 2 DEDICATIONS AND STREET IMPROVEMENTS
87.0205 Installation of Street Improvements.
Prior to Final Inspection of any building, structure, or improvement resulting in an increase or change of vehicular traffic such that the construction of street improvements are necessary for the purposes of protecting public safety and health, the installation of street improvements may, at the discretion of the City Engineer, be required in accordance with the current adopted City standards. “Street improvements” include any or all curb and gutter, sidewalks, concrete driveway approaches, drainage structures, paving, back-filling, and preparation of the road surface to rough grade for the placement of paving and other necessary improvements as determined by the City Engineer.

 

87.0210 Delayed Improvements—Bonding.
Such right-of-way dedication and installation of street improvements shall be required prior to the occupancy of the premises or commencement of the above referenced uses. Where it is impractical to install the required improvements at the time of the proposed development, an agreement in writing shall be entered into with the City Engineer to make such improvements, and a cash deposit, a surety bond, or such other form of surety as may be acceptable to the City Engineer in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the improvements as determined by the City Engineer, shall be posted with the City Engineer in lieu thereof to guarantee the installation of such improvements. In the latter event, the actual installation of street improvements may be delayed until written demand therefor is made by the City. If surety bonds are submitted, they shall be furnished by a survey company authorized to write such bonds in the State of California.

 

87.0215 Waiver of Requirements—Procedure.
(a)    Requirements for all improvements in the public right-of-way will be specified by the City Engineer. Request for a waiver of any of these requirements may be made to the City Engineer who shall have the authority to approve modifications or reject any of the requirements.

 

(1)    Prior to waiving or modifying any improvement requirement, the City Engineer shall find as follows:

 

(A)   That the waiver or modification of the required improvement would not adversely affect the public health and safety

 

(B)   That neither the improvements being waived nor the modifications authorized delete improvements which are a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area

 

(2)    Prior to waiving any improvement requirement, the City Engineer may require a written agreement from the applicant, agreeing to participate in any street improvement program for the area in which the property is located, whether privately or publicly initiated. This agreement shall be recorded with the County Recorder.

 

(3)    Appeal of Action by City Engineer

Any decision by the City Engineer pertaining to a request to waive or modify required improvements may be appealed to the Planning Commission.

 

87.0220 Office of Building and Safety Determination.
Before Final Inspection of any such building or structure, the Office of Building and Safety shall determine the following:

 

(a)    That all of the required dedications have been provided

 

(b)    That all of the required street improvements have either been installed or that a cash deposit, surety bond, or other form of acceptable surety in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the street improvements has been posted with the City Engineer to assure the installation of said street improvements.

 

 

CHAPTER 3 LOT AREA
87.0301 General.
Except as provided in this chapter, all parcels of land shall conform to the area regulations of the district in which the parcel is located.

 

87.0305 Permitted Substandard Lots.
Any legally created parcel having an area, width, or depth less than that required by an applicable standard set forth in the Development Code or applicable planning area may be used or built upon, provided the development otherwise conforms to the requirements of this Code.

 

87.0315 Exceptions.
(a)    If two or more legally created parcels of land or portions thereof are being combined in order to create a building site which will more nearly meet the lot area requirements set forth in the Development Code or applicable planning area, the resulting parcel shall be deemed to have met the applicable area requirements.

 

(b)    Where a lot area or yard width or depth has been reduced by any government agency to not more than 25% below the minimum requirements of the Development Code or applicable planning area by condemnation, acquisition, or dedication for a road, drain, or other public purpose, including any dedication as a result of a redistricting, Variance, or Conditional Use Permit, the lot area existing before reduction shall be what counts for meeting the requirements of the Development Code or applicable planning area.

 

(c)    In computing the lot area of a lot which abuts upon one or more alleys, one-half the width of such alley(s) may be assumed to be a portion of the lot.

 

(d)    The subdivision of multiple-family dwellings and mobilehome parks that are the subject of an approved Conditional Use Permit shall not be held to the minimum area requirements of the designated land use district.

 

(e)    Lots to be used for the preservation of historic structures or land uses may have less than the minimum lot size for the district provided that the following conditions are met.

 

(1)    The lot’s structure and/or use has been or may be deemed historic by an incorporated, nonprofit historic preservation organization.

 

(2)    The site will not be used for human habitation nor generate sewage effluent unless it is served by common sewage facilities or contains at least 40,000 square feet and the facilities meet the approval of the Community Development Department.

 

(3)    The lot owner will grant an easement in perpetuity to the City of Yucaipa or other governmental body empowered to accept such easement, restricting further development of the site to nonhistoric preservation purposes.

 

87.0320 Multiple-Family Residential Density Limits.
The number of units allowed on a parcel located in a multiple-family land use district which specifies the total net lot area per dwelling unit shall be calculated by dividing the total gross area of the lot in square feet by the figure before the district designation. Fractional units of 50% or greater shall be rounded to the next higher number.

 

87.0325 Aliquot Part or Metes and Bounds Subdivisions.
Metes and Bounds divisions may have actual parcel areas that are 10% less than those required by the applicable land use district where the parcels have topographical constraints or where the parcels of land are created by aliquot part division.

 

87.0330 Measurement of Lot Dimensions.
All required lot widths, whether on rectangular, pie-shaped, or other irregular lots, are measured at the required building setback line. On any irregularly shaped lot, the required lot dimensions other than lot width must be satisfied by the average dimensions of the lot.

 

87.0340 Lot Area Calculations.
Minimum lot area requirements established by this Code shall be calculated as follows.

 

(a)    Less than One Acre

Where a Development Code Standard specifies a minimum lot area requirement that is less than one acre, the lot area shall be that area included within the perimeter of the legal boundaries of the subject property, exclusive of any area within abutting planned rights-of-way.

 

(b)    One Acre or Greater

Where a Development Code Standard specifies a lot area requirement that is one acre or greater, the lot area shall be that area included within the perimeter of the legal boundaries of the subject property, inclusive of that area within the planned rights-of-way up to the centerline, not to exceed 60 feet from the legal boundary of the lot.

 

 

CHAPTER 4 HEIGHT REGULATIONS
87.0401 General Provisions.
The maximum structural height development standards established by the land use districts may be increased as specified by this chapter, provided such increase does not conflict with airport safety regulations or approved conditions of approval.

 

87.0405 Permitted Structural Height Increases.
(a)    Single Dwelling

Single dwellings in land use districts that impose a height limitation of 35 feet or less may exceed the height limit by up to 25 feet when two side yards of at least 20 feet are provided.

 

(b)    Institutional Structures

Institutional buildings in land use districts that impose a height limitation of 35 feet or less may exceed the 35-foot height limit by up to 25 feet when the required front, side, and rear yards are increased an additional one foot in excess of minimum requirements for each four feet in height above 35 feet.

 

(c)    Miscellaneous Structures

The maximum structure height specified in a land use district may be exceeded by no more than 50% for the following structures, subject to an approved Land Use Compliance Review by the Building Official.

 

(1)    Cupolas, domes, skylights, and gables

 

(2)    Ornamental towers and spheres

 

(3)    Church steeples and towers

 

(4)    Flag poles

 

(5)    Birdhouses

 

(6)    Residential chimneys, flues, smokestacks, and enclosures

 

(7)    Mechanical equipment and its screening

 

(8)    Elevator housings

 

(9)    Bulkheads and skylights

 

(10)  Monuments

 

(11)  Barns, silos, grain elevators, windmills, and other farm buildings or structures in Rural Conservation or Agricultural Districts

 

(12)  Noncommercial antennae up to 65 feet in residential districts

 

(13)  Fire or parapet walls

 

(14)  Fire and hose towers

 

(15)  Stairway housing

 

(16)  Water tanks

 

(17)  Cooling towers, gas holders, smokestacks, or other structures in industrial districts which are required by permitted industrial processes

 

(18)  Windmills and solar energy collectors in residential or commercial districts

 

(19)  Water towers

 

(20)  Observation and carillon towers

 

(21)  Radio and television station towers

 

(22)  Distribution and transmission cables and towers

 

(23)  Outdoor theater screens

 

(24)  Sign spires

 

(25)  Penthouses

 

(26)  Other roof structures and mechanical appurtenances similar to those listed above

 

 

CHAPTER 5 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS
87.0501 General Provisions.
All required yards or court areas shall be open and unobstructed from finished grade or from such other specified level at which the yard or court is required, to the sky, except for structures allowed in yards or courts by the table in Section 87.0510. The architectural projections listed in Section 87.0510 must be attached to the principle building allowed on the lot.

 

Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent the construction of any allowed primary or accessory structure within the building envelope which is the lot area not included in any required yard or court.

 

87.0505 Clear Areas.
(a)    The projections listed in the table in Section 87.0510 may not, in any event, encroach on or into the following.

 

(1)    The Clear Sight Triangle required at traffic intersections

 

(2)    Within three feet of any lot line, dividing lots not in common ownership, except as noted in the table below

 

87.0510 Table of Projections into Yards and Courts.
 

Facilities

Front and Street Side

Yards and Courts

Interior Side Yards

Rear Yard

 

 

 

 

(a) Eaves; awnings, canopies, louvers, and similar shading devices; sills, cornices, planting boxes, cantilevered closet and bay windows on first floor similar features; skylights, flues and chimneys; similar architectural features

4 feet

2 feet

4 feet

(b) Evaporative coolers, air conditioner compressors, and pool equipment when screened from view

4 feet

2 feet

15 feet

(c) Propane tanks sited per Uniform Fire Code and Fire Hazard Design Standards specified by Chapter 9 of this Division

Not allowed

Not allowed

4 feet

(d) Attached patio roofs and similar residential structures having open, unwalled sides along not less than 50% of their perimeters, including top deck, with minimum 5-foot separation from rear lot line

4 feet

Not allowed

15 feet

(e) Breezeways and similar roofed passageways projecting from a residential building

4 feet

Allowed

2 feet

(f) Cantilevered or supported decks; and cantilevered bay windows, provided the total width of bay windows on any one story does not exceed 50% of the length of the wall containing them; bay windows are to have no liveable area except a bench seat

4 feet

3 feet

4 feet

(g) Roofed stairways, landings, corridors, and fire escapes that are enclosed

5 feet

3 feet

10 feet

(h) Porches, platforms, or stairways that are uncovered or landings of average height, not greater than 4 feet above required yard or court level, plus railings up to 4 feet high

4 feet

4 feet

10 feet

(i) Open storage of boats, R.V.’s, trailers, appliances and similar materials and temporary trash storage not within ten feet of structures

Not Allowed

Allowed

Allowed

(ii) Commercial trash bins for the temporary storage of trash on single-family residential land uses. Must be fully screened and accessible from driveway

Allowed subject to special permit

Allowed subject to special permit

Allowed subject to special permit

(j) Slides, clotheslines and similar equipment and radio or television masts or satellite dish antennas

Not Allowed

Not Allowed

Allowed

(k) Garages, carports, sheds and other detached, enclosed accessory buildings which occupy no more than 25% of yard

Not Allowed

Not Allowed

Allowed

 

 

 

 

(l) Unroofed parking and loading areas regulations

As specified by the parking regulations (87.0601 et seq.)

Allowed

Allowed

 

 

 

 

(m) Covered, underground or partially excavated structures, such as adjoining garages, fallout shelters, wine cellars, basements and public utility or telephone/cable TV vaults

Allowed, provided that the facilities do not extend more than 30 inches above the average finished grade level

 

 

 

 

 

 

(n) Fences, screening, safety guard rails, walls, and dense hedges along property lines

Allowed

Allowed

Allowed

 

 

 

 

(1) Industrial Land Use Districts.

6 feet maximum height

10 feet maximum height

10 feet maximum height

 

 

 

 

(2) Commercial Land Use Districts.

4 feet maximum height

10 feet maximum height

10 feet maximum height

 

 

 

 

(3) All Other Land Use Districts.

4 feet maximum height

6 feet maximum height

6 feet maximum height

 

Fence heights in excess of these standards may be allowed by an approved Conditional Use Permit or Variance or when required by the City for reasons of the health and safety of the general public. In the RC and RL Land Use Districts, open fences may go up to a maximum of five feet in the front yard and street side yards.

 

Facilities

Front

Yards

Street Side

Courts

Interior

Side Yards

Rear

Yard

 

 

 

 

 

(o) Trees, shrubs and landscaping, other than dense hedges with a screening effect, sculpture and similar decorations; flagpoles; unroofed paving; driveways; walkways, and utility poles and lines located along property lines no closer than one foot from property line.

Allowed

Allowed

Allowed

Allowed

 

 

 

 

 

(p) Signs

Allowed, subject to Sign Design Standards

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(q) Swimming pools, spas no closer than five feet to any property line

Not Allowed

Allowed

Not Allowed

Allowed

 

(Amended by Ord. 253 § 12, 2006)

 

 

 

CHAPTER 6 PARKING REGULATIONS
87.0601 General Provisions.
(a)    Off-Street Parking Location

The required parking spaces shall be located on the same site with the main use or building, on premises contiguous thereto, or in a location and developed in accordance with a plan approved by the Planning Agency, or the Building Official subject to Land Use Compliance Review. Property within the ultimate right-of-way of a street or highway shall not be used to provide required parking or loading facilities.

 

(b)    Change in Use

When the occupancy or use of any premises is changed to a different use, parking to meet the requirements of this section shall be provided for the new use or occupancy.

 

(c)    Increase in Use

When the occupancy or use of any premises is altered, enlarged, expanded, or intensified, additional parking to meet the requirements of this section shall be provided for the enlarged, expanded, altered, or intensified portion only.

 

(d)    Two or More Uses

Where two or more uses are located in a single building or on a single lot, required parking shall be provided for each specific use.

 

87.0605 Minimum Design Standards.
(a)    Each required parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide by 19 feet long, with adequate provisions for ingress and egress by a standard, full-size passenger vehicle. This standard is applicable to all uses, including single-family residential, except where compact car spaces have been authorized. If wheel stops are installed in parking spaces, the distance from the end of the space to the rear of the wheel stop shall not exceed two feet.

(1)    An approved Land Use Compliance Review or Conditional Use Permit application may authorize up to 25% of the required parking for multiple residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional uses to be allocated to compact car parking spaces.

 

(2)    Compact car parking spaces shall be not less than 7.5 feet wide, nor less than 15 feet long.

 

(3)    Compact car spaces should be grouped in separate areas unless individual spaces are utilized for tree conservation purposes.

 

(4)    All compact car parking spaces shall be marked and/or posted with signs stating “Compact Cars Only.”

 

(b)    The parking area shall be designed so that a car entering the parking area shall not be required to enter a street to move from one location to any other location within the parking area or premises.

 

(c)    Parking and maneuvering areas shall be so arranged that any vehicle entering a vehicular right-of-way can do so traveling in a forward direction.

 

(d)    Where curbs and gutters do not exist and where vehicular access to the private property is not restricted by barriers, head-in parking shall not be permitted.

 

(e)    All off-street parking facilities shall be designed to limit access to private property from streets and highways to a minimum number of standard driveways, per the City Engineer specifications.

 

(f)    All parking area lighting shall reflect light and glare away from public thoroughfares and any adjacent residences.

 

(g)    Individual parking stalls shall be clearly striped and permanently maintained with double or hairpin lines on the surface of the parking facility, with the two lines being located an equal nine inches on either side of the stall sidelines. Arrows shall be painted on paving to indicate the direction of traffic flows.

 

(h)    Minimum Aisle Widths

 

(1)    One-Way Traffic

One-way access drives leading to aisles within a parking area shall be a minimum width of 12 feet, and within the aisles as follows.

 

Parking Stall Angle

Minimum Aisle

 

 

Parallel (0)

12 feet

1 - 45

14 feet

46 - 60

17 feet

61 - 90

24 feet

 

(2)    Two-Way Traffic

The aisles and the two-way access drives leading to aisles within a parking area shall be a minimum width of 24 feet.

 

87.0610 Parking and Loading Area Requirements General.
(a)    Every parcel of land hereafter used or maintained for residential parking, public parking, private parking, new car sales lots, used car sales lots, mobilehome, camper or trailer sales lots, boat sales lots, or other uses of a similar nature shall be improved as follows, including loading spaces and access drives.

 

(1)    Every institutional, commercial, industrial, or special use established or erected on land which abuts upon a street or an alley shall have one permanently maintained loading space of not less than 10 feet in width, 20 feet in length and 14 feet clear in height, for each 5,000 square feet of building floor area provided, however, that not more than four such spaces shall be required per use. An approved Conditional Use Permit may allow adjoining uses to share loading areas where appropriate.

 

(2)    The required off-street parking and loading areas and access drives shall be surfaced with a minimum of two inches of A.C. paving or plant-mix surfacing, in accordance with City Engineering Department specifications.

 

(3)    Truck terminals or yards and motor vehicle storage/impound facilities shall be provided with a dustproofed surface of slag, crushed rock, or the equivalent thereof.

 

(4)    Nonresidential parking areas which abut residential land use districts shall be separated therefrom by a solid fence or masonry wall six feet in height, measured from finished grade of parking lot, provided such fence or wall, from the front property line to a depth equal to the required front yard on the abutting residentially classified property, shall be four feet in height, measured from finished grade of parking lot and provided where no fence or wall is erected along any boundary of such parking area abutting upon a street, a suitable concrete curb or barrier not less than six inches in height shall be securely installed and maintained.

 

(5)    The number of parking spaces required for the handicapped for multifamily residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, and public uses, is established as follows.

 

Total # of Parking Spaces Required

# of Handicapped Parking Spaces

 

 

1 - 25

1

26 - 50

2

51 - 75

3

76- 100

4

101 - 150

5

151 - 200

6

201 - 300

7

301 - 400

8

401 - 500

9

501 - 100

2 Percent of Total

Over 100

20 Plus 1 for each 100 or fraction over 1001

 

(A)   Size of Parking Space for Handicapped

If only one space is provided, it shall be 17 feet wide and outlined to provide a nine foot parking area and a eight foot loading/unloading area. When more than one space is provided, in lieu of providing a 17-foot wide space for each parking space, two spaces can be provided within a 26-foot wide area lined to provide a nine foot parking area on each side of a eight foot loading and unloading area in the center. The minimum length of each parking space shall be 19 feet.

 

The arrangement and design of these spaces shall be subject to Chapter 2-71 of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code, and they shall be identified as required in Section 22511.8 of the California State Vehicle Code. Additional spaces shall be provided where usage indicates a greater need, or where a higher than normal percentage of handicapped persons is anticipated to use the parking facility.

 

(B)   Handicapped parking spaces shall be located as near as practical to a primary entrance to a single building or shall be located to provide for safety and optimum proximity to the entrances of the greatest incidence of use when more than one building is served by the parking lot. Such spaces shall be located so that a handicapped individual is not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked cars other than his own. Pedestrian ways which are accessible to the physically handicapped shall be provided from each such parking space to related facilities, including curb cuts or ramps as needed. Ramps shall not encroach into any parking space.

 

(8)    Except as otherwise provided by this Code, the required parking area shall not be used for any purpose other than the temporary parking of motor vehicles during the operating hours of the supporting primary land use.

 

(9)    Parking area notices are not to exceed six square feet in area and five feet in height and may be located in any district at the entrance or exit of a parking area. Such notices may contain the name of the owner or occupant of the property and any combination of the following words and symbols only: Parking, Park Here, Enter Here, Entrance, Exit, Do Not Enter, Stop, Private Parking, Public Parking, Customers Only, Handicap Parking, no parking directional arrow, and Tow Away notice. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 24, 2001)

 

87.0615 Business and Commercial Uses.
(a)    General business, except as herein specified: one parking space for each 250 square feet of building floor area; a minimum of four parking spaces shall be provided for each use.

 

(b)    Amusement enterprises, commercial recreation, and similar uses such as shooting ranges, race tracks, miniature golf course, pitch and putt courses, parks and zoos: one parking space for each four persons using or attending the facilities.

 

(c)    Automobile sales, boat sales, mobilehome sales, retail nurseries, and other open uses not in a building or structure: one parking space for each 2,000 square feet of open area devoted to display or sales, provided, however, that where such area exceeds 10,000 square feet, only one parking space need be provided for each 5,000 square feet of such area in excess of the first 10,000 square feet contained in such area.

 

(d)    Bowling alleys and billiard halls: five parking spaces for each bowling lane and two parking spaces for each billiard table.

 

(e)    Chapels and mortuaries: one parking space for each three fixed seats and for every 20 square feet of seating area where there are no fixed seats, all to be within the main chapel, and one parking space for each 400 square feet of floor area outside the main chapel; 24 linear inches of bench or pew shall be considered a fixed seat.

 

(f)    Child care centers: one parking space for each employee or teacher and one parking space for each five children that the facility is designed to accommodate.

 

(g)    Children’s homes: one and one-half parking spaces for each employee on the largest shift.

 

(h)    Churches: one parking space for each four fixed seats or for every 25 square feet of seating area within the main auditorium where there are no fixed seats; 24 linear inches of bench or pew shall be considered a fixed seat.

 

(i)     Dance halls: one parking space for each 20 square feet of dance floor area, and one parking space for each three fixed seats and for each 20 square feet of seating area where there are no fixed seats.

 

(j)     Golf courses and driving ranges, but not to include miniature golf courses: four parking spaces per hole on all golf courses, and one parking space per tee for driving ranges.

 

(k)    Hospital: one parking space for each two patient beds, and one parking space for each staff member and employee on the largest shift.

 

(l)     Medical offices, clinics, veterinary hospitals: five parking spaces for each doctor or dentist.

 

(m)   Offices, banks, building and loan associations, business and professional uses: one parking space for each 250 square feet of floor area; a minimum of four such parking spaces shall be provided.

 

(n)    Organization camps: one and one-half parking spaces for each staff member or employee.

 

(o)    Restaurants, including drive-ins, cafés, night clubs, taverns, and other similar places where food or refreshments are dispensed: one parking space for each three seats and for every 50 square feet of floor area where seats may be placed; a minimum of 10 parking spaces shall be provided.

 

(p)    Skating rinks, ice or roller: one parking space for each three fixed seats and for each 20 square feet of seating area where there are no fixed seats, and one parking space for each 250 square feet of skating area; 24 linear inches of bench shall be considered a fixed seat.

 

(q)    Large residential care facilities and boarding houses: one parking space for each three residents based on the resident capacity of the home as listed on the required license or permit, plus one parking space for each staff member and employee who will be on-site during the largest shift; these parking requirements apply regardless of whether the use exists in a residential or commercial zoning district.

 

(r)    Motels and hotels: one parking space for each guest room; these parking requirements apply regardless of whether the use exists in a residential or commercial zoning district.

 

(s)    Bed and breakfast lodges: in addition to the required parking standards for residential uses, one parking stall 19 feet in length and nine feet in width shall be provided on-site for each guest room. Such additional parking spaces shall comply with the location and design standards established by the applicable Land Use District. These parking requirements apply regardless of whether the use exists in a residential or commercial zoning district. Neither on-street parking nor tandem parking shall be used to satisfy this on-site parking requirement. Additional parking spaces may be required when deemed necessary by the reviewing authority.

 

(t)     Commercial swimming pools and swimming schools: one parking space for each 500 square feet of water surface area; a minimum of 10 parking spaces shall be provided.

 

(u)    Theaters, auditoriums, stadiums, sport arenas, gymnasiums, and similar places of public assembly: one parking space for each four fixed seats and for every 24 square feet of seating area where there are no fixed seats. (Amended by Ord. 345 § 13, 2016)


87.0620 Educational Uses.
(a)    Schools, accredited general curriculum, kindergarten through grade nine: one parking space for each staff member, faculty member, and employee.

 

(b)    Schools, accredited general curriculum, grades 10 through 12, colleges and universities, business and professional schools: one parking space for each five students plus one parking space for each staff member, faculty member, and employee.

 

(c)    Special schools or trade schools: one parking space for each three students plus one parking space for each staff member, faculty member, and employee.

 

87.0625 Industrial Uses.
Industrial uses of all types, including warehouses or buildings used exclusively for storage purposes, wholesale houses, and distributors and public utility facilities including, but not limited to, electric, gas, water, telephone, and telegraph facilities not having business offices on the premises: one parking space for each employee on the largest shift or one parking space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater, and one parking space for each vehicle operated or kept in connection with the use.

 

87.0630 Residential Uses.
(a)    Dwellings, including multiple dwellings: two parking spaces on the same site with the main building for each dwelling unit; such parking spaces shall be located to the rear of the front setback line, except that in mountain areas the parking spaces may be located within the setback areas; tandem parking shall be prohibited except in mountain areas.

(b)    Mobilehome parks: two parking spaces (which may be in tandem) on each mobilehome lot; there shall also be established and maintained within each mobilehome park one parking space for each 10 spaces or fraction thereof within the mobilehome park, for visitor use.

 

(c)    Single-family detached condominiums: each two bedroom or larger dwelling unit shall be provided with two parking spaces within a fully enclosed garage; plus two additional open parking spaces for each four bedroom unit, and one additional open parking space for each two or three bedroom unit; and guest parking shall be provided at one-half open parking space for each dwelling unit. (Added by Ord. 253 § 2, 2006; amended by Ord. 345 § 14, 2016)

 

 

CHAPTER 7 SIGN REGULATIONS
87.0701 Intent.
The provisions of this chapter establish general regulations for the use of signs and other exterior advertising formats within the City of Yucaipa. Additional standards and regulations may be adopted as part of a land use district. Also, it is the intent of this chapter to recognize that the eventual elimination of existing signs that do not conform with the provisions of this Code is as important as is prohibiting new signs that would violate these regulations.

 

Sign provisions are established to safeguard and enhance property values, to protect public and private investment in buildings and open spaces, to improve the appearance of the City as a place in which to live and work, and as an attraction to nonresidents who come to visit or trade; to encourage sound signing practices as an aid to business, and to provide information to the traveling public; to prevent excessive and confusing sign displays; to reduce hazards to motorists and pedestrians, and to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.

(Amended by Ord. 168 § 2, 1997)

 

87.0705 General Provisions.
(a)    No person, business, organization, or any entity of any kind whatsoever shall erect, install, construct, maintain, or allow any sign regulated by this chapter in the City of Yucaipa without first obtaining appropriate permits and registration. Such signs shall be erected, installed, constructed, and maintained in conformance with the provisions of this Code and any applicable plan.

 

 

(b)    All signs and their components shall be regularly maintained and kept in good repair and appearance. If a sign has broken or missing panels or components, visible rust, exposed wiring, badly faded or missing lettering, peeling paint, or is torn or tattered, it shall be removed or repaired within 30 days, following written notice of such condition by an authorized City official.

 

(c)    Except for time and temperature components and electronic message signs, signs may only be lit by steady, stationary, shielded light directed only at the sign, by light inside the sign, and by direct neon lighting. The glare from such luminous source shall not exceed one half (0.5) footcandle.

 

(d)    No sign or any portion thereof shall extend over a property line onto an adjacent property, public right-of-way, or public property.

 

(e)    No sign shall interfere with a driver’s or pedestrian’s view of public rights-of-way or in any other manner impair public safety, or interfere with the safe operation of a motor vehicle on public streets. This includes, but is not limited to, the driver’s view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic.

 

(f)    All signs shall comply with the provisions of the Development Code regarding clear sight triangles which include the following.

 

(1)    There shall be no monument signs allowed within a clear sight triangle.

 

(2)    There shall be no more than two posts or columns, each with a width or diameter no greater than 12 inches, within a clear sight triangle.

 

(3)    When a freestanding sign is located within a clear sight triangle, the lower edge of the sign face shall be at least eight feet above grade.

 

(g)    No sign shall be attached to or painted on trees, shrubs, or rocks.

 

(h)    No sign shall be attached to or painted on a public utility pole or street light or placed on any public property.

 

(i)     No more than two faces of a single sign may be viewable at one time from one place.

 

(j)     The height of all signs shall be measured along the leading edge of the sign and shall be measured from the finished grade of the ground below such leading edge to the top of the sign, except that freestanding signs shall be measured from grade or the surface of the adjacent roadbed, whichever yields the greater sign height. The maximum height of any accessory freestanding sign shall be 25 feet. A more restrictive maximum sign height standard may be specified by this chapter or the provisions of the applicable land use district or overlay district. The height of a monument sign shall be measured from the top of the supporting pedestal, base, berm, or similar support that does not exceed a height of two feet above grade. The pedestal or base shall be constructed of long-lasting, non-deteriorating decorative material such as brick, stone, or decorative concrete, or landscaped berm.

 

(k)    Where a maximum overall sign area is specified, the sum of the areas of all wall, roof, or display sign faces shall be calculated in accordance with the provisions of this section.

 

(l)     Where a ratio of building frontage to sign area is used, the building frontage shall be the linear dimension of the building foundation or base which is adjacent to the street right-of-way, or which is the main entrance to such building when the building is not adjacent to the street right-of-way.

 

(m)   Where a ratio of building frontage to sign area is used, separate attached signs are permitted on each building frontage, provided that this ratio and the maximum total area and total number of attached signs provided for within the land use district is not exceeded.

 

(n)    The area of any single sign shall not exceed 200 square feet and shall be calculated as follows.

 

(1)    Except as otherwise provided by this chapter or the provisions of a land use district, decorative trim six inches or less in width immediately surrounding the perimeter of a sign, pole covers not exceeding 24 inches in width, and roofs attached immediately above the top of the sign which do not exceed 24 inches in height, nor 12 inches in width beyond the width of each side of such sign face, shall not be included for the purposes of calculating sign area, unless such decorative trim is part of, is associated with, or implies the commercial, noncommercial, or political message that is being displayed.

 

(2)    The maximum area allowed for each face of the following signs shall be equal to the maximum sign area allowed by the applicable land use district or this chapter.

 

(A)   Single face signs

 

(B)   Double face signs, as measured on the largest single face

 

(C)   V-shaped signs with an acute or right angle between the sign faces on the side away from the right-of-way to which the sign is oriented

 

(3)    The maximum area allowed for any one sign face of the following signs shall be 75% of the maximum sign area allowed by the applicable land use district or this chapter. The total area of all such sign faces shall not exceed the maximum sign area allowed by the applicable land use district or this chapter.

 

(A)   Signs with more than two faces

 

(B)   Signs with more than one face oriented in the same direction

 

(C)   V-shaped signs with an obtuse angle greater than 90 degrees and less than 180 degrees between the sign faces on the side away from the right-of-way to which the sign is oriented

 

(4)    The area of a figure or other irregular or three-dimensional display used for advertising purposes shall be computed by enclosing the entire area within parallelograms, triangles, or circles in a size sufficient to cover the entire area and computing only the maximum single display surface which is visible from any ground position at one time.

 

(5)    Any sign which includes an automatic time or temperature display shall be given a bonus of 30% increase in area over the maximum area allowed by a land use district or this chapter. This bonus area shall only be utilized for the time or temperature display. Such bonus area shall not exceed a maximum of 50 square feet.

 

(6)    Animals, man-made objects, or natural features which are part of or incorporated into the design of the sign, and are associated with or imply the commercial, noncommercial, or political message that is being displayed, shall be calculated as part of the total sign face area.

 

(7)    The area of a monument sign shall be calculated by using only the area devoted to display of a commercial, noncommercial, or political message.

 

(o)    Unless otherwise specified by this chapter or a land use district, on lots 60 feet wide or greater, a maximum of one freestanding sign is permitted per lot, per frontage, except where the area of a second freestanding sign is less than 75 square feet or except where it is separated from all other freestanding signs, including those on adjacent lots, by at least 100 feet. No more than 10% of the view of an existing sign face, as viewed from the edge of the abutting paved roadway for 10% of the distance from the sign face up to 100 feet from such existing sign face, shall be obstructed by any new freestanding sign. In no instance shall any portion of a new freestanding sign structure, erected after November 1987, be closer than 10 feet to any existing sign.

 

(p)    Where it is determined that vegetation will obstruct the visibility of more than 10% of the face of such a proposed sign, as viewed from the edge of the abutting paved roadway for 10% of the distance up to 750 feet away from the proposed sign face, the following shall be submitted prior to issuance of a building permit.

 

(1)    Statement of Intent

The sign owner shall submit a statement indicating what vegetation will be cut, trimmed, and/or left undisturbed.

 

(2)    Acknowledgement Letter

The sign owner shall submit a letter from any affected agency or property owner, where trees are proposed to be cut or trimmed, authorizing such removal or trimming operation.

 

(3)    Where vegetation is authorized to be removed to accommodate visibility of a sign on a publicly owned right-of-way, then such remaining vegetation shall be enhanced by the planting of one specimen tree or plant of the same or similar species for each such tree or plant removed. This shall be accomplished prior to the final building permit inspection for the proposed sign. Such specimen plants shall be planted along the same roadway as close as botanically sound, but not in such a manner as to obstruct the proposed sign during the life of such tree or plant. The applicant shall obtain permission from the responsible agency or property owner for such plantings prior to the issuance of the building permit and shall maintain such vegetation after planting for a period of six months or until the plant is self sustaining, whichever is longer. This requirement shall be modified or waived by the Building Official where it is determined that an alternate mitigation measure is acceptable or where compliance is not practicable.

 

(q)    An accessory sign, as allowed by this Code, may be mounted on the same sign structure as a primary freestanding sign, provided that such accessory sign shall have a maximum area that is no more than 50% of the area of the primary sign face on the same sign structure, and provided that the maximum total area and height allowed within a land use district is not exceeded.

 

(r)    The following information shall be clearly legible and in a conspicuous place on each sign.

 

(1)    Every accessory sign shall display the name of the maker and date of construction.

 

(2)    Every primary sign shall display the name of the sign owner, operator, and builder, and the State Outdoor Advertising Permit number, where required.

 

 

(3)    A City sign registration decal shall be displayed on all permanent accessory signs.

 

(s)    All freestanding signs which have an area 18 square feet or greater and/or a height of six feet or greater shall require a building permit prior to construction.

 

(t)     No part of any freestanding sign, including the footing, shall be located closer than one foot from any property line.

 

(u)    The leading edge or footing of a sign shall be located no closer than one foot from the existing right-of-way line.

 

(v)    When a freestanding sign is located within a street front or side yard setback area, the sign face shall be at least eight feet above grade.

 

(w)   A monument sign may be substituted for any freestanding sign permitted by the provisions of this Code or any applicable plan, provided such monument sign complies with the provisions of this chapter.

 

(x)    The maximum height of a monument sign located in a yard or street setback area shall be the height of an allowed wall or fence in the same yard or street setback area.

 

(y)    The height of a projecting sign shall not exceed the height of the structure to which it is attached and shall not project more than five feet from the supporting wall or be less than eight feet from grade.

 

(z)    A roof sign shall be mounted on the roof parallel to the ridge of the roof. Where the structure has flat roof, roof signs shall be mounted parallel to the wall facing the street. Maximum height of roof signs shall not exceed 25 feet above grade.

 

(aa)  Wall signs shall be attached flat against a wall of the building. Such signs shall project no more than 18 inches from the wall, and shall not project above the roof line or extend over a public sidewalk or right-of-way. (Amended by Ord. 168 § 2, 1997)

 

87.0710 Prohibited Signs.
The following signs are prohibited.

 

(a)    Signs having any animated, moving, or rotating parts

 

(b)    Signs attached to or painted on trailers or vehicles parked on private property for the purpose of gaining unauthorized sign area

 

(c)    Signs which make sounds

 

(d)    Signs which obscure, imitate, or otherwise limit the effectiveness of official traffic control signs or devices

 

(e)    Signs which display any statement or symbol of an obscene or immoral nature as to offend the public morals or decency

 

(f)    Banners and flags, except that each occupant of property may display not more than two flags or one banner per street frontage subject to an approved temporary flag/banner permit. Such banners and flags shall not exceed 15 feet in length and three feet in width. Banners and flags may be displayed on roof, wall, or fence areas only. A commercial banner or flag may not be displayed for more than 60 consecutive days, and shall not be displayed for a total of more than 180 days per calendar year. Occupants must obtain an annual permit from the City before erecting commercial banners or flags. The application for a permit shall include the following information: the number of banners or flags proposed, the size of the proposed banners or flags, the proposed location of the banners or flags on the property, and the time period for which the banners or flags will remain on display. If the applicant meets the criteria set forth in this section, the City shall issue an annual permit.

 

(g)    Tethered balloon(s) or other inflatables used to draw attention to a use or event

 

(h)    Signs with flashing neon elements or signs which have neon lighting on their support structures

 

(i)     Signs which are not effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light being directed at any portion of the traveled way or which are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle, or which otherwise interfere with any driver of a motor vehicle

 

(j)     Permanent primary signs which advertise or identify a business, function, establishment or product at a location other than the property on which such business or establishment is located or such product is manufactured or sold. Such signs may advertise political viewpoints, political campaigns, and other noncommercial messages. (Amended by Ord. 168 § 2, 1997; Ord. 295 § 1, 2010)

 

 

87.0715 Additional Signs.
The following signs shall comply with the requirements of this Code or any applicable plan.

 

(a)    Service station product price signs, provided such signs do not exceed 24 square feet in area per sign; one such sign shall be allowed per street frontage; any additional sign area shall be calculated as part of the total sign area allowed by the land use district

 

(b)    Drive-in restaurant menu boards, including those with speakers, provided each sign does not exceed 30 square feet; no more than two such signs shall be permitted per site

 

(c)    Any freeway oriented primary sign(s) identifying a City or unincorporated community, provided that such signs only display the name, surname, or slogan of such City or community and conform to the size-setback schedule for freeway oriented accessory signs specified by Subsection 87.0730

 

(d)    Temporary signs for garage sales provided such signs shall not be displayed for more than two weeks in any six-month period

 

(e)    Any noncommercial sign shall be permitted in any Land Use District wherever a commercial or residential sign is allowed. Noncommercial signs shall comply with all permit requirements of the City Code applicable to the Land Use District in which they are located.

(Amended by Ord. 168 § 2, 1997)

 

87.0720 Exempt Signs.
The following signs are exempt from the requirements of this Code and any applicable plan.

 

(a)    Signs, flags, banners, emblems, notices, or other noncommercial messages issued or endorsed by a constituted governmental body, public agency, court, person, or officer in performance of a public duty, including traffic or highway signs, railroad crossing signs, or similar regulatory or warning devices and legal notices, and any other public business or program

 

(b)    Holiday displays and decorations not to exceed 60 days per holiday

 

(c)    Signs located inside a building, courtyard, mall, or other similar structure, provided such signs are not conspicuously visible and readable from a public street or adjacent properties not under the same ownership

 

(d)    Utility company signs identifying conduits, cables, any dangerous condition, or providing other such similar notice

 

(e)    Memorial tablets or signs and historic markers

(Amended by Ord. 168 § 2, 1997)

 

87.0725 Primary Signs.
(a)    Primary Signs

The following primary signs are permitted in any land use district.

 

(1)    Primary Civic Signs

 

(A)   Primary civic signs which serve to identify a community are permitted in any land use district subject to a Land Use Compliance Review by the Building Official and the following.

 

(B)   Primary civic signs shall have a maximum area of 100 square feet and a maximum height of 15 feet, except that in those districts where accessory business signs are not permitted, primary civic signs shall have a maximum area of 32 square feet and a maximum height of 12 feet. In those districts where accessory business signs are permitted, the maximum height and area for a primary civic sign shall be the same as the permitted accessory business sign, unless otherwise specified by this chapter.

 

(b)    Temporary Primary Signs

The following signs shall be permitted in any land use district on a temporary basis, subject to the issuance of a Temporary Sign Permit, as follows.

 

(1)    Temporary Primary Political Signs

 

(A)   A temporary primary political sign is any sign that indicates any one or a combination of the following.

 

(I)    The name and/or picture of an individual seeking election or appointment to a public office

 

(II)   Relates to a forthcoming public election, initiative, or referendum

 

(B)   A temporary primary political sign is permitted in any land use district, subject to the following limitations.

 

(I)    Such political signs shall not be posted more than 45 days before an election. All such signs shall be removed within seven days after the same election.

 

(II)   Such political signs shall have a maximum area of eight square feet in residential land use districts and 32 square feet in all other land use districts, unless such sign is an accessory (e.g., campaign headquarters) or primary sign permitted by this chapter. Such political signs posted on private property must have the property owner’s permission. Signs posted on vacant property must have written consent of the property owner.

 

(III)  Such political signs shall not be erected within any street intersection, clear sight triangle, or at any location where the sign may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign.

 

(IV)  Such political signs shall not be nailed or affixed to any tree, fence post, or public utility pole and shall not be located in the public right-of-way, parkway, or on publicly-leased property.

 

(V)   Such political signs which have an adhesive backing shall not be affixed directly to any structure, and shall be affixed in such a manner that such signs are easily removed.

 

(VI)  Such political signs require a temporary political sign permit prior to the placement of temporary political advertising signs. Said permit shall be issued at no cost to the applicant, and it shall list the requirements of this section. It shall be issued to the applicant upon their signatures indicating their agreement to be bound by the provisions of this ordinance.

 

(2)    Temporary Primary Directional Signs

 

(A)   These directional signs are for each residential development project.

 

(B)   Where no approved Sign Location Plan exists, temporary primary directional signs for each residential development project or approved increment or phase thereof will be permitted subject to the issuance of a Temporary Use Permit and subject to the following.

 

(I)    A maximum of four signs not within the boundaries of the residential development project shall be permitted, with a maximum area of 32 square feet per sign.

 

(II)   A maximum of three signs are permitted within the boundaries of the residential development project. These signs are to be located as follows: one at the entrance and one at the exit of the residential development project, and one at the sales office site.

 

(III)  Signs allowed by this subsection may only state the name of the development, directions, and distance to the development, type of financing, price range, and the developer’s telephone number.

 

(IV)  Each sign location will be considered as an individual site.

 

(V)   Each sign shall be located at least 500 feet away from any other sign, unless it is determined by the Director of the Department of Planning that a closer spacing will better accomplish the intent of this section.

 

(VI)  Such signs may be located in front, side, or rear yards, but may not be located closer than five feet from the edge of the planned right-of-way.

 

(C)   Sign Location Plan

In areas where a Sign Location Plan has been approved, temporary directional primary signs shall be incorporated into sign structures designed to accommodate identifications of more than one residential development project, or approved increments thereof.

 

Such temporary primary directional signs shall comply with the following.

 

(I)    The site of each sign structure must be shown on an approved Sign Location Plan.

 

(II)   Each sign structure shall be constructed in accordance with elevations shown on an approved Sign Location Plan.

 

(III)  Each individual sign structure shall have no more than 100 square feet of total sign area. The average sign area for all signs approved by the Sign Location Plan shall be 64 square feet or less.

 

(IV)  New sign structures shall be located no closer than 500 feet from any existing sign structure.

 

 

(V)   Any one face of a sign structure shall include no more than one panel per residential development.

 

(VI)  In addition to the above requirements, a maximum of two separate primary signs may be individually approved per residential development as an amendment to the Sign Location Plan. Each sign shall be subject to the same design and location standards specified by subsection 87.0725(b)(2)(B).

 

(VII) All nonconforming signs on the proposed site shall be removed prior to the approval of a Sign Location Plan.

 

(VIII)       Where such alternate advertising displays are proposed to be placed within County road right-of-ways, City transportation encroachment permits shall be obtained prior to approval of the Sign Location plan.

 

(IX)  An approved Sign Location Plan may also approve the use of flags or other alternate advertising displays both on-site and off-site, provided the conditions of approval specify the type, maximum area, maximum height, maximum number, minimum spacing, time limitation, and maintenance requirements for such alternate advertising displays.

 

(X)   Temporary Use Permits issued for such primary signs and sign structures constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section may receive up to four annual renewals and time extensions or until all lots within subdivisions or units within a residential development using the sign structure have been sold, whichever occurs first.

(Amended by Ord. 168 § 2, 1997; Ord. 253 § 13, 2006)

 

87.0730 Accessory Signs.
Accessory advertising signs and structures shall be regulated by the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the applicable land use district. The following accessory signs are permitted in addition to those specified within a land use district.

 

(a)    Accessory Residential Signs

The following signs are permitted in any land use district that allows residential land uses.

 

(1)    Accessory residential signs are signs which give notice of the name and/or address of residential land uses on the same lot and/or the name of a resident thereof. Except as otherwise provided, accessory residential signs shall not exceed a total of six square feet in area per residential dwelling and shall not exceed six feet in height.

 

(2)    Accessory residential signs for multi-family structures shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.

 

(3)    Accessory residential signs shall also include signs which identify a residential development by name or give similar notice to identify a residential area or neighborhood. Each residential area or development shall be limited to a maximum of two permanent signs per principal entrance to the residential development. The maximum total sign area shall be 100 square feet per development, and all such individual signs shall not exceed a maximum height of six feet. Such signs shall not advertise the sales of lots or homes. These signs are permitted in any land use district which allows residential land uses.

 

(b)    Nonresidential Accessory Signs in Residential Land Use Districts

When a nonresidential use is allowed within a residential land use district, said use may be accompanied by one unlighted, single or double faced sign not to exceed six feet in height or 6 square feet in area.

 

(c)    Accessory Commercial/Industrial Complex Signs

 

(1)    A shopping center occupant located on the perimeter of a shopping center with street frontage may have one monument sign, subject to a Land Use Compliance Review, in addition to a wall, roof, or projecting sign. The additional sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area.

 

(2)    A shopping center occupant which backs onto or is located adjacent to a major arterial or a major or secondary highway may have an additional wall sign on the rear of the building, subject to a Land Use Compliance Review.

 

(3)    A shopping center complex abutting two street frontages of at least 150 feet each may have one additional monument sign, subject to a Land Use Compliance Review. However, the total cumulative square footage of all monument signs shall not exceed 100 square feet.

 

(4)    Freestanding or monument signs shall be permitted, subject to a Land Use Compliance Review, and shall be mounted in a landscaped planter at least two times the area of the sign. The planter shall contain a permanent operational irrigation system.

 

 

(5)    One roof or one projecting sign shall be permitted, subject to a Land Use Compliance Review, when the Building Official finds that an allowed accessory freestanding sign does not provide sufficient opportunity for adequate viewing.

 

(d)    Accessory Civic Signs

Accessory civic signs are signs which give notice of the name or service, or other function or operation, of a publicly owned land use type on the same lot, or which give notice of the address or conditions of use of a parking area or other facility serving such activity. Accessory civic signs are permitted in any land use district subject to the following limitations.

 

(1)    In those districts where accessory business signs are not permitted, accessory civic signs with a maximum area of 32 square feet and a maximum height of 12 feet are permitted, subject to a Land Use Compliance Review by the Building Official.

 

(2)    In those districts where accessory business signs are permitted, the maximum height and area for accessory civic signs shall be the same as that permitted for accessory business signs.

 

(e)    Temporary Accessory Signs

The following signs shall be permitted as accessory signs in any land use district on a temporary basis.

 

(1)    Accessory Realty Signs

 

(A)   Accessory realty signs are temporary accessory signs which pertain to the sale, lease, rental, or display of lots, buildings, or such facilities which exist or are in the process of being constructed or altered.

 

(B)   Accessory realty signs are permitted subject to following height and area limitations.

 

(I)    In those districts where accessory business signs are not permitted, the maximum area of an accessory realty sign shall be six square feet, and the maximum height shall be five feet. Such signs shall have a maximum height of four feet when placed within the front yard or side street yard setback areas.

 

(II)   In those districts where accessory business signs are permitted, the maximum area for an accessory realty sign shall be 50% of the allowable area permitted for the accessory business signs, but not more than 32 square feet. Permitted height for an accessory realty sign shall be the same as that permitted for an accessory business sign.

 

(2)    Accessory Development Signs

Accessory development signs are temporary accessory signs which announce future activities and facilities to be located on the site and which may identify the persons or firms engaged in the promotion, design, construction, or alteration of the facilities. Accessory development signs are allowed in any land use district subject to the issuance of a Temporary Use Permit.

 

(3)    Temporary Accessory Portable Signs

 

(A)   General Limitations

 

(I)    A maximum of one portable sign shall be permitted per business. The sign shall be directly related to the business frontage and shall be oriented to the main entrance to the business.

 

(II)   Buildings/businesses with freestanding signs shall not be permitted to have portable signs.

 

(III)  No objects shall be attached to a portable sign. This includes balloons, banners, merchandise, electrical devices, etc.

 

(IV)  Portable signs shall be removed at the daily close of business. These signs are prohibited while the business is closed.

 

(V)   Portable signs should be well-maintained.

 

(VI)  The maximum time period for display of an approved portable sign shall be 30 days no more than three times a year.

 

(B)   Design

 

(I)  A space for changeable copy may be incorporated into the design of portable signs. This area shall not exceed 30% of the total sign area and must be surrounded by a border. The alterable surface must be permanently attached to the sign and be comprised of washable/erasable materials.

Paper, poster board, bulletin boards, peg boards, and magnetic materials are not permitted.

 

(II)   All portable signs visible from both sides shall be double-sided.

 

(III)  Portable signs should function as visual enhancements and should be graphically oriented.

 

(C)   Content

 

(I)    Portable signs may contain the following text elements: the name of the business, the type of business, and/or the principal product(s) of the business.

 

(II)   Changeable copy shall not be restricted.

 

(D)   Size

 

(I)    The maximum allowable sign area for portable signs shall not exceed eight square feet. The sign shall not exceed four feet in height and two feet in width, including all structural elements.

 

(E)   Location

 

(I)    No portable signs shall be permitted in any public right-of-way or on public property.

 

(II)   Portable signs may be placed on private property as long as they are oriented to the main entrance.

 

(III)  No sign shall be placed in such a manner that it obstructs pedestrian or vehicular traffic or visibility.

 

(IV)  Portable signs shall not be located within eight feet of permanent pedestrian seating areas.

 

(V)   Portable signs shall be self-standing and shall not lean against or be attached to any tree, pole, or other fixture. Signs shall not be placed over grates, planters, etc.

 

(F)    Sign Approval Required

 

(I)    The type, size, location, and design of all signs and support structures shall be approved by the Community Development Department.

 

(II)   An application must be submitted for review and approval of all temporary portable signs.

 

(III)  Decisions made by the Planning Division staff may be appealed to the Planning Commission.

 

(f)    Freeway Oriented Accessory Signs

The following regulations shall apply to freestanding signs directly adjacent to a freeway or freeway right-of-way (including on- and off-ramps).

 

(1)    The maximum height of a freeway oriented accessory sign shall be twenty-five (25) feet, unless a taller sign is necessary to achieve visibility a minimum of three-tenths (3/10) of one (1) mile from at least one (1) approach to an off-ramp serving the center. A sign greater than twenty-five (25) feet may be constructed as determined by a flag test.

 

(2)    The maximum sign area of a freeway oriented accessory sign shall be two hundred (200) square feet.

 

(3)    Flag test for freeway oriented accessory signs shall be conducted as follows:

 

(A)   A flag or object no smaller than thirty-two (32) square feet shall be lifted vertically in the location of the proposed freeway freestanding sign, starting at a height of twenty-five (25) feet (measured from the bottom of the object).

 

(B)   City personnel shall be stationed at locations three-tenths (3/10) of one (1) mile from the beginning of the off-ramps directly serving the center for which the sign will be installed.

 

(C)   City personnel shall observe whether the object is visible at a height of twenty-five (25) feet. If the object is not visible, it shall be raised in ten (10) foot increments until it is visible from one (1) direction at a distance of three-tenths (3/10) of one (1) mile from the start of the offramp approach. If a greater height is needed for visibility from one of the off-ramp approaches, the Planning Commission may permit the greater height to be used if it is determined that visibility from that direction is needed.

 

 

(D)   The height established in subsection (C) shall be the maximum height of the sign, no greater than sixty (60) feet.

 

(E)   A detailed report shall be presented to City personnel documenting with photos, dimensions and text of the observations of the flag text.

 

(4)    No freeway oriented accessory sign shall be erected which would obscure another sign when viewed from the freeway.

 

(5)    No freeway oriented accessory sign shall be erected that will be closer than one hundred (100) feet from another freeway oriented accessory sign.

 

(6)    No more than one (1) freeway oriented accessory sign is permitted per complex.

(Amended by Ord. 168 § 2, 1997; Ord. 378 § 2, 2019)

 

87.0740 Enforcement.
(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person, business, organization, or any entity of any kind whatsoever to erect, install, construct, maintain, or allow to be erected, installed, constructed, or maintained, any sign in violation of this chapter, or any other provision of this Code. The City Attorney may specify in the accusatory pleadings that the offense shall be an infraction. All such remedies are herein stated to be cumulative and not exclusive.

 

(b)    The following signs are hereby declared to be public nuisances.

 

(1)    Any sign or advertising structure, including flags, unlawfully constructed, placed on, or unlawfully projecting over any public property including, but expressly not limited to any public right-of-way.

 

(2)    Any sign declared to be hazardous or unsafe by the Planning Agency, Building Official, or City Engineer.

 

(3)    Any sign erected, constructed, installed, or maintained in violation of the Development Code.

 

 

 

(c)    A City enforcement officer may, without notice, move, remove, and/or dispose of a sign or advertising structure that has been declared a public nuisance pursuant to Subsection 87.0740(b)(1) and (2). In addition, an enforcement officer may authorize any work required to correct a hazardous or unsafe condition.

 

(d)    A City enforcement officer shall charge the cost of moving, removing, disposing, correcting, storing, repairing, or working on a sign or sign structure to any one or all of the following, each of which shall be jointly and individually liable for said expense.

 

(1)    The permittee.

 

(2)    The owner of the sign.

 

(3)    The owner of the premises on which the sign is located.

 

(4)    The sign lessee or lessor.

 

(e)    The charge for expenses shall be in addition to any penalty for the violation. Recovery of the sign does not necessarily abrogate the penalty.

 

(f)    Signs made of paper, cardboard, lightweight plastic, or similar materials, which are removed, may be discarded immediately. All other removed signs shall be held no less than 30 days by the City, during which period it may be recovered by the owner upon paying the City for costs of removal and storage. If not recovered within the allowed 30-day period, the sign and structure is hereby declared abandoned and title thereto shall vest to the City.

(Amended by Ord. 168 § 2, 1997)

 

87.0750 Sign Registration.
(a)    All existing and new permanent signs, not to include temporary signs, established in conjunction with a commercial, industrial, private institutional, or commercial-agricultural business use shall be subject to a biennial sign registration requirement. A sign registration decal will be issued by the Community Development Department on applicable signs when permit is issued.

 

(b)    Verification of application for sign registration and plot plan approval by the Community Development Department shall be submitted prior to the issuance of any building permit for the installation, wiring, remodeling, or reconstruction of any sign or portion thereof which requires a building permit.

(Amended by Ord. 168 § 2, 1997)

 

87.0760 Amortization/Abatement.
(a)    General Requirements

A nonconforming sign, as defined by this Code, shall not be altered in any of the following ways.

 

(1)    Structurally altered to extend its useful life

 

(2)    Expanded

 

(3)    Re-established after damage or destruction of more than 75% of its value, as determined by the Building Official

 

(4)    No new sign shall be approved for a site, structure, building, or use that contains nonconforming signs, unless such nonconforming signs are removed or modified to conform with the provisions of this Code. No building permit shall be issued for any structures, building expansions, or new building construction on a site which contains nonconforming signs, unless all signs on the site are brought into conformance with this Code. This does not include interior alterations which do not substantially change the character or intensity of the site.

 

(b)    Accessory Sign Amortization

Every accessory sign not described in California Business and Professions Code subsection 5490 (b) and which does not comply with the provisions of this Code shall have the same nonconforming use rights as the on-site business use it advertises, and shall be removed at the time the nonconforming use is discontinued, pursuant to Section 84.0810(b) of this code. If a business or use is conforming, the non-conforming accessory sign shall be removed in accordance with the amortization provisions of Section 87.0760(c).

 

(c)    Removal and Relocation of Nonconforming Primary Signs

Nonconforming primary sign displays located in an area designated on the General Plan and designated as either agricultural or residential and located more than 660 feet from the edge of the right-of-way of a freeway or primary highway, which have copy not visible or intended to be read from such freeway or primary highway, shall be removed from the site without compensation in accordance with the following schedule. This amortization period shall commence upon receipt of written notice of nonconformance.

 

Fair Market Value on Date of Notice

Maximum Years Allowed

 

 

Under $1,999

3.0

$2,000 to $3,999

4.5

$4,000 to $5,999

6.0

$6,000 to $7,999

7.5

$8,000 to $9,999

9.0

$10,000 and over

10.5

 

The amounts provided in this section shall be adjusted each January 1st and after January 1, 1993, in accordance with the changes in building costs as indicated in the United States Department of Commerce Composite Cost Index for construction costs.

 

(d)    Hardship Cases

Under cases of extreme hardship and unusual circumstances, the Planning Commission shall have the authority to allow the retention of a nonconforming sign if the Commission specifically finds that extreme hardship and unusual circumstances exist.

 

The proponent of the request shall have the burden of clearly demonstrating that an extreme hardship and unusual circumstance exist and warrant the retention of the sign. The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing and shall find the following to be true prior to allowing retention of a nonconforming sign.

 

(1)    The site has a unique character or features that cause visibility problems.

 

(2)    The sign does not create a traffic hazard.

 

(3)    The sign does not create a visual blight to the community.

 

(4)    The sign does not adversely affect adjacent properties.

 

(5)    The sign is properly maintained and structurally sound.

 

(6)    No other signing alternative or design would be feasible or be able to provide reasonable signing in accordance with this Code.

 

If the Planning Commission finds that an extreme and unusual circumstance exists, but that the design or condition of the sign creates a visual blight, then the Commission can grant a relief from the amortization of the nonconforming sign with the condition that the sign be remodeled to a more aesthetic design.

 

The Building Official shall determine the fair market value in accordance with the latest material valuation schedules and send notice of the determined value to the owner. Any disagreement over the value shall be resolved under the appeal procedures set forth in this Code. Upon the expiration of the appeal period, the sign shall be an illegal use, subject to immediate removal.

 

(e)    Removal and Relocation of Nonconforming Accessory Signs

 

(1)    Nonconforming accessory signs described in California Business and Professions Code Subsection 5490 (b) located in an agricultural or residential land use district shall be removed from the site without compensation after the expiration of 15 years from the date the sign became nonconforming or from March 12, 1983, whichever is later. Upon the expiration of the amortization period, the sign shall be an illegal use subject to immediate removal. Nonconforming accessory signs described in California Business and Professions Code Subsection 5490 (b) and meeting one or more of the criteria in California Business and Professions Code Subsection 5497 (a) - (i) shall immediately be removed from the site without compensation.

 

(2)    Any legal nonconforming commercial accessory signs not described in Section 5490 (b) of the Business and Professions Code existing at the time this Title became effective may be continued, although such use does not conform with the provisions thereof, provided, however, that all such nonconforming signs and billboards and their supporting members shall be completely removed by their owners in accordance with the schedule set forth in Section 87.0760(c).

 

(f)    In the event that there is any inconsistency between this chapter and any other provisions of the City Code, then this chapter shall prevail.

(Amended by Ord. 168 § 2, 1997)

 

CHAPTER 8 GENERAL SETBACK REGULATIONS
87.0801 Introduction.
Except as provided in this chapter, all yards or setbacks shall be as set forth in the land use districts or zones.

 

87.0805 General Provisions.
(a)    Where setbacks are provided within a land use district, front yard setbacks shall mean distance from a road right-of-way unless otherwise specified within this section.

 

(b)    Where setbacks are provided within a land use district, side and rear yard setbacks are from adjacent lot lines unless otherwise specified within this section.

 

(c)    Yards or other open spaces required around an existing building or which are hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the yard provisions of a land use district shall not be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building.

 

(d)    Yards or required open space on an adjoining lot shall not be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected.

 

(e)    On through lots, front yards shall be provided on all street frontages.

 

(f)    If any future right-of-way line has been established by provisions of a specific ordinance, planning area, Specific Plan, or similar document, the measurement of the yard shall be made from the future right-of-way or future property line.

 

(g)    All street setbacks shall include provision for a minimum half-width of 25 feet for any valley right-of-way unless otherwise specified by provisions of a specific ordinance, planning area, Specific Plan or similar document.

 

(h)    Side yards on the street sides of corner lots require the same building setback as do front yards unless otherwise specified within the provisions of a land use district, ordinance, planning area overlay, Specific Plan or similar regulation.

 

(i)     When the side lines of a lot converge to a point or to a rear lot line narrower than 10 feet, for setback purposes the rear lot line is considered to be a line parallel to the front lot line measuring 10 feet between the two side lot lines. The rear yard depth is measured from the 10-foot line to the nearest part of the principal building on the lot.

 

(j)     For the purposes of side yard regulations, the following dwellings with common party walls shall be considered as one building occupying one lot: semi-detached two and four-family dwellings, row dwellings, group dwellings, and court apartments.

 

(k)    Street setback lines, as delineated on all Final Maps, Parcel Maps, and Records of Survey maps recorded in said City between March 1, 1948 and January 1, 1987, or on Composite Development Plans on file with the Office of Building and Safety shall be the street and yard setback distances required on the property within said Final Maps, Parcel Maps, or Records of Survey. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Development Code, any request to modify or deviate from a building setback line designated on a recorded map or final map shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 83.030905 regarding variances.

 

(l)     Any primary use structure which is constructed upon a portion of two or more lots which are held in a common contiguous ownership shall not be required to adhere to the yard setback requirements specified for those lot lines upon which the construction has taken place. All other requirements specified by this Code shall apply to this type of construction, including those requirements for distance between structures and required setbacks as measured from the combined perimeter boundary of the contiguous parcels.

 

(m)   Front street setback lines shall be established so wherever possible the yard width at such a setback line is at least the minimum width specified by the applicable land use district, unless otherwise allowed by this Code.

 

87.0810 Exceptions.
In computing the depth of a rear yard where such yard opens into an alley, one-half the width of such alley may be assumed to be a portion of the required rear yard.

 

 

87.0815 Clear Sight Triangles.
(a)    Adequate visibility for vehicular and pedestrian traffic shall be provided at clear sight triangles at all 90-degree angle intersections of public rights-of-way and private driveways, through the following measures.

 

(1)    There shall be no man-made visual obstruction in Clear Sight Triangles except by no more than two posts or columns, each with a width no greater than twelve inches.

 

(2)    There shall be no monument signs, walls, or fences allowed within a Clear Sight Triangle.

 

(b)    Clear Sight Triangles are right triangles which are measured as follows.

 

(1)    The 90-degree angle is formed by the intersection of either:

 

(A)   The intersection of the edges of two roadways as measured at the edge of their ultimate planned right-of-way; or

 

(B)   The intersection of the edge of a private driveway or alley and the edge of the ultimate planned right-of-way of an intersecting roadway.

 

(2)    The two 45-degree angles of a Clear Sight Triangle shall each be located as follows.

 

(A)   Roadway Intersections: 30 feet from the roadway intersection

 

(B)   Private Driveway or Alleyway: 10 feet from the intersection

 

 

CHAPTER 9 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
87.0901 Intent.
(a)    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to residential, institutional, commercial and industrial land uses.

 

(b)    Performance standards are designed to mitigate the environmental impacts of existing and proposed land uses within a community. Environmental impacts include noise, air quality, glare, heat, and waste disposal and runoff control. Performance standards protect the health and safety of workers, nearby residents, and businesses and prevent damaging effects to surrounding properties. (Amended by Ord. 253 § 14, 2006)

 

87.0905 Noise.
(a)    Noise Measurement

        Noise will be measured with a sound level meter which meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI Section SI4-1979, Type 1 or Type 2). Noise levels shall be measured using the “A” weighted sound pressure level scale in decibels (ref. pressure = 20 micronewtons per meter squared). The unit of measure shall be designated as dB(A). The Director of the Community Development Department shall be the noise control officer.

 

(b)    Noise Standards

 

(1)    The following table describes the noise standard for emanations from any source as it affects adjacent properties.

 


Noise Standards

 

 

 

Affected Land Use

Noise Level (Ldn)

Time Period

(receiving noise)

 

 

 

 

 

Residential

55 dBA

7am to 10pm

 

55 dBA

10pm to 7am

Professional

55 dBA

Anytime

Services

 

 

Other Commercial

60 dBA

Anytime

Industrial

70 dBA

Anytime

 

(2)    No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound at any location or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person which causes the noise level, when measured on any other property, either incorporated or unincorporated, to exceed any of the following levels.

 

(A)   The noise standard for that receiving land use [as specified in subsection (b) (1) of this section] for a cumulative period of more than 30 minutes in any hour

 

(B)   The noise standard plus 5 dBA for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour

 

(C)   The noise standard plus 10 dBA for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour

 

(D)   The noise standard plus 15 dBA for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour

 

(E)   The noise standard plus 20 dBA for any period of time

 

(c)    If the measured ambient level exceeds any of the first four noise limit categories above, the allowable noise exposure standard shall be increased to reflect said ambient noise level. If the ambient noise level exceeds the fifth noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under this category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level.

 

(d)    If the alleged offense consists entirely of impact noise or simple tone noise, each of the noise levels in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be reduced by 5 dBA.

 

(e)    Exempt Noises

 

(1)    The following sources of noise are exempt.

 

(A)   Motor vehicles not under the control of the industrial use

 

(B)   Emergency equipment, vehicles, and devices

 

(C)   Temporary construction, repair, or demolition activities between 7am and 7pm, except Sundays and Federal holidays

 

87.0910 Vibration.
(a)    Vibration Standard

No ground vibration shall be allowed which can be felt without the aid of instruments at or beyond the lot line, nor will any vibration be permitted which produces a particle velocity greater than or equal to two-tenths (0.2) inches per second measured at or beyond the lot line.

 

(b)    Vibration Measurement

Vibration velocity shall be measured with a seismograph or other instrument capable of measuring and recording displacement and frequency, particle velocity, or acceleration. Readings are to be made at points of maximum vibration along any lot line next to a lot within a residential, commercial, and industrial land use district.

 

(c)    Exempt Vibrations

 

(1)    The following sources of vibration are not regulated by this Code.

 

(A)   Motor vehicles not under the control of the subject use

 

(B)   Temporary construction, maintenance, or demolition activities between 7am and 7pm, except Sundays and Federal holidays

 

87.0915 Air Quality.
(a)    All required permits shall be obtained for equipment that may cause air pollution. Before such equipment may be constructed, plans and specifications must be submitted for approval. After completion of construction, the equipment will be evaluated for a “Permit to Operate” and the installation inspected and tested. Plants must be reviewed annually and whenever there is a change of ownership, the equipment is rented, changes are made, or the equipment is relocated.

 

(b)    Detailed rules for air containment emissions apply to, among others, hydrocarbons, oxides of nitrogen, sulfur dioxide, total suspended particulate (including fugitive dust), carbon monoxide, smoke, odor, combustion, containments, sulfur content of fuels, use of solvents, storage of organic liquids, and special regulations for certain industrial processes and equipment.

 

(c)    The Ringleman Chart, published by the United States Bureau of Mines, shall be the basic measure for the density of smoke or other visible emissions. Emissions as dark or darker than Ringleman No. 1 shall not be allowed for periods of or aggregating to more than three minutes in any one hour.

 

87.0920 Glare.
(a)    Glare levels shall be measured with a photoelectric photometer, following the standard spectral luminous efficiency curve adopted by the International Commission on Illumination.

 

(b)    Any activity producing glare in a Community Industrial or Regional Industrial District shall be carried on so that direct or indirect light from the source shall not cause glare above point five-tenths (0.5) foot candles when measured in a Residential District or lot.

 

87.0925 Heat.
Land uses in industrial districts shall not emit heat which would cause a temperature increase on any adjacent property in excess of 10 degrees Fahrenheit, whether the change is in the air, on the ground, or in any structure.

 

87.0930 Electrical Disturbances.
No activity or land use shall cause electrical disturbance that adversely affects persons or the operation of any equipment across lot lines and is not in conformance with the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.

 

87.0935 Fire Hazards.
This section establishes standards for storage of solid materials susceptible to fire hazards and flammable liquids and gases.

 

(a)    Combustible Solids

Land uses which include the storage of solid materials susceptible to fire hazards shall be subject to the following storage standards when established within the following Land Use Districts.

 

(1)    Regional Industrial (IR) Land Use District

 

(A)   Inside Storage

A building utilized for the storage, use, or manufacture of flammable solid materials shall be no less than 40 feet from any lot line and any other on-site buildings or shall adhere to standards specified in subsection 87.0935(a)(2) below.

 

(B)   Outside Storage

Outdoor storage of flammable solid materials shall be no less than 50 feet from any lot line and any other on-site buildings.

 

(2)    All other manufacturing or industrial uses legally established within any other land use district

The storage, use, or manufacture of highly flammable solid materials shall be done in enclosed spaces having fire resistance of no less than two hours and protected with an automatic fire extinguishing system.

 

(b)    Flammable Liquids and Gases

Land uses which involve the storage of flammable liquids and gases shall be subject to the following storage standards when established within the following land use districts.

 

(1)    Storage Capacity

The total storage capacity of flammable liquids and gases on any lot shall not exceed the following quantities and setbacks.

 

 

Land Use District

Max. Capacity

 

 

 

A. Liquids

Regional Industrial District (IR) All other manufacturing 60,000 gallons or industrial uses legally established within any other

120,000 gallons

 

 

 

B. Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG)

 

 

 

All manufacturing or industrial uses established in any land use district

Per S.B. County Code, Title 2, Division 3

 

 

 

 

All commercial uses legally established in any land use district

15,000 gallons per 20,000 gallons maximum aggregate total

 

 

 

 

All agricultural uses legally established in any land use district

15,000 gallons per and aggregate total

 

 

 

C. Gases, other than LPG

 

 

 

Regional Industrial District (IR)

300,000 SCF* above ground

 

 

600,000 SCF* below ground

 

 

 

 

All other manufacturing or industrial uses legally established within any other land use district

150,000 SCF* above ground 300,000 SCF* below ground

 

*SCF refers to Standard Cubic Feet at 60 degrees Fahrenheit and 29.92 inches Hg.

 

(2)    The San Bernardino County Code Title 2, Division 3, shall establish setback requirements for flammable liquids and gases.

 

(c)    LPG Siting Requirements

The following standards shall apply to the installation and maintenance of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) storage and distribution facilities for commercial, agricultural, manufacturing, or industrial uses in applicable land use districts allowing such uses. The County Code Title 2, Division 3, shall establish such standards for residential uses and residential land use districts.

 

(1)    Requirement for Conditional Use Permit

All LPG storage and distribution facilities, except those for residential uses, shall be subject to a Conditional Use Permit and subject to this section. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this section and the provisions of any land use district, including the requirement for Conditional Use Permit, the provisions of this section shall prevail and control.

 

(A)   The Planning Agency shall notify the applicable local fire authority of any Conditional Use Permit request to establish an LPG storage and distribution facility.

 

(B)   The applicable local fire authority shall provide an analysis and report to the Planning Agency in accordance with the County Code Title 2, Division 3. This report shall address the following issues, as well as any other relevant issues.

 

(I)            Topographical Conditions

 

(II)           Nature of Occupancy

 

(III)          Proximity to Buildings

 

(IV)          Capacity of Proposed Tanks

 

(V)           Degree of Private Fire Protection

 

(VI)          Local Fire Protection Facilities

 

(VII)         Exposure to or from Other Properties

 

(VIII)       Water Supply

 

(IX)          Effectiveness of Plan Fire Brigade

 

(X)           Time of Response

 

(XI)          Probable Effectiveness of Fire Department

 

(XII) Access Roads (all-weather surface)

 

(C)   The applicable local fire authority shall provide the Planning Agency with recommendations of conditions of approval based upon the required analysis report and any health or safety conditions independently imposed by the applicable local fire authority.

 

(D)   The Planning Agency shall impose as one of the conditions of approval for such uses the requirement that a Special Use Permit for the operation, siting, and maintenance of an LPG storage and distribution facility be obtained and shall be made subject to the following.

 

(I)    The City Planner shall designate the applicable local fire authority as the reviewing authority for such Special Use Permits.

 

(II)   The Special Use Permit shall be issued for time periods not to exceed two years between the review and renewal of such a permit.

 

(III)  Prior to issuance or renewal of such a Special Use Permit, the applicable local fire authority shall review the LPG storage and distribution facilities to determine compliance with the conditions of approval imposed by the Conditional Use Permit and/or Special Use Permit for such use. Also, the need for any additional conditions of approval shall be evaluated, including any needs caused by the development or change of use of the subject property or surrounding properties. Among the considerations of such a periodic review shall be the need for additional protective measures as surrounding areas develop.

 

(E)   The Planning Agency shall not approve such requested Conditional Use Permits unless the applicable local fire authority has recommended such approval along with the conditions and requirements necessary to allow such a use.

 

(F)    The Planning Agency shall not waive or significantly modify any such condition of approval unless recommended by the applicable local fire authority.

 

(2)    Fire Protection Requirements for All Parcels

 

(A)   Setbacks for LPG storage and distribution facilities from structures and property lines shall be those specified by the San Bernardino County Code Title 2, Division 3.

 

(B)   LPG storage tanks shall be centrally located on the parcel to the satisfaction of the local fire authority.

 

(3)    Additional fire protection requirements for parcels which have no more than one occupied structure which is less than 5,000 square feet in size and where the water system provides substandard flows per ISO Standards for structure protection are as follows.

 

(A)   Where parcel size is 10 acres or more, fire flow shall be calculated for exposures only, in accordance with the County Code Title 2, Division 3.

 

(B)   Where parcel size is at least five acres, but less than 10 acres, the following standards shall apply.

 

(I)    A one-hour approved protective coating shall be applied to the LPG storage tank.

 

(II)   Fire flow shall be calculated for exposures only, in accordance with the County Code Title 2, Division 3.

 

(C)   Where parcel size is at least 2.5 acres, but less than five acres, the following standards shall apply.

 

(I)    A two-hour approved protective coating shall be applied to the tank.

 

(II)   Fire flow shall be calculated for exposures only, in accordance with the County Code Title 2, Division 3.

 

(4)    Additional fire protection requirements for any parcel with adequate fire flow available per ISO Standards

 

(A)   Fire hydrant(s) shall serve the parcel in accordance with the County Code Title 2, Division 3.

 

(B)   Fire flow shall provide for exposure protection (ISO Calculation) and LPG storage tank protection/suppression. Sprinklers shall use calculations as adopted by County Code Title 2, Division 3; hoselines shall use the formula GPM = five times the square root of the tank capacity.

 

(C)   Additional Protection

 

(I)    Where the local fire authority determines that water can be applied to the tank or exposures by the fire authority in required amounts in eight minutes or less, no additional protection shall be required.

 

(II)   Where the local fire authority determines that water cannot be applied to the tank or exposures by the fire authority in required amounts in eight minutes or less, one of the following protection measures shall be required.

 

(i)     A one-hour approved protective coating shall be applied to the LPG storage tank.

 

(ii)    A fixed spray water system shall be installed as approved by the fire department.

 

(5)    Additional fire protection requirements for any parcel not included in either 87.0935 (c) (3) and (4)

 

(A)   Either a one-hour or more protective coating shall be applied to the LPG storage tank, as required by the fire authority, or a fixed spray water system shall be installed in lieu of coating the tank.

 

(B)   Fire flow shall be calculated for exposure only, in accordance with the San Bernardino Code Title 2, Division 3.

 

87.0940 Waste Disposal.
(a)    Liquid Waste Disposal and Runoff Control

Land uses shall operate within the guidelines of the Regional Water Quality Control Board in the particular region that serves that location. Disposal of liquid waste must meet applicable guidelines of the Community Development Department and the Office of Building and Safety. Disposal of waste shall comply with County Code, Division 1, Chapter 2, Section 31.023; Division 3, Chapter 3, Sections 33.031 - 33.0314; Chapter 4, Sections 33.041 - 33.0413; Chapter 5, Sections 33.051 - 33.059; Chapter 6, Sections 33.061 - 33.0614; and Chapter 7, Sections 33.071 - 33.0717.

 

(b)    Hazardous Waste

Hazardous waste handling, transportation, recovery, and disposal shall be regulated according to Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 1976; California Water Code, Division 7, Chapter 5; California Health and Safety Code (Division 20, Chapter 6.5, Hazardous Waste Control, Sections 25100 - 25240); California Administrative Code (Title 22, Division 4, Chapter 30, Environmental Health) and the City of Yucaipa Hazardous Waste Management Plan.

 

(c)    Solid Waste Disposal

Solid waste disposal shall be regulated as per City Ordinance No. 119 and California Government Code, Title 7.3, which relates to solid waste management. Also involved is Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, P.L. 94-580, which provides minimum standards and regulations for solid waste and hazardous waste management and recovery (recycling). The Public Works Director shall be the enforcement agent.

 

CHAPTER 10 CONDITIONAL GRADING COMPLIANCE
87.1010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to assure compliance with conditions of approval on projects involving earthwork grading by providing on-site continuous inspections as required by the City Engineer of grading projects or developments for which adopted conditions of approval require any specific or general features to be incorporated into the earthwork or restrict or limit the earthwork in any way which is more restrictive than the grading provisions as prescribed in the Uniform Building Code.

 

87.1020 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter apply to projects which have been conditionally approved and which involve grading in excess of 5,000 cubic yards and when either of the following conditions exist: 1) natural pregraded slopes of 15% or greater, or 2) requirements for natural open space retention. The provisions and conditions of this chapter are in addition to the provisions of the Uniform Building Code and any geotechnical investigation report recommendations.

 

87.1030 Quality Control Engineer’s Responsibilities.
The quality control engineer shall not be employed by, have any relationship to, or interest in the developer, or any contracting, engineering, or geotechnical companies performing work on or providing services to the project being inspected.

 

The quality control engineer shall be responsible for inspection of the work in progress to assure compliance with the conditions of approval which may include, but are not limited to, slope ratio, slope height, slope location, areas of land disturbance, or set provisions regarding archeology, paleontology, landscaping, erosion control, protection of native plants and animals, or any other conditions of approval which will control or impact grading. The quality control engineer shall report to and file reports with the City Engineer as required by the City Engineer.

 

87.1040 Developer’s Deposit.
Prior to the issuance of the grading permit, the developer shall post a deposit with the City Engineer in the amount and in the form specified by the City Engineer. The deposit funds held in trust shall be dispersed to the quality control engineer by the City Engineer under the terms of the agreement between the City and the quality control engineer to pay for the services of the quality control engineer. The City Engineer will notify the developer if and when it becomes apparent that the deposit will be exhausted, and the developer shall make such additional deposit as is required by the City Engineer. If the developer fails to submit such additional deposit by the date specified by the City Engineer, the City Engineer shall suspend or revoke the grading permit, in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code, and order that work on the project be ceased. Upon completion of the work, unused funds shall be returned to the developer within 60 days following the final grading and quality control inspection approvals.

 

87.1050 City Engineer Authority.
The City Engineer shall have authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations to clarify, interpret, and enforce the provisions of this Chapter. The City Engineer may approve variations when such variations are not detrimental to the life, health, safety, or welfare of the public and are necessary because of particular or peculiar circumstances, and will achieve the same level of protection as the original condition. Variations of the environmental conditions shall be applied for and processed in the same manner as other grading variations.

 

87.1060 Authority to Contract.
For the purpose of this chapter, the City Engineer may retain, on behalf of the City, independent engineers to serve as the quality control engineer on projects regulated by this Chapter using a standard form contract approved by the City Council.

 

87.1070 Penalty for Noncompliance.
The City Engineer is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and may use any legal means to affect such enforcement, including suspending and/or revoking any permits that have been issued by the City Engineer for the project, whether or not the permits are for the earthwork grading, and withholding issuance of any permits on the project for which applications have been filed. The City Engineer is further authorized to expend any remaining funds in the developer’s deposit to obtain compliance herewith.

 

 

CHAPTER 11 REGULATION OF HILLSIDE AND/OR RIDGELINE DEVELOPMENTS
87.1105 General Provisions.
The hillside and/or ridgeline development standards, procedures and guidelines established by this Chapter are meant to be complementary to those found in the City of Yucaipa Grading Manual. Relevant sections addressing grading or drainage within this Chapter are meant to provide further design guidelines for persons seeking permits to improve lands classified as hillside or ridgeline sensitive. These standards and the guidelines contained in the Hillside/Ridgeline Development Manual shall govern all hillside/ridgeline developments.

 

87.1110 Applicability.
(a)    The standards, guidelines and procedures established by this Chapter shall apply to all lands lying within the corporate limits of the City of Yucaipa that are within the Hillside Overlay District as designated by the City of Yucaipa General Plan Hillside Overlay District Map and shall apply to all prominent Ridgelines as designated by the City of Yucaipa General Plan Hillside Overlay District Map, its sphere of influence as determined by LAFCO, and its overall planning area as determined by the General Plan of the City of Yucaipa. All properties seeking annexation, or preapproval of projects pending annexation to the City will be evaluated according to these standards, guidelines and procedures.

 

(b)    The requirements and guidelines portions of these standards for ridgeline preservation and hillside development are presented in two separate reports. The requirements portion shall apply to all projects in hillside areas with average slopes over 15%. The guidelines portion consists of recommendations; however, they shall be enforced based on the significance of individual projects at the discretion of the Community Development Director. The requirements and guidelines build upon and enhance the goals, objectives and General Plan policies of the City of Yucaipa. (Amended by Ord. 313 § 2, 2011; Ord. 349 § 2, 2016)

 

87.1115 Definitions.
The following definitions apply for the purposes of administering, interpreting and enforcing this Chapter. Terms used shall have the same meaning as set forth in Division 12 of the Development Code and/or Ordinances of the City.

 

As-graded

The surface configuration upon completion of grading

 

 

Average Slope

The slope calculated by utilizing the formula:

 

Average Cross Slope = I x L x 0.0023

 

                                               A

 

I = Contour Interval

 

L = Contour Length

 

0.0023 = Constant to Convert Square Feet to Acres and Slope to Percent

 

A = Acres in Site

 

 

Balance

The cutting and filling of a site which does not require the export or import of earth material

 

 

Bench

Relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed or intermediate drainage area

 

 

Bench Drain

A generally horizontal drainage feature on a manufactured slope usually in the form of a gunited concrete v-ditch with a minimum of five (5%) percent slope

 

 

Berm

A low mound of earth graded in a linear or undulating form; Often used as a noise or visual barrier

 

 

Building

A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls

 

 

Building Height

The vertical distance measured from the ground level grade to the top of the building

 

 

Building Line

An imaginary line on a building site specifying the closest point from an ultimate right-of-way line or a property line where a main building may be located

 

 

Canyon

A deep, narrow valley having high, steep slopes

 

 

Contour

A line drawn on a plan which connects all points of equal elevation

 

 

Contour Grading

A grading concept designed to result in earth forms which resemble natural terrain characteristics. Horizontal and vertical curve variations are often used for slope banks. Contour grading is not necessarily minimal grading

 

 

Crib Wall

An earth-retaining structure with nearly vertical face constructed of modular preformed materials

 

 

Creek

A natural stream of running water larger than a brook and smaller than a river

 

 

Cut

The mechanical removal of earth material

 

 

Cut and Fill

The excavating of material in one place and depositing of it as fill in an adjacent place

 

 

Daylight Line

The line between grading and natural terrain drawn by connecting the points where proposed contours meet existing contours

 

 

Earth Material

Any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof

 

 

Elevation

Height or distance above sea level

 

 

Erosion

The process by which the soil and rock components of the earth’s crust are worn away and removed from one place to another by natural forces such as weathering, solution and transportation

 

 

Excavation

The mechanical removal of earth material

 

 

Existing Grade

The grade prior to grading

 

 

Export

Excess cut that is removed from a grading project and deposited off site

 

 

Fill

A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means

 

 

Finish Grade

The final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan

 

 

Floodplain

The land area adjacent to a watercourse which is subject to the overflow of flood waters

 

 

Foothill

A hill at the base of a mountain

 

 

Grade

The vertical location of the ground surface

 

 

Grade Separation

The separation at different levels of two intersecting roads, by bridge, tunnel, or underpass, so as to permit the roads to cross without obstructing free traffic movement on either

 

 

Grading

Any excavating or filling or combination thereof

 

 

Hill

A small area of land that is higher than the land around it

 

 

Hillside

Refers to a parcel of land or a definable portion thereof with an average rise or fall of more than one (1) foot vertically for each fifteen (15) feet horizontally (15% slope)

 

 

Hydrology

The properties of the water, including circulation and distribution, on and below the ground

 

 

Import

Fill material obtained off-site to balance a grading project

 

 

Knoll

A small, round hill or mound

 

 

Land

The portion of the earth’s surface above the level of the sea or ocean

 

 

Minimal Grading

A grading concept designed to minimize excavation and filling. Concept often associated with roads conforming closely to natural contours with the structures being built on natural terrain

 

 

Mountain

A lofty elevation on the earth’s surface

 

 

Native Vegetation

The natural vegetation commonly found in area

 

 

Natural Areas

Undeveloped sites which have not been graded

 

 

Natural Open Space

Natural open space shall refer to the landform as created by nature or subsequently modified to meet fuel modification fire standards of the plan. Within natural open spaces, vegetation introduced for agricultural purposes may be removed and the area re-vegetated with native vegetation. Existing trees, riparian vegetation and native plant communities within natural open spaces shall be preserved and protected. Man-made water bodies (excluding swimming pools) and trails through open space areas may be considered as natural open space. No grading or structures of any type shall be permitted in the natural open space areas, including walls or fencing

 

 

Natural Slope

A slope which is not man-made. A natural slope may retain the natural vegetation during adjacent grading operations or it may be partially or completely removed and replanted

 

 

Natural Vegetation

The vegetation occurring on a site under natural conditions

 

 

Open Space

Land not covered by buildings, roads or vehicular access ways and including such areas as private yards, landscaped areas, slopes, natural areas, common areas, greenbelts or parks, etc.

 

 

Pad development

A generally flat or stepped area created by grading to accommodate

 

 

Peak

The highest part of a mountain; usually steep sided at the summit

 

 

Prominent Ridge

A ridge or hill which is visible from arterial streets or major public space which forms a part of the skyline or is seen as a distant edge against a backdrop of land or is so designated by the General Plan or Development Code

 

 

Ridge

A long, narrow, or sharply defined conspicuous elevation of land

 

 

Setback Area

The area between the building line and the property line, or when abutting a street, the ultimate right-of-way line

 

 

Setback Distance

The distance between the building line and the property line, or when abutting a street, the ultimate right-of-way line

 

 

Single-Loaded Street

A street with lots fronting on one side only

 

 

Site

Any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted

 

 

Slope

An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance

 

 

Slope Bank

A man-made slope steeper than 5:1 (20%)

 

 

Slope Man-Made

A manufactured slope consisting wholly or partly of either cut or filled material

 

 

Slope Transition

The area where a slope bank meets the natural terrain or a level graded area either vertically or horizontally

 

 

Summit

Highest part of a hill or mountain

 

 

Topography

General term to include characteristics of the ground surface such as plains, hills mountains, degree of relief, steepness of slope, and other physiographic features

 

 

Toe of Slope

The lowest elevation of a slope which transitions to a flatter area or pad

 

 

Top of Slope

The highest elevation of a slope which transitions to a flatter area or pad

 

 

Uniform Slope

A slope of a uniform slope ratio

 

 

Valley

The land between hills or mountains, usually containing a stream

 

 

Variable Slope

A man-made slope (usually a slope bank) which has a variety of slope ratios rather than a single ratio

 

 

Vegetation

Growing plants

 

 

Viewshed

Areas or development which can be viewed from arterial roads, freeways, major collector roads and public gathering places such as major shopping centers, etc.

(Amended by Ord. 313 § 3, 2011; Ord. 269 § 4, 2007)

 

87.1120 Hillside Classifications.
(a)    Hillside classifications have been determined to identify significant categories relative to hillside development. These categories have been classified in terms of landform types with respect to different slope categories, as follows:

 

Slope

Landform Type

0 - 6%

Flat

6.1 - 15%

Gentle, Rolling Land

15.1 - 20%

Hillside

20.1 - 30%

Steep Hillside

30.1 - 40%

Mountainous

40.1% +

Rugged Mountain

 

(b)    Slopes of 0—6% are essentially flat land, normally posing no major restrictions to development, except in terms of landscaping and maintenance for the small amounts of slopes created. Slopes of 6.1—15% are not suitable for freeways and major arterials, but flexible as to local road orientation and site layout. There are generally no significant constraints associated with this category, but it is more restrictive than flat land. Development in areas with slopes of 15.1% and above shall require Hillside Development Review. Hillsides of 15.1—20% slope are significantly affected in terms of read alignment in that roads will normally be required to parallel contours. More significant grading is required to create flat pad areas, and the orientation of site planning, such as orienting pads parallel to contours to avoid significant side splits or a saw tooth effect on graded pads, begins to be restricted in terms of access and the ability to grade flat sites. In steep hillside areas of 20.1—30% slope, the required quantities of earthwork necessary for grading to create flat pads increases dramatically, as does the significance of view opportunities and visual prominence. In mountainous areas with slopes of 30.1—40%, both access and the ability to create pads using 2:1 slopes are severely restricted. Flat areas and roads are difficult to create, making access a problem. In rugged mountain areas with slopes of 40.1% or greater, development is prohibited. Without the use of retaining walls, access is very difficult and the grading of pads on side slopes of 40.1% or greater is virtually impossible without massive grading that would involve cutting hilltop areas and filling the valleys. (Amended by Ord. 313 § 4, 2011)

 

87.1125 Ridgeline Preservation.
(a)    Any Tentative Parcel Map or Tentative Tract Map in the vicinity of or affecting ridgeline areas shall be required to perform a view analysis depicting before and after conditions. Views from a minimum of three (3) selected vantage points showing a precise depiction of the potential visual impacts of the proposal shall be presented to the Planning Commission. The technology may incorporate the use of a three-dimensional computer model or photographs incorporating a height reference (either reference poles or chalk lines) of the proposed development in order to display the impact of development on ridgeline views.

 

(b)    Alternatives which staff may require for ridgeline preservation are:

 

(1)    No structure shall be permitted within a 150-foot horizontal distance from the centerline of prominent ridgelines and no finished pad will be allowed within 50 feet of the top elevation of the ridge.

 

(2)    Identify contour elevation on each of the prominent ridgelines above which no development will occur.

 

(3)    From existing foothill areas to prominent ridgelines, the project will maintain 50% of existing view to prominent ridgelines from selected vantage points.

 

(4)    Determine preservation areas within which development will be prohibited.

 

87.1130 Average Slope Calculations.
(a)    The average cross slope formula for calculating average slopes for any given site shall be as follows:

 

Average Cross Slope

 =

I x L x 0.0023

 

 

A

I = Contour Interval

L = Contour Length

0.0023 = Constant to Convert Square Feet to Acres and Slope to Percent

A = Acres in Site

 

(b)    Where there is a dramatically different landform character in the topography of any one site, the site may be divided into several distinct areas and average slope calculated separately, at the discretion of the Community Development Director.

 

87.1135 Design Criteria.
(a)    The slope and natural open space relationship below is used to determine natural open space dedication requirements for development projects based on the slope of the land. One column defines the percentages of slope within a project that are to be categorized. The other column indicates the proportion of each slope category that must be left as natural open space.

 

Slope Category (%)

Minimum Percent of Open Space Left Natural

0 - 15

0

15.1 - 20

50

20.1 - 25

60

25.1 - 30

70

30.1 - 35

80

35.1 - 40

90

40.1 +

100

 

(b)    The relationship is designed so that as the steepness of the land increases, the open space requirement increases. This encourages development on rugged environmentally sensitive terrain to be concentrated or intensified in the most appropriate areas of the site. It does not necessarily, however, prohibit development on steep slopes, nor does it necessarily reduce the permitted density.

 

(c)    Other public health, safety or welfare considerations could also increase the open space requirements for a project.

 

(d)    The method of calculating the percent slope of any piece of land involves plotting the land on a topographic base map and dividing the vertical rise between contours by the horizontal distance between the same contours, multiplied by 100. A slope map shall be prepared and submitted with any residential development application. The slope map shall include the following information:

 

(1)    A topographic map of the proposed project area and all adjoining properties within 150 feet at a scale of not less than one (1) inch to two hundred (200) feet. The contour interval shall be not more than two (2) feet except that the contour interval may be five (5) feet if the general slope is more than ten (10) percent.

 

(2)    The topographic map shall be prepared and certified by a Registered Civil Engineer or a Professional Land Surveyor.

 

(3)    Land within each slope category, e.g., zero (0) to fifteen (15) percent, shall be delineated. The area in acres shall be tabulated for each category.

 

(4)    Steeply incised drainage channels with near-vertical walls shall not be included in the slope calculations for the purpose of tabulating the cumulative acreage of each slope category.

 

(e)    The amount of land to be left in natural open space for any given project is computed by multiplying the number of acres of the project area within each slope category by the required percentage of natural open space for that category. The totals for each category are then summed to yield the total natural open space requirement for the project. (Amended by Ord. 313 §§ 5—7, 2011; Ord. 269 §§ 2, 5, 2007)

 

 

87.1140 Earth Work/Land Forms.
(a)    Building pads in hillside areas shall have a minimum dimension of 60 feet in width measured at the building setback line.

 

(b)    Manufactured Slopes shall not exceed a slope ratio of 2:1 (cut or fill).

 

(c)    The maximum slope height shall be 30 feet between pads or between roads and pads or between two roads, or a maximum of 30 feet of cut and fill area which ties into natural grade for a road or a pad. All slopes will be rounded at the top and the toe of the slope to a minimum of 15 feet radius.

 

(d)    Retaining walls in the back of the pad on a lot shall be a maximum of six feet (6′) in height. Retaining walls in the side yard of a lot shall be a maximum of four feet (4′). Retaining walls may be used with planters in between the walls to soften the effect within a minimum horizontal spacing of three feet (3′). Adjacent to roadways, retaining walls shall be a maximum of four feet (4′) high, or a total of six feet (6′) if two (2) three-foot (3′) walls are used in combination with a minimum horizontal spacing of three (3) feet.

 

(e)    At the discretion of the Community Development Director the Guidelines for roads depicted in the Hillside/Ridgeline Development Manual shall apply.

 

87.1145 Landscape Requirements.
(a)    All projects shall be reviewed by the Community Development Director to determine if they are subject to the criteria defined in the Design Guidelines section of the Hillside/Ridgeline Development Manual.

 

87.1150 Architecture/Structure.
The provisions within this section shall apply except for existing structures for which a valid permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this Chapter.

 

(a)    Building Envelope/Setback and Height

 

(1)    A minimum setback of 30 feet from top of slope or an average setback of 30 feet shall be provided from the edge of the pad where the structure is in public view. Setbacks and building heights shall be varied from the top of 2:1 slopes to maintain ratios of 3:1 below prominent ridgelines.

 

(2)    A minimum of 25% of the units shall be single-story when the housing is in the public view from arterial roads and major public spaces. Where two-story units are utilized, they shall be architecturally designed so that only one story is exposed to public view.

 

(3)    Below prominent ridgelines, a variety of spacing between units shall be provided at a minimum ratio of 1/2:1 (building setback to property line to building height).

 

(b)    Fencing

 

Privacy walls and fences, not exceeding six feet (6′) in height, are permitted adjacent to structures in order to provide a private outdoor area. All fences which are adjacent to or visible from public roads or major public spaces shall be decorative masonry or other approved materials with a preference to use of indigenous rock and colors of materials which blend with the surrounding landscape.

 

87.1155 Environmental Constraints.
The maximum number of residential units or fixed floor area ratio shall be reduced by the impact of the Environmental Constraints affecting the subject property.

 

87.1160 Fire Protection Standards.
(a)    Development shall be constructed in such a manner so as to reduce the potential for spread of brushfire through consideration of the following:

 

(1)    In the case of a conflict where more restrictive provisions are contained in the Uniform Building Code or adopted local Fire Management Plan, the more restrictive provisions shall prevail.

 

(2)    Roofs shall be covered with noncombustible materials as defined in the Building Code. Open eave ends shall be stopped in order to prevent bird nests or other combustible material lodging within the roof and to preclude entry of flames.

 

(3)    Exterior walls shall be surfaced with noncombustible or fire resistant materials.

 

(4)    Balconies, patio roofs, eaves and other similar overhangs shall be of noncombustible construction or shall be protected by fire-resistant material pursuant to the Building Code.

 

(b)    Residential developments shall be constructed with adequate water supply and pressure for all proposed development in accordance with standards established by the Fire Marshal.

 

(c)    A permanent fuel modification area shall be required around development projects or portions therefor that are adjacent or exposed to hazardous fire areas for the purpose of fire protection. The required width of the fuel modification area shall be based on applicable building and fire codes and a Fire Hazard Analysis Study approved by the Fire Marshal.

 

Fuel modification areas shall incorporate soil erosion and sediment control measures to alleviate permanent scarring and accelerated erosion.

 

If the Fire Marshal determines in any specific case that difficult terrain, danger of erosion or other unusual circumstances make strict compliance with the clearance of vegetation undesirable or impractical, he may suspend enforcement thereof and require reasonable alternative measures designed to advance the purposes of this Chapter.

 

In the event the abatement is not performed as required in subsection C of this section, the City Council may instruct the Fire Marshal to give notice to the owner of the property upon which said condition exists to correct such prohibited condition and, if the owner fails to correct such condition, the City Council may cause the same to be done and make the expense of such correction a lien on the property upon which such conditions exist.

 

87.1165 Grading.
(a)    The following standards complement those contained in the Grading Manual and define basic grading techniques which are consistent with adopted ordinances and which avoid unnecessary cut and fill. Limitations on project grading amounts and configurations will be decided on a case-by-case basis.

 

(1)    No finished slopes greater than 2:1 may be created except beneath a structure where the maximum created slope is limited to 1-1/2:1 or less.

 

(2)    Grading shall be phased so that prompt revegetation or construction will control erosion. Where possible, only those areas which will be built on, resurfaced, or landscaped shall be disturbed.

 

87.1170 Access and Parking.
(a)    The following standards define access criteria:

 

(1)    Driveway grades up to a maximum of twelve (12) percent may be permitted, and shall be aligned with the natural contours of the land. Proper design considerations shall be employed, including such items as vertical curves and parking landings. In any case, parking landings shall be utilized on all drives over ten (10) percent grade.

 

(2)    Driveways shall not be permitted which exceed twelve (12) percent slope except that one length, not at the point of access, of not more than twenty (20) feet may have a slope of sixteen (16) percent.

 

(3)    Grooves for traction should be incorporated into the construction of driveways with a slope of ten (10) percent or greater.

 

(4)    Roadways and driveways, where feasible, should conform to the natural landform. They should not greatly alter the physical and visual character of a hillside by creating large notches in ridgelines or by defining wide straight alignments or by building switch-backs above the hillside view line. Reduced road sections, split sections and parking bays should be utilized in the layout of hillside streets.

 

87.1175 Drainage.
(a)    The following standards complement those contained in the Grading Manual.

 

(1)    Debris basins, rip rap, and energy dissipating devices shall be provided where necessary to reduce erosion when grading is undertaken. Except for necessary flood control facilities, significant natural drainage courses shall be protected from grading activity. In instances where crossing is required, a natural crossing and bank protection shall be preferred over steel and concrete systems. Where brow ditches are required, they shall be naturalized with plant materials and native rocks.

 

(2)    Building and grading permits shall not be issued for construction on any site without an approved location for disposal of runoff waters, including but not limited to such facilities as a drainage channel, detention basins, public street or alley, or private drainage easement.

 

(3)    All cuts shall be drained.

 

(4)    The use of cross lot drainage shall be permitted subject to City Engineer review, and may be approved after demonstration that this method will not adversely affect the proposed lots or adjacent properties, and that it is absolutely required in order to minimize the amount of grading which would result with conventional drainage practices. Where cross lot drainage is utilized, the following shall apply:

 

(A)   Project interiors - One lot may drain across one other lot if an easement is provided within either an improved, open V-swale gutter, which has a naturalized appearance, or within a closed drainage pipe which shall be a minimum twelve (12) inches in diameter. In both cases, an integral wall shall be constructed. This drainage shall be conveyed to either a public street or to a drainage easement. If drainage is conveyed to a private easement, it shall be maintained by a homeowners association, otherwise the drainage shall be conveyed to a public easement. The easement width shall be determined on an individual basis and shall be dependent on appropriate hydrologic studies and access requirements.

 

(B)   Project boundaries - On-site drainage shall be conveyed in an improved open V-swale, gutter, which has a naturalized appearance, or within an underground pipe in either a private drainage easement, which is to be maintained by a homeowner’s association or other approved mechanism, or it shall be conveyed in a public easement. The easement width shall be determined on an individual basis and shall be dependent on appropriate hydrologic studies and access requirements.

 

(5)    Where possible, drainage channels should be placed in inconspicuous locations, and more importantly, they should receive a naturalizing treatment including native rock, colored concrete and landscaping, so that the structure appears as an integral part of the environment.

 

(6)    Natural drainage courses should be preserved and enhanced to the extent possible. Rather than features should be incorporated as an integral part of the project design.

 

87.1180 Hillside/Ridgeline Development Plan Approval.
No person shall grade or construct upon property classified as hillside/ridgeline property without first obtaining proper permits issued by the City of Yucaipa.

 

Permits shall be issued upon completion of a plan review approved by the Community Development Director. Hillside development plans may be approved subject to conditions. The Development Review Committee shall evaluate each plan and recommend comments, corrections and conditions. Plans shall demonstrate compliance with adopted Building and Grading Codes in addition to this Code.

 

Application shall be made for Hillside Plan Review upon the forms provided by the Planning Department. Fees for such review and approval shall be as established by Resolution of the City Council.

 

 

CHAPTER 12 CITYWIDE DESIGN GUIDELINES
87.1205 General Provisions.
(a)    Intent

The purpose of the Citywide Design Guidelines is to implement General Plan policies regarding the advancement of the visual quality of the community, and to ensure that new projects provide high quality design and architecture by providing clear and concise direction for the renovation of existing buildings and the construction of new buildings.

 

(b)    Locational Requirements

The Design Guidelines shall be applied in the City of Yucaipa for all Land Use Districts.

(Added by Ord. 376 § 1, 2019)

 

87.1210 Development Standards.
All development projects shall be reviewed in accordance with and conform to the Design Guidelines, as adopted by resolution of the City Council, and as may be amended from time to time, and shall also comply with the development standards specified by the Development Code. (Added by Ord. 376 § 1, 2019)

DIVISION 8 SPECIFIC USE DESIGN STANDARDS
CHAPTER 1 SINGLE RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
88.0101 Minimum Residential Construction Standards.
(a)    The following standards shall be applied City-wide to the permitted construction or installation of all detached, single family residential structures unless otherwise specified within this Code.

 

 

(1)    Manufactured home foundation systems shall comply with either Section 18551 of the California Health and Safety Code or California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Chapter 2, Sections 1333 and 1334, which shall include tie down, clip, or anchoring systems approved by an engineer to resist lateral forces for the subject manufactured home.

 

(2)    Siding material shall consist of stucco, wood, brick, stone, or decorative concrete block. Synthetic products of a similar appearance and equivalent durability shall be permitted. Metal siding, if utilized, shall be non-reflective. The exterior covering material shall extend to a point at or near grade except if an approved solid wood, metal, concrete, or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the exterior covering material need not extend below the top of the foundation.

 

(3)    The roofing material shall be tile, composition shingles, wood shakes and shingles (if allowed by Fire Safety or other applicable overlay districts), or other material customarily used in the surrounding community. In addition, manufactured homes shall have eave and gable overhangs of not less than 12 inches measured from the vertical side of the manufactured home.

 

(4)    All entries/exits shall be completed per Chapter 33 of the Uniform Building Code.

 

(5)    All multi-level single-family residential structures shall be provided with a water closet on the ground floor.

 

(b)    Residential structures located on lots greater than 30 feet in width and greater than 5,000 square feet in area shall comply with the provisions as specified in subsections 88.0101 (a)(1) through (4) and the following.

 

(1)    Minimum floor area shall be 725 square feet, measured from the exterior of the structure excluding garages, porches, patios, eaves, cabanas and popouts.

 

(2)    Minimum floor width and depth shall each average 20 feet, measured from the exterior of the structure excluding garages, porches, patio, eaves, cabanas, and popouts.

 

(3)    All residential structures located in a Single Residential (RS) district shall have a fully enclosed garage constructed in compliance with the Uniform Building Code with a minimum area of 20′ x 20′.

 

(4)    Utility hookups and an area shall be provided to accommodate installation of a clothes washer and dryer within the primary structure or within an enclosed accessory structure.

(c)    Residential structures located on lots of 30 feet or less in width or 5,000 square feet or less in area shall comply with the provisions as specified in subsections (a)(1) through (4) and the following.

 

(1)    Minimum floor area shall be 600 square feet, measured from the exterior of the structure.

 

(2)    Minimum floor width shall be 15 feet, measured from the exterior of the structure.

 

(d)    A Land Use Compliance Review in accordance with Article 1, Chapter 3, Division 3 of this Code shall be required when more than one single family residential structure is proposed to be constructed or placed on the same parcel.

 

(e)    Except as otherwise provided within this Code, any manufactured home installed or constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be allowed where this Code allows the construction of a detached, single family residential structure.

 

(f)    A building permit or a mobilehome permit for the installation of a manufactured home not within an approved and properly licensed mobilehome park shall not be issued if more than 10 years have elapsed between the date of manufacture and the date of the application for the issuance of the permit to install such manufactured home. (Amended by Ord. 186 § 15, 1998; Ord. 210 § 26, 2001)

 

88.0115 Restricting the Issuance of Building Permits.
No building permit shall issue for the construction of any new single family residential unit proposed for construction within an existing subdivision where building permits have issued, construction has commenced and/or where individual lot(s) have been sold to third parties, prior to completion of a Compatibility Review as described in Section 88.0120. This section does not apply to subdivisions which have been specifically approved for individual lot sales.

(Ord. 143 § 1, 1995)

 

88.0120 Establishment of a Compatibility Review Procedure.
Prior to issuance of any building permit for the construction of a new single family residential unit within an existing subdivision as described in Section 88.0115, the proposed residential dwelling unit shall be reviewed by the Planning Division for compatibility according to one of the following methods:

 

(a)    Pre-approved or Constructed Design. Where the building permit application is for construction according to plans previously approved or constructed in the same subdivision, no further review is necessary prior to issuance of building permits. For example, where the construction of already-approved production units or constructed models is being proposed, building permits may issue for construction according to those approved plans, or consistent with constructed models.

 

(b)    Minor Design Deviation. Where the building permit application is for construction which represents a deviation from approved residential unit plans in the same subdivision of items such as, but not limited to, a 5% or less reduction in square footage from the smallest of existing constructed or approved units, or modifications in exterior or design features such as window sizes, color and stucco texture or other decorative details, approval may be granted by the Planning Division, without a public hearing, subject to the Division’s finding that the proposed modification is compatible with existing or approved construction. In marginal cases, the Director of Community Development may refer a minor Design Deviation to the Planning Commission for a non-hearing compatibility review.

 

(c)    Major Design Deviation. Where the unit or units propose construction which represents a deviation from approved residential unit plans in the same subdivision of at least a 6% reduction in square footage from the smallest of existing constructed or approved units, but not more than a 20% reduction in square footage, or any exterior architectural modification not determined by the Planning Division as a Minor Design Deviation, Major Design Deviation Review, set forth in Section 88.0125, is required.

 

(d)    Reductions in Unit Size Representing Greater Than 20% Deviation Prohibited. Proposed reductions in unit size which represent a reduction in square footage from the smallest of existing constructed or approved units greater than 20% are prohibited, and building permits shall not be issued by the Building & Safety Division.

(Ord. 143 § 1, 1995)

 

88.0125 Compatibility Review Process for Major Design Deviations.
Where a determination has been made that Major Design Deviations are proposed in architectural size or detail, the following procedure must be followed to determine and ensure compatibility:

 

(a)    Application. Where the Director of Community Development has determined that an application is subject to Major Design Deviation Review, the applicant shall provide all information deemed by the Director of Community Development to be necessary to the review, and shall pay all fees established by the City for processing a Major Variance.

 

(b)    Notice. Notice of the proposed design deviation shall be mailed to all property owners within the subject tract, as shown on the latest equalized tax roll, as well as within 300 feet of the proposed residential unit(s). The notice shall describe the nature of the proposal, the location of the project, and a statement that the decision will be made on a date not less than 20 days nor more than 30 days from the mailing of the notice. The notice shall also state that written responses are requested. Notice of the decision shall be mailed or delivered to the property owners within the subject tract and within 300 feet of the proposed homes.

 

(c)    Public Hearing. Major Deviations shall be evaluated by the Community Development Director in light of responses made as a result of the mailed notice. Where substantial opposition to the proposed deviations is received by the City, or upon determination by the Community Development Director that the application presents facts which are subject to the Major Deviation Review procedure, or upon the Community Development Director’s independent determination that a further evaluation of compatibility is necessary, the matter shall be set for public hearing before the Planning Commission. Substantial Opposition is defined in Section 88.0130.

 

(d)    Planning Commission Review. Review of the proposed changes shall be in accordance with the procedure for reviewing Major Variances, as set forth in Article 9 of the Development Code, and shall also include findings related to compatibility as defined in Section 88.0130, including a finding that the proposed deviations, as they may be conditioned by the Planning Commission, retain the integrity and character of the neighborhood.

(Ord. 143 § 1, 1995)

 

88.0130 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall be defined as indicated:

 

(a)    Compatible or compatibility - shall mean capable of coexisting in harmony or without significant conflict. A compatible residential land use will not cause a significant detriment to the use, economic value, habitability and enjoyment of residents, owners, and/or patrons of any land uses in the surrounding and adjacent area. In terms of building design, compati-

 

ble means consistent or in harmony with existing and approved planned development. Elements to be considered in the evaluation of compatibility included, without limitation, style, mass, bulk, size, use, occupancy, improvements, character, scale, texture, color and other principles of design.

 

(b)    Substantial Opposition - shall mean written opposition or complaints from 25% or more of the noticed property owners, received by the Community Development Director prior to the 20th day from the notice of mailing date.

(Ord. 143 § 1, 1995)

 

 

CHAPTER 2 MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
88.0201 General Provisions.
(a)    INTENT. The purpose of this chapter is to provide quality development guidelines for multiple-unit residential development within the City of Yucaipa.

 

(b)    LOCATIONAL REQUIREMENTS. The Multiple Residential Design Standards shall be applied in the City of Yucaipa in all Residential land use districts where the residential designation is preceded by the RM designation.

 

(c)    REVIEW REQUIREMENTS. A CUP and a public hearing shall be required for all proposed multi-family projects of five (5) or more units in areas of the City zoned RM. Factors used to determine specific density shall include: compatibility with neighboring properties, quality of proposed development and amenities to be provided, and the ability of the City to provide adequate infrastructure and service levels.

 

88.0205 Parking Requirements.
(a)    Each two bedroom or larger dwelling unit shall be provided with two (2) parking spaces within a fully enclosed garage. Each dwelling unit with a single bedroom shall be provided with two parking spaces within a covered carport or fully enclosed garage, at developer’s option. An attempt shall be made to locate the carport/garage adjacent to the unit being served. If not adjacent to the unit being served, the carport/garage shall be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the dwelling unit it is designed to serve. For single-family detached condominiums, each two bedroom or larger dwelling unit shall be provided with two (2) parking spaces within a fully enclosed garage; plus two (2) additional open parking spaces for each four bedroom unit, and one (1) additional open parking space for each two or three bedroom unit.

 

(b)    One parking space for each two dwelling units shall be provided for guest parking. Such parking shall be distributed throughout the development site.

 

(c)    Required parking spaces shall be side by side and tandem parking shall not be counted toward minimum parking requirements.

 

(d)    Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission and/or City Council, in projects containing more than two units, on-street parking shall not be used to satisfy any of the above parking requirements. (Amended by Ord. 253 § 15, 2006)

 

88.0210 Dwelling Size and Amenities.
(a)    One (1) bedroom units shall be a minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet; two (2) bedroom units shall be a minimum of nine hundred (900) square feet; three (3) or more bedroom units shall be a minimum of one thousand fifty (1,050) square feet.

 

(b)    In no case may any building structure exceed two stories.

 

(c)    All bedrooms in any unit shall have a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet, including any closet space. Projects with plans showing a bonus room, den or other similar nomenclature shall be treated as if an additional bedroom were being proposed, if said room has direct access to a bathroom and/or contains closet space.

 

(d)    A laundry facility, including washer and dryer hook-ups, shall be provided within each residential unit or in an attached garage. Automatic garbage disposal shall be provided in each dwelling unit.

 

(e)    Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of private open space of one hundred fifty (150) square feet, in the form of patio or private yard, with a minimum dimension of ten (10) feet. For units above the ground unit, one or two balconies with a combined area of one hundred (100) square feet shall be provided. This requirement may be waived by the Planning Commission and/or City Council if the proposed development contains other exceptional design features or amenities.

 

(f)    At least three items from the following list of amenities shall be provided to each unit:

 

*only one (1) of these items can be chosen from 5, 6, 7, or 11.

 

(1)    fireplace

(2)    bay or kitchen greenhouse windows

(3)    skylights

(4)    oversized closets

(5)    refrigerator*

(6)    automatic dishwasher*

(7)    washer/dryer units*

(8)    entry courtyard or arbor

(9)    decorative doors

(10)  enclosed garage, where not required

(11)  air conditioner*

(12)  security alarm system

(13)  automatic garage door opener

(14)  other comparable features

 

(g)    Each door providing ingress and egress to any dwelling unit subject to this ordinance shall be equipped with the following devices:

 

(1)    A peephole allowing a person inside the unit to see, at a wide angle, persons outside of the unit at the door, without the person inside being seen. The Planning Commission and/or City Council may consider other options to a peephole which provide like security features.

 

(2)    A deadbolt lock attached to the construction studding. Attachment to the doorjamb or trim shall not be sufficient to comply with the terms of this ordinance.

 

(h)    All multi-level multiple-family residential structures shall be provided with a water closet on the ground floor. (Amended by Ord. 186 §16, 1998)

 

88.0215 Site Amenities.
(a)    Multi-family projects containing more than five (5) units shall provide an entry statement, consisting of at least one of the following:

 

(1)    hardscape structure (trellis, decorative garden wall, landscaped berming, decorative gate, etc.)

(2)    specimen landscaping (large, distinctive vegetation) or mature trees

(3)    textured or stamped concrete

(4)    monument signage with accompanying landscaping

(5)    or other comparable installations, as approved by the Planning Commission and/or City Council

 

(b)    Trash collection areas shall be provided within two hundred (200) feet of the farthermost unit they are to serve, and shall be situated so as to eliminate noise and visual intrusion on adjacent property as well as to eliminate fire hazard to adjacent structures. Trash enclosures shall be of masonry construction, easily accessible to all residents and trash collection vehicles.

 

(c)    Each project shall provide outdoor open space for recreation and leisure activities within the development site in the following manner:

 

(1)    Outdoor open space shall comprise not less than forty (40) percent of the net acreage. Public driveways, parking spaces, or other areas designated for operational functions are not considered open space. Open space may include game courts or room, saunas, tennis courts, putting greens, play lots, outdoor cooking areas, lawn bowling, and front and rear and side yard setbacks, if landscaped and greater than the minimums required. Private patios and/or yards attached to individual units may be computed as required open space. In multifamily complexes which include a majority of two or more bedroom units, the City strongly encourages the development of a portion of the required open space as children’s’ play lots.

 

(2)    Swimming pools, with related deck areas, wading pools, fish ponds, volleyball courts, tennis courts, barbecue areas, game rooms, or other recreational facilities provided for the common use of all the residents may be constructed within the required outdoor living space; provided, however, that such facilities shall not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the required outdoor living space.

 

(3)    Projects containing more than twenty-five (25) units will require installation of at least one (1) community focal point per project. The community focal point should be designed to function as a central meeting space for use by project residents. These areas should include shading, seating, and decorative features consistent with the style and design of the units, or may be enclosed to function as a multi-purpose recreation/meeting room. The focal point should be centrally located and accessible to all individuals. Such facilities may not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the required outdoor living space.

 

(d)            Under all conditions, the open spaces created pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance shall remain open and available for such use during the life of the development.

 

88.0220 Architecture.
(a)    Architectural plans will be subject to review by the City Architect, and approval of the Planning Commission and/or City Council. In general, it is anticipated that the following standards will be applied wherever possible:

 

(1)    Building Massing: Buildings must be interesting and should display an integrity of design and style. Flat, unarticulated building faces are strongly discouraged. Simple, stucco-box structures with standard simple roofs and tack on highlights should be avoided. Building shapes and wall massing should be varied. Wall relief should be provided by introducing variables into the building equation. Rectangular box shapes should be avoided in favor of second floor tiering and increasing the number of major building faces.

 

(2)    Unit Entry Areas: Entry areas should be utilized to articulate building faces and provide a recognizable, perhaps more formal entry way to units. Entry areas should be located on different faces of the building to avoid a “motel-look.” Stairways and entries should be recessed, covered, or treated in such a fashion as to increase the sense of arrival and provide shelter from natural elements.

 

(3)    Roof and Roof Lines: Wood-shake roof materials are prohibited in new multi-family development due to fire hazards. Roof lines should be varied and interesting. Long, continuous expanses of simple roofs should be avoided. Hips and gables should be provided when consistent with other architectural elements. Rooftop equipment should be screened from street view.

 

(4)    Scale: Buildings should be in scale for the area in which they are proposed, and should be compatible with surrounding properties. Views of existing residences shall be protected wherever possible.

 

(5)    Perimeter walls, fencing or other screening will be required where appropriate. In general, backyards and parking areas should be screened from street view.

 

88.0225 Landscape.
(a)    Landscape plans will be subject to review by the City Planning Director and approval by the Planning Commission and/or City Council. In general, it is anticipated that the following standards will be applied wherever possible:

 

(1)    Setback areas shall include landscape installations.

 

(2)    All parking lots, more than four (4) spaces, should be provided with pockets for trees or shrubs. Landscape plans should be designed to provide reasonable shade for the parking lot areas.

 

(3)    Buildings should be provided with proper landscape screening. Landscape cutouts and pockets should generally be provided along building walls, at building corners, or other highly visible locations around buildings.

 

(4)    All plant and tree material should be verifiably appropriate for use in the Yucaipa area. Consideration should be given to resistance to drought, water requirements, adaptability to wind (if appropriate), longevity, and ease of maintenance. A specific attempt should be made to utilize plant palettes and design plans which serve to promote energy and water conservation.

 

(5)    Invasive species (cottonwood or ash for example) should be installed away from hardscape improvements, or provided with root barriers, or avoided.

 

(6)    Irrigation systems should generally avoid spray methods in favor of bubbler or drip systems. Lines shall be placed underground.

 

(7)    On-site native vegetation should be incorporated into site or landscape plans wherever feasible. Special effort should be made to preserve and incorporate existing trees into design schemes. Mature trees removed from a site shall be replaced two to one with minimum 24 inch box trees, unless prohibited by site dimensions. Where feasible, natural vegetation should be allowed to re-establish itself.

 

(8)    Parking lots should be screened from street view wherever possible.

 

(9)    Sidewalks are required in conjunction with all new multi-family residential development. Builders/developers should extend landscaping beyond the property to the sidewalk or curb line.

 

(10)  Building faces should be softened by tree installation over a reasonable period of time.

 

(11)  Buffer areas between potentially conflicting uses should be well planted with large shrubs and fast growing evergreen trees.

 

88.0230 Notification.
Developer applicant shall cause a Notice of at least 12″ x 24″ to be erected on any property where a multi-family housing project of five (5) or more units is proposed. Said sign should be prominently displayed and shall state a description of the project.

 

88.0235 Multiple Residential Building Separations.
The following separations shall apply to any lot containing two or more dwelling units which are in separate detached structures. The separations shall be between opposite exterior walls. Walls shall be considered opposite if a perpendicular line drawn in a horizontal plane from one structure intersects another structure’s wall. The front side of a unit is the one containing the primary entrance to the dwelling unit.

 

Building Orientation

Separation

Side-to-Side

10 feet

Rear-to-Rear or Front-to-Side

15 feet

Front-to-Rear

20 feet

Front-to-Front or Interior Court Space

25 feet

Interior Court Space with Parking Access

30 feet

All Others

20 feet

 

CHAPTER 3 MOBILEHOME PARKS
88.0301 General Provisions.
(a)    Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations for the location, design, and improvement of mobilehome parks.

 

(b)    Intent

It is the intent of this chapter to provide regulations for the location, design, and improvements of mobilehome parks that equal or exceed all applicable State laws. It is hereby declared that in an instance where the provisions of this chapter do not encompass all of the State regulations insofar as the limits of this chapter apply, that such regulations are included and required for conformance as a part of this chapter.

 

(c)    Enforcement of Other Regulations

The provisions of the Mobilehome Parks Act, California Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.1, and the applicable regulations adopted pursuant thereto by the State Department of Housing and Community Development are hereby adopted as a part of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Building Official to enforce all of the provisions of said Act pertaining to construction, alteration, or modification of all mobilehome parks. It shall be the duty of the City Planner to enforce all the provisions pertaining to permits to operate, maintenance, use, occupancy, sanitation, and safety of all mobilehome parks.

 

88.0305 Definitions.
Except as otherwise provided in Division 12, all terms used in this chapter which are defined in the Mobilehome Parks Act, California Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.1 and the applicable regulations adopted pursuant thereto by the State Department of Housing and Community Development are used in this chapter as so defined unless, from the context thereof, it clearly appears that a different meaning is intended.

 

88.0310 Establishment of Mobilehome Parks.
(a)    Compliance with Laws

Each map or plan prepared pursuant to this chapter shall be in accordance with applicable State laws, the Yucaipa City Code, and any other ordinance, statute, or law pertaining to the establishment of mobilehome parks.

 

(b)    Compliance with Plans and Standards

Each map or plan filed pursuant to this chapter shall be in compliance with the officially adopted General Plan and any amendment adopted pursuant thereto.

 

(c)    Preparation of Map or Plan

Each map or plan shall be prepared by an architect, professional engineer, or other person qualified to do such work. The map shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or less. Information required shall be as specified by the Conditional Use Permit application packet.

 

(d)    Investigation of Application

Upon receipt of a complete filing for approval to establish or enlarge a mobilehome park, the City Planner shall make the necessary investigation, review, and inspection of the application, plot plans, site, and proposed facilities to determine whether the establishment or enlargement of the park will meet the requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and laws.

 

(e)    Distribution of Maps

The City Planner shall transmit a copy of the mobilehome park map to the affected agencies for review and comment.

 

(f)    Reports

Departments and agencies receiving the maps for review shall transmit comments or recommendations to the City Planner in writing within 15 days after receipt of the map. Failure to so report shall be deemed approval of the design.

 

(g)    City Planner Action

The City Planner shall review the application and maps of the proposed mobilehome park. It shall consider the reports of other departments and agencies, together with the provisions of this chapter and shall submit its findings to the Community Development Director. After reviewing the findings, the Community Development director shall approve, conditionally approve, disapprove, or extend the maps submitted. An extension of time shall be granted when, in the opinion of the Community Development Director, additional information is necessary to properly act on an application in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

 

(h)    Report to Applicant

After consideration and action of the Community Development Director, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances, the City Planner shall notify the applicant in writing of the action. Copies of this action shall be forwarded to the Building Official for processing of construction plans.

 

88.0315 Standards of Design and Improvements.
(a)    Compliance to Standards

Any person desiring to enlarge or establish a mobilehome park shall meet or exceed the design standards set forth in this chapter.

 

(b)    Locations

Mobilehome parks shall be located in accordance with all applicable County and City ordinances and State laws.

 

(c)    Minimum Areas

Mobilehome parks shall be developed on a parcel of land at least 10 acres in area.

 

(d)    Drainage and Flood Hazard

A mobilehome park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to provide for adequate disposition of runoff. Such areas shall be free of flood hazard from external sources. The City Planner may require dedications and improvements which will insure proper protection to the park in accordance with this section.

 

(e)    Streets and Highways

The City Planner may require additional dedication and improvements on streets and highways abutting the proposed mobilehome park in accordance with the Transportation Element of the General Plan and established widths of local and collector streets.

 

(f)    Lot Areas and Dimensions

Each mobilehome lot shall contain a minimum area of 1,200 square feet, with a minimum width of 30 feet fronting on a driveway provided, however, that the following conditions are met.

 

(1)    Lots larger than the above minimum sizes may be required where it is determined that said lot size will either:

 

(A)   Be consistent with the general pattern established by mobilehome parks in the vicinity, or

 

(B)   Be necessary to accommodate manufactured home sizes as stated in the mobilehome park report submitted.

 

(2)    Lots on curved driveways or cul-de-sacs where lot lines are either converging or diverging from the front to the rear of the lot shall have an average width of at least 30 feet, but in no case shall the frontage on a driveway be less than 25 feet.

 

(g)    Clearances

Manufactured homes (mobilehomes) shall be located so they are at least 10 feet apart from side to side, eight feet apart from side to rear, six feet apart from rear to rear, and 10 feet from any building, except for accessory buildings used as private toilets or baths for the exclusive use of the occupant of the mobilehome site. Mobilehome hitches shall face the access driveway.

 

(h)    Minimum Side and Rear Lot Clearances

There shall be minimum side lot clearances totaling 10 feet in width, provided, however, that no mobilehome shall be closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line. Where lots abut side or rear yards as defined in subsection 88.0315 (j), said yard areas may be included as a part of this requirement.

 

(i)     Occupied Area

The occupied area of each mobilehome space shall not exceed 75% of the total area of such mobilehome lot. The area shall be deemed to be occupied when covered or occupied by a trailer coach, cabana, vehicle, ramada, awning, closet, cupboard, or any other structures.

 

(j)     Yards and Setbacks

The following yards shall be maintained on each mobilehome park.

 

(1)    A front yard of at least 25 feet in depth along the public street upon which the mobilehome park fronts shall be maintained. This yard shall extend across the entire width of the park.

 

(2)    Side yards of not less than five feet in width along each side boundary line of the mobilehome park shall be maintained.

 

(3)    A rear yard of not less than 10 feet in depth along the rear boundary line of the mobilehome park shall be maintained.

 

(4)    Greater yards or setbacks may be required where, in the opinion of the City Planner, such yards or setbacks are necessary due to topographic conditions, grading, drainage, or protection of adjacent property.

 

(5)    No part of any mobilehome shall be located within any yard or required setback area.

 

(k)    Roads within Mobilehome Parks

Roads within mobilehome parks shall be designed to provide reasonable and convenient traffic circulation and shall meet the following standards.

 

(1)    No road shall be less than 32 feet in width if car parking is permitted on one side of the road, and not less than 40 feet in width if car parking is permitted on both sides.

 

(2)    Road widths to provide for parking on one side shall be deemed necessary when lots abut the road on one side only. Road widths to provide for parking on both sides shall be deemed necessary when lots abut the road on both sides.

 

(3)    The entire width of the roads within mobilehome parks shall be surfaced with a minimum of two-inch thick asphalt, concrete, plant mix, or other approved material.

 

(l)     Parking

There shall be provided two parking spaces on each lot. There shall also be established and maintained within each mobilehome park automobile parking area for the use of guests. The number of such spaces shall be equal to one for every 2 mobile home spaces or fraction thereof within the mobilehome park. Each parking space shall be 10’ x 20’ in size, plus such additional area as is necessary to afford adequate ingress and egress.

 

(m)   Walkways

Walkways shall be provided to permit reasonably direct access to all lots, service buildings, and other areas or buildings used by occupants of the trailers. Collector walkways serving utility buildings, playgrounds, and other general areas shall be four feet in width or more, and individual entrance walks to each mobilehome site shall be at least two feet in width. All walkways shall be constructed of asphalt, concrete, plant mix, or other approved materials which will permit all-weather pedestrian movement.

 

(n)    Enclosures of Mobilehome Park

A wall or fence six feet in height shall be erected and maintained along each side and rear boundary of a mobilehome park, except along the portion of such side or rear boundary line which either abuts a public street or is within a front yard or side yard adjacent to the street, in which case, a wall or fence may be required. A wall or fence shall be solid and of concrete, brick, or other masonry construction or of chainlink metal construction with an evergreen hedge planted. Where, in the opinion of the City Planner, it is unreasonable to require the construction of a fence or wall, the City Planner, at his discretion, may waive or modify the requirements as specified in this paragraph.

 

(o)    Service Area (Enclosure)

The City Planner may require fencing or screen planting around areas containing garbage, rubbish, or waste disposal or ground service or recreational areas as a condition of approval of a mobilehome park.

 

(p)    Vehicle Storage

Common storage areas shall be provided with an enclosed fenced area for the residents of the mobilehome park for the storage of recreational vehicles, trailers, travel trailers, and other licensed or unlicensed vehicles. This area shall total not less than 50 square feet for each mobilehome lot. All storage on a mobilehome lot shall be in accordance with the provisions of Title 25 of the California Administrative Code.

 

(q)    Modifications in Design

Where mobilehome parks are submitted for approval which, although not complying with the requirements of design as stated herein, are consistent with the general intent and purpose of this chapter, the Community Development Director may approve such parks with conditions and restrictions which insure that the general purposes are satisfied.

 

(1)    Park designs utilizing duplex or cell-type groupings of mobilehome lots or other modified designs may be approved under the provisions of this section.

 

(2)    Modifications of the above standards of design may be approved under the provisions of this section for mobilehome parks, travel trailer parks, recreational trailer parks, temporary trailer parks, and tent camps. However, in no case shall such modifications be in conflict with the minimum requirements of the Mobilehome Parks Act, California Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.1 and the applicable regulations adopted pursuant thereto by the State Department of Housing and Community Development.

 

88.0320 Buildings, Structures, and Facilities.
(a)    Structural Requirements

The erection, construction, reconstruction, repair, relocation, or alteration of all permanent buildings and structures located within a mobilehome park shall conform to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code as adopted.

 

(b)    Plumbing Requirements

The construction, installation, arrangement, alteration, repair, use, and operation of all plumbing, water, and sewage systems within, on, or pertaining to all permanent buildings and structures located within a mobilehome park shall be designed and installed in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted.

 

Floor drains of a type approved by the Building Official shall be installed in all concrete floors of rooms containing sanitary plumbing fixtures. Hose bibs shall be installed near each floor drain. Sanitary facilities within a mobilehome park shall be for the exclusive use of tenants of the mobilehome park.

 

(c)    Electrical Requirements

The construction, installation, arrangement, alteration, repair, use, and operation of all electrical wiring and electrical equipment within, on, or pertaining to all permanent buildings and structures located within the mobilehome park shall be designed and installed in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code, as adopted.

 

(d)    Certificate of Occupancy

Upon completion of any mobilehome park and prior to the use thereof, the owner or operator of said park shall make an application to the City Building Official for a Certificate of Occupancy, said application to be in writing upon the form provided by the Office of Building and Safety, and shall be filed not less than 10 days nor more than 20 days before the mobilehome park is ready for use. The Building Official shall thereupon make a final inspection of the mobilehome park referred to in said application and if found to be in conformity with the requirements of this chapter and other ordinances of the City of Yucaipa, and the laws of the State of California.

 

(e)    Public Address Systems

 

Public address systems or loudspeakers shall not be permitted if audible outside the boundaries of the mobilehome park.

 

88.0325 Operation of Mobilehome Parks.
(a)    Health Permit

Any person or owner who operates or permits the use of a mobilehome park or portion thereof shall first obtain a permit issued by the Community Development Director authorizing such person or owner to operate such a mobilehome park. Application for permits may be secured from the City Planning Office.

 

(b)    Investigation of Application for Health Permit

Upon receipt of an application for a public health permit filed pursuant to this chapter, the Community Development Director shall cause to be made an inspection of the mobilehome park, and if found to be in conformity with the requirements of this chapter and other ordinances of the City of Yucaipa, and the laws of the State of California, the permit shall be issued upon payment of the fee hereinafter specified.

 

(c)    Health Permit Fee

Prior to the issuance of a public health permit, there shall be paid to the Community Development Director, a fee pursuant to Section 16.0213 (B).

 

(d)    Supplemental Permit Fee

Fees for supplemental permits issued for lots added after issuance of the regular permit shall be pro-rated on a monthly basis, and the expiration date of the supplemental permit shall be the same as the expiration date of the regular permit.

 

(e)    Expiration of Permit

Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on the December 31st following issuance, and such permit must be renewed within 30 days following the expiration date. Permit fees for mobilehome parks beginning operation during the permit year shall be pro-rated on a monthly basis, and all such permits shall expire December 31st.

 

(f)    Renewal of Existing Permit

Permit fees on renewal of permits expiring during the permit year shall be pro-rated on a monthly basis, and all such permits shall expire on the December 31st following issuance.

 

(g)    Failure to Reapply for Permit

Every person, firm, or corporation having a permit as required under this chapter who fails to reapply for such permit within the time prescribed in subsection (e) hereof shall, in addition to the required fee, pay a penalty fee in the amount of 25% of the required fee.

 

(h)    Health Permit - Nontransferable

Health permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be nontransferable.

 

(i)     Transfer of Ownership

A transfer of ownership or possession of a mobilehome park under existing valid permit may be made upon request for a new permit to operate, accompanied by an appropriate adopted fee.

 

88.0330 Approved Maps.
(a)    Filing of Approved Maps

 

A reproducible tracing of the map of the mobilehome park as approved by the Community Development Director shall be filed with the office of Building and Safety for construction permits. Blueline prints, in an amount determined to be necessary for processing of the application, shall be submitted together with the tracing.

 

(b)    Checking of Approved Map

The approved map shall be checked for compliance with all the conditions set forth by the City Planner. When it is determined that all conditions have been met, construction permits may be issued by the Building Official.

 

88.0335 Bonds to Guarantee Improvements.
(a)    Bonds Required

If all improvements required as a condition of approval of a mobilehome park are not satisfactorily completed at the time an operating permit is requested, the owner or owners of the mobilehome park shall, prior to the issuance of said permit, enter as contractor into an agreement with the City guaranteeing that the required work will be accomplished.

 

88.0340 Subdivisions of Mobilehome Parks.
A subdivision may be permitted by the Community Development Director. All mobilehome park subdivisions shall be conditioned to require reservation and maintenance of all common areas for common use and enjoyment of the residents of the mobilehome subdivision. All mobilehome subdivisions shall comply with all appropriate design standards established by this division and all applicable State, County, and City Subdivision requirements.

 

 

CHAPTER 4 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL
88.0401 Service Station Setbacks.
(a)    Protective pump island canopies shall maintain a setback of five feet from the right-of-way shown on the adopted Master Plan of Highways.

 

(b)    Pump islands, when designed parallel or up to, but not including 30 degrees to the nearest right-of-way, shall maintain a setback of 15 feet from the right-of-way shown on the Transportation Element of the General Plan, adopted Specific Plan, or planning area.

 

(c)    Pump islands, when designed at an angle of 30 degrees or more to the nearest right-of-way, shall maintain a setback of 25 feet from the right-of-way shown on the Transportation Element of the General Plan, Specific Plan, or planning area.

 

(d)    Area lighters shall maintain a setback of one foot from the right-of-way shown on the Transportation Element of the General Plan.

 

(e)    All other structures over four feet in height shall maintain setbacks as required in the street setback section for land use districts or as required by the applicable Specific Plan or planning area.

 

88.0405 Underground Utility Requirements.
Utility lines, including, but not limited to, electric, telephone, communication, street lighting, and cable television, within or directly serving each new commercial, industrial, or institutional development that, for purposes of this section, includes the construction of a new building or an expansion of an existing building by the lesser of 500 square feet or 10% of the existing building square footage, and/or overhead distribution lines on the perimeter, where such undergrounding would result in the removal of four (4) or more utility poles on the same street, shall be placed underground. However, an infill project, which for purposes of this section consists of a site no more than 15 acres, completely surrounded by existing development, and where poles along the surrounding frontage have not been undergrounded, is exempt from underground utility requirements for existing poles along the frontage. The developer is responsible for complying with the requirements of this subsection without expense to the City, and he or she shall make necessary arrangements for the installation of such facilities. (Amended by Ord. 340 § 2, 2016; Ord. 253 § 16, 2006; Ord. 186 § 14, 1998; Ord. 389 § 2, 2020)

 

88.0420 Commercial and Industrial Transitional Uses.
(a)    Any commercial or industrial use which is located on a lot in a commercial or industrial district which abuts a residential, agricultural, or resource conservation district shall adhere to the following standards.

 

(1)    The use shall maintain a setback of 15 feet or that required within the land use district in which the use is located, whichever is greater.

 

(2)    All open facilities or outside storage shall be screened by a manmade or natural barrier(s) sufficient to screen all outside storage. For commercial uses, the barrier(s) shall be sufficient to screen all outside storage and shall be sufficient to attenuate noise levels to 65 dBA/Ldn at the property line.

 

 

 

CHAPTER 5 PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
88.0501 Intent.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote a more efficient use of the land and to create a more desirable and affordable living environment by providing greater design flexibility than would be possible through the strict application of standard development regulations required by a land use district. This chapter shall set forth those requirements, design standards, and conditions by which planned development shall be regulated. For other regulations concerning Planned Developments, refer to Section 84.0250 in Division 4 of this Code.

 

88.0515 General Regulations.
(a)    Density

The total density of a planned development shall be determined by the following.

 

(1)    General Plan Official Land Use District for the Particular Property Increased densities may be granted by the reviewing authority through the bonus density or transfer of density provisions authorized by the General Plan and implemented by the Development Code or by a Specific Plan. However, density increases shall not be granted for that portion of a Planned Development for which only a Preliminary Development Plan has been approved. Lot sizes smaller than those required by the Land Use District may be approved for a Planned Development provided the overall lot density is not exceeded, except as otherwise allowed by this Code and/or the General Plan.

 

(2)    Density Transfers

One hundred percent (100%) transfer of the density indicated on the City of Yucaipa General Plan Official Land Use District is permitted within the project, provided all other performance criteria are met. This transfer of density may include a transfer of density from adjacent property for which development restrictions in favor of this project have been obtained.

 

(A)   To be eligible for density transfer, adjacent private lands must meet the following criteria.

 

(I)    Private lands from which the density is being transferred must be free of hazards or other physical constraints that prohibit the construction of residential dwellings.

 

(II)   Private lands from which the density is being transferred must be shown on the General Plan as developable for residential dwellings.

 

(B)   All open space within the project which has been created as a result of a density transfer must be common open space, provided, however, in those circumstances when it is infeasible or impracticable for a private organization to adequately maintain and preserve the land as open space, such land may be dedicated to the public for open space purposes.

 

(3)    Density Bonus

 

(A)   An additional bonus in dwelling unit density, up to 10% above that indicated in the General Plan Official Land Use District for the area, may be granted by the reviewing authority, provided one of the following criteria is met.

 

(I)    A publicly valuable resource is provided, preserved, or enhanced which would otherwise require the expenditure of public monies.

 

(II)   A public or quasi-public item is provided above and beyond the normal expectations.

 

(III)  An amenity, convenience, or excellence in design is provided above and beyond normal expectations.

 

(B)   In all cases, the granting of density bonuses must further the purpose and intent of the Planned Development provisions of this Code and the General Plan.

 

(b)    Accessory Uses Permitted in Planned Residential Developments

 

(1)    All accessory uses permitted in the RS District shall be permitted in a Planned Development, provided that such accessory uses are compatible with the approved PD development plan.

 

(2)    When the underlying land use district permits horse raising, and where the density of a Planned Development project does not exceed four dwelling units per acre, horses shall be permitted in a PD project as follows.

 

(A)   On lots 20,000 square feet or greater, subject to the regulations of the RS District

 

(B)   Where lots are less than 20,000 square feet, horses shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:

 

(I)    Horses shall be clustered onto common lots.

 

(II)   The maximum density of horses shall not exceed 3.2 horses per gross acre of common lot area.

 

(III)  All standards and regulations of the Community Development Department shall apply.

 

(IV)  Maintenance and management of the clustered facilities shall be provided by the property-owners’ association.

 

(c)    Phasing

In a phased development, safeguards shall be required in the form of easements or bonds or other commitments for open space requirements that will protect the integrity of the total project.

 

(d)    Subdivision

When a tentative subdivision map is filed with a planned development project, prior to recordation of the final subdivision map, the following items shall be filed with the appropriate agency.

 

(1)    Documentation of easements, covenants, deeds, and Property Owner Association by-laws, restrictions, and articles of incorporation

 

(2)    Sureties and performance bonds covering open space areas, dedicated public improvements, and other items as determined by the reviewing authority; the amount of the performance bonds shall be reviewed annually by the appropriate agency.

 

(e)    Revision of Approved Development Plans

No revisions may be made in an approved Planned Development Site Plan or Final Development Plan before, during, or after the construction of a planned development, except upon application by the applicant to the appropriate reviewing authority, under the procedures provided below.

 

(1)    Minor revisions such as in the location and siting of building and structures may be authorized by the City Planner if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the development plan was approved. These revisions shall be made prior to recording the final subdivision map or the issuance of any building permits, whichever occurs first.

 

(2)    Major revisions such as changes in use, any significant rearrangement of lots, blocks and building tracts, any substantial changes in the provision of common open spaces, and all other modifications shall be approved by the reviewing authority authorized to approve the plan being revised. The reviewing authority shall hold a public hearing to consider such major revisions. No amendments may be made in the approved development plan unless they are shown to be required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the development plan was approved or by changes in the General Plan, Specific Plan, or area plan.

 

88.0520 Design Standards.
(a)    Unless specifically changed within this section, all adopted City ordinances, standards, and policies apply to a Planned Development project, including those set forth in the Yucaipa General Plan. The Planning Commission may alter adopted standards where, in their opinion, the altered standards would more adequately serve the intent and purposes of the Planned Development provisions of the Code.

 

(b)    Circulation

 

(1)    The vehicular circulation pattern shall be designed such that the following are accomplished.

 

(A)   It provides adequate vehicular access to and within the project, in accordance with adopted City standards.

 

(B)   It is coordinated with external transportation networks in terms of location and loads.

 

(C)   It is integrated with the natural landscape and, where possible, parallels the natural drainage system.

 

(D)   It is designed such that the noise levels from vehicular traffic shall comply with the Noise Quality Standards of the Yucaipa General Plan.

 

(E)   The planned development project and each phase thereof has two points of vehicular ingress and egress from surrounding streets, one of which may be emergency only. Where the applicant can show that this is a physical impossibility, this requirement may be modified by the local Fire Authority or County Fire Warden.

 

(F)    Private streets are acceptable if they are built to City standards and are inspected by the City. However, right-of-way shall not be accepted by the City, nor shall private streets be accepted into the City-maintained road system.

 

(2)    The pedestrian circulation pattern shall be designed such that the following are accomplished.

 

(A)   It is separated from vehicular traffic where possible and designed to discourage pedestrian crossing of the vehicular network, except at controlled points which are designed for pedestrian safety.

 

(B)   Hard-surfaced, safely-lighted pedestrian access to common open space, recreational areas, community facilities, and other logical terminal points shall be provided.

 

(3)    All common off-street parking areas shall be designed such that the following are accomplished.

 

(A)   They provide adequate, convenient, well-marked, and safely-lighted parking.

 

(B)   With the exception of building-enclosed parking structures, they shall contain appropriate landscaping to minimize the effect of large areas of asphalt or concrete

 

(4)    Two parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided. No tandem parking is permitted. Guest parking, either on-street or in common parking areas, shall be provided at a ratio of one space per two dwelling units.

 

(c)    Open Space

 

(1)    For the purposes of this chapter, open space within a planned development shall be the total area of land or water within the boundaries of a planned development, designed and intended for use and enjoyment as open space areas.

 

(A)   Open space within a planned development shall include the following.

 

(I)    Area of the site not covered by buildings, paved areas, or accessory structures, except recreational structures

 

(II)   Land which is accessible and available to all occupants of the development for which the space is intended

 

(B)   Open space within a planned development does not include the following.

 

(I)    Proposed and existing street rights-of-way and private streets

 

(II)   Open parking areas and driveways

 

(III)  School sites

 

(IV)  Commercial, industrial, or office areas, and the buildings, accessory buildings, parking, and loading facilities thereof

 

(2)    A residential planned development project shall have a minimum of 40% private and common open space, not including balcony area.

 

(3)    Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum contiguous private open space area as follows.

 

(A)   Ground Floor

225 square feet

 

(B)   Upper-Story Dwelling with No Ground Floor

660 square feet

 

(4)    Provisions for the maintenance and management of the common open space and common facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the reviewing authority. Such approval shall be based on the following criteria.

 

(A)   The applicant shall establish a Property Owners’ Association prior to the selling of any lot or occupancy of any dwelling unit.

 

(B)   The Property-Owners’ Association by-laws, restrictions, and articles of incorporation shall include the necessary regulations required by the Federal Housing Administration. Other standards may be approved by the reviewing Housing Authority.

 

(d)    Site Resource Utilization

 

(1)    The planned development shall be designed and developed in such a manner as to minimize the cutting of trees, disturbance of ground cover, cut-and-fill work, drainage alteration, and hillside development. All tree removals shall be in accordance with City permit procedures.

 

(2)    All new dirt work and exposed slopes shall be suitably stabilized in accordance with Sections 68.001 through 68.024 of the City Code. Scarred and erosion-prone areas shall be stabilized with appropriate planting.

 

(3)    A drainage analysis shall be prepared and shall accompany the application for a planned development.

 

(e)    Site and Structure Relationship

 

(1)    The spacing of buildings shall be governed by the requirements for adequate light and air, proper access, fire regulations, and by the need for visual and auditory privacy.

 

(2)    Whenever possible, dwelling units shall be arranged to take advantage of views and vistas with consideration given to “micro” (subsections of the planned development) climate control and pleasing relationships of building mass.

 

(3)    The planned development shall be designed to minimize the likelihood of criminal activity by the following methods.

 

(A)   Minimizing those areas that are neither clearly private or public

 

(B)   Planting landscaping such that maximum observation is obtained while providing the desired degree of aesthetics

 

(4)    Building height, bulk, and “micro” coverage are regulated only inasmuch as they meet the performance criteria set out above.

 

(5)    No structure for human habitation shall be placed in an environmentally hazardous, fragile, or unique area.

 

(f)    Perimeter

 

(1)    Adjacent properties to the planned development shall be protected from adverse influences of traffic, land uses, building scale, and density by the combined use of screening, setbacks, and land use location.

 

(2)    Perimeter planning and coordination are required to assure continuity in the community facilities and services. The applicant shall demonstrate that the development proposal can be adequately served by community facilities and services without undue public expenditure.

 

(3)    Planned development projects which are within Fire Safety (FR) Overlay Districts shall develop perimeter areas in accordance with standards set forth in that element.

 

 

CHAPTER 6 PAROLEE HOMES
88.0601 Parolee Home.
(a)    Location Requirements

 

(1)    In evaluating requests for parolee homes, particular attention will be directed to the physical relationship and proximity of the proposed use to similar uses on the same or surrounding sites, the compatibility of the proposed use with neighboring uses (i.e., schools, parks, and other similar uses), and ensuring that no adverse effects on the public health, safety, or welfare will be created by the proposed use.

 

(2)    When a Conditional Use Permit for a parolee home is requested, other than for a renewal or ownership transfer, the parolee home shall be located a minimum of 660 feet away from an existing or proposed school, park, religious institution, hospital, youth facility, or other similar use.

 

(3)    When a Conditional Use Permit for a parolee home is requested, other than for a renewal or ownership transfer, the parolee home shall be located a minimum of 1,320 feet away from an existing parolee home or other similar use.

 

(b)    Operational Requirements

 

(1)    Each parolee home, or “parolee home” unit, is limited to a maximum number of six parolees with each bedroom not exceeding two parolees.

 

(2)    Multiple-family residential projects with less than 25 units shall be limited to one “parolee home” unit.

 

(3)    Multiple-family residential projects with 25 or more units shall be limited to two “parolee home” units.

 

(4)    The property owner or a designated on-site manager must live full-time on the site of the parolee home.

 

(5)    The Police Department shall be provided with a weekly update of the names of all parolees currently living at the parolee home.

 

(c)    Revocation

        Pursuant to Section 84.0105(b) of this Code, land uses, buildings or structures shall only be designed, occupied, and used for those land uses allowed by and in compliance with the provisions of the Development Code. The Planning Commission may revoke a Conditional Use Permit for any violation of this Code Section or the Conditions of Approval that are placed on a Conditional Use Permit. The revocation hearing must be noticed as a public hearing as required in Section 83.010330 of this Code, and the Planning Commission must make the necessary findings to revoke the Conditional Use Permit. (Added by Ord. 247 § 12, 2005)

 

 

 

CHAPTER 7 SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
88.0701 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to regulate, sexually-oriented businesses which, unless closely regulated, tend to have serious negative secondary effects on the community, which effects include, but are not limited to, the following: depreciation of property values and increase in vacancies in residential and commercial areas in the vicinity of sexually-oriented businesses; interference with residential property owners enjoyment of their property when such property is located in the vicinity of sexually-oriented businesses a result of increases in crime, litter, noise and vandalism; higher crime rates in the vicinity of sexually-oriented businesses; and blighting conditions such as low-level maintenance of commercial premises and parking lots, which thereby have a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to prevent these adverse effects and the blighting or degradation of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of the sexually-oriented businesses.

 

It is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to communication materials or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of sexually-oriented businesses to their intended market.

 

Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which violates any city ordinance or any statute of the State of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful or indecent exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof.

 

 

 

Notwithstanding any other provision of Volume II (Land Use and Development) of the Yucaipa Municipal Code, the regulations set forth under this chapter shall apply specifically to sexually-oriented businesses. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 5(part), 2000)

 

88.0705 Applicability and Exceptions.
This chapter shall apply to the establishment of a sexually-oriented business, as defined in Chapter 19 (Definitions Beginning with “S”) of Division 12 of Volume II (Land Use and Development) of the Yucaipa Municipal Code.

 

This chapter shall not apply to any of the following businesses or activities:

 

(a)    Any massage parlor or massage practitioner holding a valid current license issued pursuant to Section 5.04.030(A) of the Yucaipa Municipal Code.

 

(b)    Any treatment administered in good faith in the course of the practice of any healing art or profession by any person holding a valid license or certificate issues by the state to practice any such art or profession under the provisions of the state business and professions code or any other state law. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 5(part), 2000)

 

88.0710 Establishment of a Sexually-Oriented Business
The establishment of a sexually-oriented business shall be permitted only in the IC Land Use District as set forth in Section 84.0370 of Volume II (Land Use and Development) of the Yucaipa Municipal Code, subject to the following regulations:

 

(a)    A sexually-oriented business shall not be established or located within one hundred (100) feet of:

 

(1)    Any zone or land use district (of an adjacent jurisdiction) which contains the word “residential” or its equivalent (of the adjacent jurisdiction);

 

(2)    Any residential use or residential zone;

 

(3)    Any religious institution, or property zoned, planned or otherwise designated for such use by city action, where a construction or use approval has been issued by the city prior to the city’s receipt of an application for a sexually-oriented business permit;

 

(4)    Any funeral parlor, mortuary, cemetery, or similar facility where religious services are regularly conducted, or property zoned, planned or otherwise designated for such use by the city action, where a construction or use approval has been issued by the city prior to the city’s receipt of an application for sexually-oriented business permit;

 

(5)    Any school, public park, or public or private playground, or other recreational facility where minors congregate, or property zoned, planned or otherwise designated for such use by city action, where a construction or use approval has been issued by the prior to the city’s receipt of an application for a sexually-oriented business permit;

 

(6)    Any existing sexually-oriented business. If two (2) or more existing sexually-oriented businesses are located in closer proximity to each other than one hundred (100) feet, in determining which of the businesses is nonconforming, preference shall be given in the order of the respective lengths of continuous uninterrupted operation of the businesses.

 

(b)    The locational standards set forth in subsection (a), (1) through (6), inclusive, of this section shall pertain to legally established land uses in adjacent jurisdictions.

 

(c)    Each such sexually-oriented business must, prior to commencement or continuation or substantial enlargement of such business, first apply for and receive sexually-oriented business license in accordance with the provisions of Article 12 of Chapter 3 of Division 3, of Volume II of the Yucaipa Municipal Code.

 

(d)    Where two or more sexually-oriented business applications are submitted for businesses which would be located in closer proximity to each other than one hundred (100) feet, the application which was accepted first in time shall be processed by the city, with any later submitted applications deemed nonconforming until such time as a determination is made by the city on the initial application. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 5(part), 2000)

 

88.0715 Measurement of Distance.
For the purposes of this section, the distance between any two sexually-oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the boundaries of the city and to intervening structures, from the closest point of each business. The distance between any sexually-oriented business and any residential use, religious institution, school, public park or sensitive use shall also be measure in a straight line, without regard to the boundaries of the city and to intervening structures, from the nearest portion of the property line of the lot where such sexually-oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of a residential use, religious institution, school, public park or sensitive use. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 5(part), 2000)

 

88.0720 Misdemeanor Offenses.
In addition  to all other offenses specified in this chapter, the Municipal Code and state statutes, a sexually-oriented business shall be subject to the following restrictions:

 

(a)    Notwithstanding that it is not a criminal offense for a person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually-oriented business to be in violation of the nudity limitation set forth in Article 12 of Chapter 3 of Division 3 of Volume II of the Municipal Code, it shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to establish, substantially enlarge or operate a sexually-oriented business within the city without first complying with the provisions of this chapter.

 

(b)    It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to operate or cause to be operated a sexually-oriented business outside of the land use district specified in this chapter.

 

(c)    It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to operate or cause to be operated sexually-oriented business in violation of the locational standards set forth in Section 88.0710 of this chapter.

 

(d)    It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to cause or permit the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually-oriented business within the same building, structure or portion thereof, or to cause the increase of floor area of any sexually-oriented business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually-oriented business.

 

(e)    It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to cause or permit the operation, establishment or maintenance of a sex supermarket/sex mini-mall as defined herein. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 5(part), 2000)

 

88.0725 Violations/Penalties.
Any firm, corporation or person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any violation of the provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 5(part), 2000)

 

88.0730 Public Nuisance.
In addition to the penalties set forth above, any sexually-oriented business which is operating in violation of this chapter or any provision thereof, or Article 12 of Chapter 3 of Division 3 of Volume II of the Municipal Code, or any provision thereof, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 5(part), 2000)

 

88.0735 Amortization and Regulation of Nonconforming Sexually-Oriented Business Uses.
(a)    Any sexually-oriented business which was legally established prior to March 25, 1996, shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided herein.

 

(b)    Any use of real property existing on March 25, 1996, which does not conform to the provisions this chapter, but which was constructed, operated and maintained in compliance with all previous regulations, shall be regarded as a nonconforming use which may be continued until June 25, 2004, after which time all such nonconforming uses shall be terminated unless an extension of time has been approved by the city manager pursuant to Section 88.0740 of this chapter.

 

(c)    Abandonment. Notwithstanding the above, any discontinuance or abandonment of the use of any lot or structure as a sexually-oriented business for a period of one hundred and eighty (180) days shall result in a loss of legal nonconforming status of such use.

 

(d)    Amortization - annexed property. Any adult oriented business which was a legal use at the time of annexation of the property and which is located in the city, but which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be terminated within one year of the date of annexation, unless an extension of time has been approved by the city manager in accordance with the provisions of Section 88.0740 of this chapter.

 

(e)    Any nonconforming sexually-oriented business shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use.

 

(f)    If two or more sexually-oriented businesses are within one hundred (100) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually-oriented business which was first established and has continually operated at the particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is nonconforming.

 

(g)    Any sexually-oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of a sexually-oriented business permit and/or license, of a school, public park, religious institution, public building likely to be frequented by minors, residential or other sensitive use within one hundred (100) feet of the sexually-oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit and/or license and does not apply when an application for a permit and/or license is submitted after a permit and/or license has expired or has been revoked. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 5(part), 2000)

 

88.0740 Extension of Time for Termination of Nonconforming Use.
The owner or operator of a nonconforming use as described in Section 88.0735(b) or (d) may apply under the provisions of this section to the city manager for an extension of time within which to terminate the nonconforming use, as follows:

 

(a)    Time and manner of application. An application for an extension of time within which to terminate a use made nonconforming by the provisions of this chapter may be filed by the owner of the real property upon which such use operated, or by the operator of the use. Such application must be filed with the city manager at least sixty (60) days but no more than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the time established in Section 88.0735 for termination of such use.

 

(b)    Content of application; fees. The application shall state the grounds for requesting an extension of time. The filing fee for such application shall be the same as that for a variance as is set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution from time to time by the city council. An application which fails to state a basis upon which an extension may be granted, as set forth in subsection (d) hereinbelow shall be returned to the applicant, as nonresponsive, together with the application fee less any administrative costs of processing the application.

 

(c)    Hearing procedure. The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to hear the application. The hearing officer shall set the matter for hearing within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and subject to judicial review pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

 

(d)    Approval of extension; findings. An extension under the provisions of this section shall be for a reasonable period of time commensurate with the investment involved, and shall be approved only if the hearing officer makes all of the following findings or such other findings as are required by law.

 

(1)    For uses which are rendered nonconforming by virtue of their proximity to other uses, pursuant to Section 88.0735:

 

(A)   The applicant has made a substantial investment (including but not limited to lease obligations) in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; such property or structure cannot be readily converted to another use; and such investment was made prior to March 25, 1996, or prior to the date of annexation; and

 

(B)   The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of the date established for termination of the use; and

 

(C)   The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the investment and to relocate the use to a location in conformance with Section 88.0735.

 

(2)    For uses which comply with the requirements of Section 88.073 5, but whose business operations must be modified in order to comply with other provisions of Chapter 7:

 

(A)   The applicant has made a substantial investment (including but not limited to lease obligations) in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; such property or structure cannot be readily converted so as to comply with the requirements of Chapter 7 within the time period provided in Section 88.0735; and such investment was made prior to March 25, 1996, or prior to the date of annexation; and

 

(B)   The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of the date established for modification or termination of the use; and

 

(C)   The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the investment and has filed plans with the city which demonstrate the ability and intent to comply with the requirements of Chapter 7 within a reasonable time, but needs additional time within which to make the required modifications. This finding shall be made with respect to each aspect of compliance, and no extension shall be granted for modifications which are required by Chapter 7 and which can be made without additional time. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 5(part), 2000)

 

CHAPTER 8 CEMETERY DESIGN STANDARDS
88.0805 Findings.
The City Planner, when approving a Conditional Use Permit for the establishment or expansion of a cemetery, including pet cemeteries, shall find and justify the following to be true, in addition to the findings required in subsection 83.030120 (d).

 

(a)    The present or probable population density in the area contiguous to said proposed cemetery or extension of an existing cemetery is not adversely affected by the cemetery development.

 

(b)    The proposed cemetery or extension of an existing cemetery does not interfere with the free movement of traffic or the movement of police, ambulance, or fire equipment for the protection of the lives and property of the public.

 

(c)    A Final Map has been required to be submitted to the City Engineer for review and recordation as specified by and subject to subsection 83.040201 (d).

 

(d)    The proposed cemetery or expansion complies with the California Health and Safety Code, Division 8.

 

88.0810 Requirements.
(a)    In addition to any conditions necessary to ensure protection of public health, safety, and general welfare, the City Planner may require adequate screening or fencing of the property reserved for cemetery purposes in order to clarify the ultimate boundaries of said cemetery.

 

(b)    An approved Conditional Use Permit or revised Conditional Use Permit shall be required for the establishment of cemetery boundaries or the expansion of previously approved boundaries. Such approvals shall identify all proposed structures and major grading activities.

 

(c)    A Conditional Use Permit shall not be required for normal on-site development of grave sites within previously approved or established cemeteries that have recorded a map in compliance with subsection 83.04020 (d) of this Code.

 

CHAPTER 9 SMALL LOT STANDARDS
88.0901 Intent.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide development standards for substandard lots which will minimize the impacts to water, sewage treatment, roads, and fire protection resources.

 

88.0905 Locational Standards.
(a)    Small Lot Standards shall apply to lots that are 5,000 square feet or less or that are less than 60 feet in width.

 

88.0915 Development Standards.
All new dwellings and accessory structures on substandard lots shall be subject to the following development standards and special requirements.

 

(a)    Lot Merger Requirements

One of the following shall be submitted to the City Planner or Building Official for all substandard lots prior to issuance of any development permit.

 

(1)    A Notice of Merger of the subject lot with an abutting lot in common contiguous ownership that has been recorded; or

 

(2)    Record of Ownership

To ascertain whether said lots are owned by the same person, documentation shall be submitted showing the record ownership of the subject lot and all lots sharing a common side lot line with the subject lot, on and after the imposition of this ordinance and up to the time of application for building permit.

 

(b)    Dedication Requirement

An offer of dedication or grant of road easement shall be required prior to the issuance of a development permit to provide a minimum 40-foot right-of-way width on all roads or streets or other width as deemed necessary by the General Plan or City Engineer.

 

(c)    Yard Requirements

 

(1)    Front Yards

The front yard setback may be reduced to no less than 15 feet.

 

(2)    Interior Side Yard

Each side of each lot may be reduced to no less than five feet, provided there is at least 10 feet between structures.

 

(d)    Evidence of Water Service

A signed letter provided by the water serving entity shall be submitted, certifying that adequate line and storage capacity exists or will exist to serve the proposed dwelling and that arrangements have been made to serve each dwelling with a potable water system at the time of occupancy or final building inspection, if applicable. This requires that the water main shall be in place to serve the subject property or that financial arrangements have been made with the water company for installation of the water main. In the absence of such a water-serving entity, an approved domestic water system under pressure is required to serve each proposed dwelling. This water system must be certified by the City Planner, and a copy of the certification shall be submitted to the Building Official.

 

(e)    Evidence of Sewer Service

A signed letter provided by the serving sewer entity shall be submitted, certifying that an adequate collection system and treatment plant capacity exists or will exist to serve the proposed dwelling, and that sewage hookup arrangements have been made to serve each proposed dwelling at the time of occupancy or final building inspection, if applicable. In the absence of such a sewering agency, a letter from the City Planner indicating that an individual sewage system with subsurface disposal is permitted shall be submitted to the Building Official.

 

(f)    Survey Requirements

Evidence shall be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer that each lot has been surveyed and staked in accordance with the provisions of the Land Surveyors Act by a Registered Civil Engineer or Licensed Land Surveyor, or evidence of a past survey shall be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer as being in conformance with the Land Surveyors Act.

 

 

 

CHAPTER 10 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
88.01001 Purpose and Intent.
(a)    The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the siting of wireless telecommunications towers and antennas as follows:

 

(1)    Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas;

 

(2)    Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas;

 

(3)    Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;

 

(4)    Encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of single-use towers;

 

(5)    Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal, now and in the future;

 

(6)    Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse the visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques;

 

(7)    Enhance the ability of providers of wireless telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently;

 

(8)    Consider the public health and safety of wireless telecommunication towers;

 

(9)    Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures;

 

(10)  Retain local responsibility for and control over the use of the public right of way to protect citizens and enhance the quality of their lives;

 

(11)  Create and preserve telecommunication facilities that will serve as an important and effective part of the city’s emergency response network;

 

(12)  Promote fair and effective wireless telecommunication services and ensure that a broad range of competitive telecommunications services with high quality telecommunications infrastructure are available to serve the community. (Added by Ord. 204 § 4, 2001)

 

88.01005 Applicability.
(a)    New Towers and Antennas. All new towers or antennas shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in subsections (b) through (e) herein, inclusive.

 

(b)    Amateur Radio Station Operators/Receive Only Antennas. This section shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under seventy feet (70′) in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator, or is used exclusively for receive only antennas.

 

(c)    Pre-Existing Towers or Antennas. Pre-existing towers and pre-existing antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section, other the requirements of Sections 88.01010(b) and (c).

 

(d)    AM Array. For purposes of implementing this section, an AM array consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers including in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right.

 

(e)    Small Wireless Facilities. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Municipal Code to the contrary, all small wireless facilities as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.60002(l), as may be amended or superseded, shall be subject only to, and must comply with, the “Citywide Policy Regarding Permitting Requirements and Development Standards for Small Wireless Facilities” adopted by City Council resolution. No person shall construct, install, attach, operate, collocate, modify, reconstruct, relocate, remove, or otherwise deploy any small wireless facility in violation of such policy. (Added by Ord. 204 § 4, 2001; amended by Ord. 388 § 3, 2020)

 

88.01010 General Requirements.
(a)    Inventory of Existing Sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the community development director an inventory of its existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the city or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The community development director may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or conditional use permits under this section or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the city, provided, however, that the community development director is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.

 

(b)    State or Federal Requirements. All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by the this section shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense.

 

(c)    Building Codes and Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30) days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense.

 

(d)    Measurement. For the purposes of this section, all distances shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest point of the proposed major wireless telecommunication facility to the nearest point of another major wireless telecommunication facility. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in the city irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries.

 

(e)    Not Essential Services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.

 

(f)    Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless communication system in the city have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the community development director.

 

(g)    Public Notice. For purposes of this section, any permitted use, conditional use, permit request, variance request, or appeal of an administratively approved use special use or shall require public notice to all abutting property owners and all property owners of properties that are located within the corresponding separation distance listed in Section 83.010330(a)(6), in addition to any notice otherwise required by state law or the Municipal Code.

 

(h)    Multiple Antenna/Tower Plan. The city encourages the users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process, in compliance with the Permit Streamlining Act. (Added by Ord. 204 § 4, 2001)

 

88.01015 Permitted Uses.
(a)    General. The uses listed in this section are deemed permitted uses and shall not require administrative approval or a conditional use permit.

 

(1)    Permitted Uses. The following uses are specifically permitted:

 

 

(A)   Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the city.

 

(b)    Notice. Notification shall be provided to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet. (Added by Ord. 204 § 4, 2001)

 

 

 

88.01020 General Screening and Site Selection Guidelines.
(a)    Stealth facilities and concealed antennas are preferred.

 

(b)    Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be located where the existing topography, vegetation, building or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening. Where insufficient screening exists, applicants shall provide screening satisfactory to the community development director, or as otherwise required.

 

(c)    Ground-mounted wireless telecommunication facilities shall be located only in close proximity to existing above-ground utilities, such as permanent electrical towers, light poles, trees of comparable heights, and in areas where they will not detract from the appearance of the city.

 

(d)    Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be located in the following order of preference:

 

(1)    Co-located with other major wireless telecommunication facilities;

 

(2)    On existing structures such as buildings, communication towers, or utility facilities not subject to the city’s under grounding ordinance;

 

(3)    On existing signal, power, light or similar kinds of permanent poles;

 

(4)    In industrial land use districts;

 

(5)    In commercial land use districts;

 

(6)    In residential land use districts (minor wireless telecommunication facilities only). (Added by Ord. 204 § 4, 2001)

 

88.01025 General Development Requirements.
(a)    Applicants for wireless telecommunication facilities shall be required to provide written documentation demonstrating good faith efforts to satisfy the site selection guidelines set forth in Section 88.01020 herein.

 

(b)    Applicants for wireless telecommunication facilities shall be required to provide written documentation of the proposed site and alternative site analysis and facility design. The analysis shall identify all reasonable, technically feasible site locations which could provide the proposed telecommunication service. The analysis shall address the potential for co-location at an existing or, at the proposed site. It shall explain the rationale for selection of the proposed site in view of the relative merits of the alternative sites.

 

(c)    Applicants for wireless telecommunication facilities may be required to provide a visual analysis with cross sections of the proposed site as determined by the community development director.

 

(d)    Wireless telecommunication facilities shall not bear any signs or advertising devices other than certification, warning, or other required seals or legally required signage.

 

(e)    Accessory equipment associated with the operation of the wireless telecommunication facility shall be located within a building, enclosure, or underground vault that complies with the development requirements of the land use district in which the accessory equipment is located, subject to city approval. If the equipment is permitted to be located above ground, it shall be visually compatible with the surrounding buildings and include sufficient landscaping to screen the structure from view.

 

(f)    Wireless telecommunication facilities shall, to the extent possible, use non-reflective materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings.

 

(g)    If an antenna is located on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be compatible with the existing architecture and of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.

 

(h)    Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding view.

 

(i)     Monopoles and antennas shall be no greater in diameter or cross-sectional dimensions than is necessary for proper function of the wireless communication facility. The applicant shall provide documentation satisfactory to the community development director establishing compliance with this subsection. (Added by Ord. 204 § 4, 2001)

 

88.01030 Minor Wireless Telecommunication Facilities; Administrative Approval Allowed.
(a)    Minor wireless telecommunication facilities shall be subject to approval by the community development director pursuant to Section 83.030305 (Land Use Compliance Review) of Volume II of the Municipal Code.

 

(b)    Each applicant for administrative review and approval shall apply to the community development director, providing the information set forth in Section 88.0 1025 and a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing the application.

 

(c)    Considering applications for minor wireless telecommunication facilities, the community development director shall be guided by both the provisions of Section 88.030305 (Procedures) of Volume II of the Municipal Code and this section. However, in the event of any inconsistency in said standards, the provisions of this section shall govern.

 

(d)    The community development director shall respond to each such application within sixty (60) days after accepting the application as complete, by either approving or denying the application.

 

(e)    In connection with any such administrative approval, the community development director may, in order to encourage shared use, administratively waive any land use district setback requirements in Section 88.01040(b)(4) or separating distances in Section 88 .01040(b)(5) up to fifty percent (50%).

 

(f)    In connection with any such administrative approval, the community development director may, in order to encourage the use of monopoles, administratively allow the reconstruction of an exiting tower to monopole construction.

 

(g)    If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant may file an appeal application under Article 6 of Chapter 1 of Division 3 of this Code. (Added by Ord. 204 § 4, 2001)

 

88.01035 List of Minor Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Subject to Administrative Procedure.
(a)    The following are considered minor wireless telecommunications facilities subject to the administrative approval set forth in Section 88.01030 herein.

 

(1)    A facility in any General Commercial (CG), Service Commercial (CS), or Community Industrial (IC) district that is stealth in design and does not exceed the height limit of the land use district in which it is located.

 

(2)    A building-façade or wall-mounted facility, which does not exceed the height of the parapet wall or roofline of the building.

 

(3)    A roof-mounted facility, which is screened by solid material on all four sides and does not exceed the maximum height of the land use district in which it is located.

 

(4)    Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with the terms of subsections (A) and (B) below.

 

(A)   Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna which is not attached to a tower may be approved by the community development director as an accessory use to any commercial, industrial, office professional, institutional, or multi-family structure of eight or more dwelling units, provided:

 

(i)     The antenna does not exceed more than ten feet (10′) above the highest point of the structure;

 

(ii)    The antenna complies with all FAA and FCC regulations; and

 

(iii)   The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.

 

(B)   Antennas on existing towers. An antenna which is attached to an existing tower may be approved by the community development director and, to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of towers, co-location of antennas by more than one carrier on existing towers shall take the precedence over the construction of new towers, provided such co-location is accomplished in a manner consistent with the following:

 

(i)     A tower which is modified to accommodate an additional antenna shall be the same tower type as the existing tower, unless the community development director allows reconstruction as a monopole.

 

(ii)    Height

 

(a)    An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed thirty feet (30′) over the tower’s existing height to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna.

 

(b)    The height change referred to in subsection (ii)(a) shall not require an additional distance separation as set forth in Section 88.01040(b)(5). The tower’s pre-modification height shall be used to calculate such distance separations.

 

 

(iii)   Onsite locations

 

(a)    A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna may be moved onsite within fifty feet (50′) of its existing location.

 

(b)    After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate colocation, only one tower may remain on the site.

 

(c)    A relocated onsite tower shall continue to be measured from the original tower location for purposes of calculating separation distances between pursuant to Section 88. 1040(b)(5). The relocation of a tower hereunder shall in no way be deemed to cause a violation of . Section 88.01040(b)(5).

 

(d)    The onsite relocation of tower which comes within the separation distances of residential units or residentially zoned land as established in Section 88.0l040(b)(5) shall only be permitted when approved by the community development director.

 

(5)    Installing a cable micro-cell network through the use of multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such as conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology that does not require the use of towers. (Added by Ord. 204 § 4, 2001)

 

88.01040 Major Wireless Telecommunication Facilities; Conditional Use Permit Required.
(a)    General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of conditional use permits for towers or antennas by the planning commission:

 

(1)    Applications for conditional use permits under this section shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of Article 1 of Chapter 3 of Division 3 of Volume II of the Municipal Code.

 

(2)    In considering applications for major wireless communications facilities, the planning commission shall be guided by the provisions of Article 1 of Chapter 3 of Division 3 of Volume II of the Municipal Code and this section. However, in the event of any inconsistency in said standards, the provisions of this section shall govern.

 

(3)    The decision of the planning commission shall be final unless appealed in writing within ten calendar days pursuant to Article 6 of Chapter 1 of Division 3 of Volume II of this code.

 

(4)    If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under Section 88.01015 or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to Section 88.01035 of this code, then a conditional use permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all land use districts. As a condition of issuance of a conditional use permit for a facility utilizing the public right of way, an applicant may be required to enter into a franchise agreement with the city.

 

(5)    In granting a conditional use permit, the planning commission may impose conditions to the extent the planning commission concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties.

 

(6)    Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer.

 

(7)    An applicant for a conditional use permit shall submit the information described in this section and a non-refundable fee as established by resolution of the city council to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing the application.

 

(b)    Towers.

 

(1)    Information required. In addition to any information required for applications for conditional use permits pursuant to Article 1 of Chapter 3 of Division 3 of Volume II of this code, applicants for a conditional use permit for a tower shall submit the following information:

 

(A)   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities), general plan classification of the site and all properties within the applicable separation distances set forth in Section 88.01040(b)(5), adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other structures, topography, parking, and other information deemed by the community development director to be necessary to assess compliance with this section.

 

 

(B)   Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable).

 

(C)   The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties.

 

(D)   The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to Section 88.01010(a) shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known.

 

(E)   A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.

 

 

 

(F)    Method of fencing, and finished color, and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination.

 

(G)   A description of compliance with Sections 88.01010(a), (b), (c), (d), and (f), and 88.01025(d), (e), (f), (g), (h) and (i), and 88.01040(b)(4) and 88.01040(b)(5).

 

(H)   A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future users.

 

(I)    Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in the city.

 

(J)    A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the services to be provided through the use of the proposed new tower.

 

(K)   A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or antennas within the city based upon existing physical, engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected.

 

(2)    Factors Considered in Granting Conditional Use Permits for Towers. In addition to any standards for consideration of conditional use permit applications pursuant to Article 1 of Chapter 3 of Division 3 of Volume II of this code, the planning commission shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a conditional use permit, although the planning commission may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the planning commission concludes that the goals of this section are better served thereby:

 

(A)   Height of the proposed tower;

 

(B)   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries;

 

(C)   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;

 

(D)   Surrounding topography;

 

(E)   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;

 

(F)    Design of the . tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness;

 

(G)   Proposed ingress and egress; and

 

(H)   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures, as discussed in Section 88.01040(b)(3) of this section.

 

(3)    Availability of Suitable Existing Towers, Other Structures, or Alternative Technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the planning commission that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit information required by this section and/or requested by the planning commission related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alterative technology can accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:

 

(A)   No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area which meet applicant’s engineering requirements.

 

(B)   Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant’s engineering requirements.

 

(C)   Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant’s proposed antenna and related equipment.

 

(D)   The applicant’s proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant’s proposed antenna.

 

(E)   The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.

 

(F)    The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.

 

(G)   The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable micro-cell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable.

 

(4)    Setback Requirements. The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers for which a conditional use permit is required; provided, however, that the planning commission may reduce the standard setback requirements if the goals of this section would be better served thereby.

 

(A)   Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least one-hundred percent (100%) of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line.

 

(B)   Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum land use district setback requirements.

 

(5)    Separation Requirements. The following separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which a conditional use permit is required; provided, however, that the planning commission may reduce the standard separation requirements if the goals of this section would be better served thereby.

 

(A)   No tower shall be sited closer than one thousand (1,000) feet from an existing, or otherwise approved facility, unless the new facility is a co-located facility, in which case the minimum separation shall be seven hundred and fifty (750) feet. However, where the co-located facility is less than seventy-five (75) feet in height, the minimum separation shall be five hundred (500) feet.

 

(B)   Separation distances between towers shall be .applicable for and measured between the proposed tower and pre-existing towers. The separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower.

 

(6)    Height. The planning commission may consider approval of towers proposed to exceed the maximum height limit of the underlying land use district as part of its review of a conditional use permit application. In approving the height of a tower, the planning commission shall give consideration to the potential for co-location and whether the requirements of the applicant as demonstrated in the site analysis indicate a need for an increased height.

 

(7)    Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, that the planning commission may waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate.

 

(8)    Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers for which a conditional use permit is required; provided, however, that the planning commission may waive such requirements if the goals of this section would be better served thereby.

 

(A)   Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from property used for residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound.

 

(B)   In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived.

 

(C)   Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.

 

(9)    Performance Standards. No wireless telecommunication facility shall interfere with the public safety radio communications system, including, but not limited to, the eight hundred (800) MHz trunking system. If such facility is found to interfere with the pubic safety radio system, it shall immediately cease operations until such time as the interference is resolved to the satisfaction of the city.

 

(10)  Temporary Facilities in Connection With Permanent, Approved Facilities. A temporary wireless communication facility may be deployed subject to approval by the community development director and if it meets the following:

 

(A)   A permanent wireless communication facility has been approved for the property in question.

 

(B)   The temporary facility was approved as part of the conditional use permit or minor development review.

 

 

(C)   The facility is deployed for no more than six months, provided that no more than two, ninety (90) day extensions may be granted by the community development director, with the total duration for the facility not to exceed one year. (Added by Ord. 204 § 4, 2001)

 

88.01045 Buildings or Other Equipment Storage.
(a)    Antennas Mounted on Structures or Rooftops.

 

(1)    The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than three hundred and fifty (350) square feet of gross floor area or be more than eleven feet (11′) in height.

 

(2)    If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and structures shall not occupy more than ten percent of the roof area. As with all roof-mounted equipment, this equipment must be screened from view of any public right of way.

 

(3)    Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all applicable city building codes, regulations and land use standards.

 

(b)    Antennas Mounted on Utility Poles or Light Poles. The equipment cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be located in accordance with the following:

 

(1)    In residential districts, the equipment cabinet may be located:

 

(A)   In a front or side yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than three feet in height and nine square feet in gross floor area, and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from all lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at least forty-eight (48) inches and a planted height of at least thirty-six (36) inches.

 

(B)   In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than six feet in height and thirty-five (35) square feet in gross floor area.

 

(2)    In commercial or industrial districts the equipment cabinet or structure shall be no greater than eight feet in height and one hundred (100) square feet in gross floor area. The structure or cabinet shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of six feet and a planted height of at least thirty-six (36) inches.

 

(c)    Antennas Located on Towers. The related unmanned equipment structure shall not contain more than three-hundred and fifty (350) square feet of gross floor area or be more than eleven feet (11′) in height, and shall be located in accordance with the minimum yard requirements of the land use district in which it is located. The unmanned equipment structure or cabinet shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of six feet and a planted height of at least thirty-six (36) inches.

 

(d)    Modification of Building Size Requirements. The requirements of Sections 88.01045(a) through (c) may be modified by the community development director in the case of administratively approved uses or by the planning commission in the case of uses permitted by conditional use permit, to encourage collocation. (Added by Ord. 204 § 4, 2001)

 

88.01050 Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Towers.
(a)    Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within ninety (90) days of receipt of written notice from the community development director notifying the owner of such abandonment. If the owner does not remove the equipment or does not request a hearing before the planning commission on the issue of whether the equipment is abandoned and subject to removal, the city may remove the equipment and store it in a secure location. The owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date the city provides the owner with written notice of removal of the equipment and notification of the current location of equipment, to reclaim the equipment. If the equipment is not reclaimed in accordance with this section, the city may dispose of the equipment in accordance with the city’s existing policy for disposal of abandoned or lost property.

 

(b)    Upon written request for a hearing made pursuant to subsection (a), the community development director shall schedule a hearing on the matter to be conducted before the planning commission at which time the owner may present any relevant evidence on the issue of abandonment. The planning commission may affirm,  reverse or modify with or without conditions the original determination of abandonment and shall make written findings in support of its decision. The decision of the planning commission shall be final.

 

(c)    Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within thirty (30) days of the final determination of abandonment shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. (Added by Ord. 204 § 4, 2001)

 

88.01055 Nonconforming Uses.
(a)    No expansion of nonconforming uses. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure.

 

(b)    Pre-existing towers. Installed towers preexisting the effective date of this section shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be permitted on such preexisting towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements of this section.

 

(c)    Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or antennas. Notwithstanding Section 88.01050, bona fide nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain administrative approval or a conditional use permit and without having to meet the separation requirements specified in Sections 88.01040(b)(4) and (5). The type, height, and location of the tower onsite shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility approval. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then applicable building codes and shall be obtained within one hundred and eighty (180) days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in Section 88.01050 herein. (Added by Ord. 204 § 4, 2001)

 

 

CHAPTER 11 EMERGENCY SHELTERS
88.01101 Standards for Emergency Shelters.
In accordance with the authority granted in Section 65583(a)(4) of the Government Code, all emergency shelters shall comply with the following development and management standards:

 

(a)    Lighting

Adequate external lighting shall be provided for security purposes. The lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of an intensity that is compatible with the neighborhood.

 

(b)    Security

Parking and outdoor facilities shall be designed to provide security for residents, visitors and employees. On-site supervisory personnel shall be provided at all times during the hours the shelter is in operation.

 

(c)    Parking

The shelter shall have not less than one parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area, unless it is demonstrated by credible evidence that a different parking ratio is appropriate based on the shelter’s demonstrated need.

 

(d)    Client Intake

The waiting and client intake areas shall be at least 500 square feet in total floor area.

 

(e)    Shelter Provider

The agency or organization that is operating the shelter shall comply with the following requirements:

 

(1)    Temporary shelter shall be available to residents for no more than 180 consecutive days.

 

(2)    Staff and services shall be provided to assist residents to obtain permanent shelter and income.

 

(3)    The provider shall prepare and file a management plan with the City that includes clear operational rules and standards, including, but not limited to, standards governing expulsions and lights out, security, screening of residents to ensure compatibility with services provided at the shelter, and opportunities for training, counseling, and treatment programs for residents.

 

(4)    The shelter may not be located within 300 feet of another emergency shelter.

 

(f)    Refuse Collection Areas

Refuse shall be stored in a trash collection area in conformance with the requirements for multiple residential housing, as described in Section 88.0215(b). (Added by Ord. 296 § 7, 2010)

 

88.01105 Review Procedures for Emergency Shelters.
To accommodate the city’s emergency housing need as required by Section 65583(a)(4) of the California Government Code, emergency shelters shall be allowed by right in the Service Commercial (CS) District subject to the provisions of Section 88.01101 of this Code. For the purposes of this chapter, “emergency shelter” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 812.05011 of this Code. The City shall not require a Conditional Use Permit or other discretionary permit for the construction of an emergency shelter. (Added by Ord. 296 § 7, 2010)

 

88.01110 Denial of an Emergency Shelter.
The City may not disapprove an emergency shelter, or condition the approval of an emergency shelter in a manner that makes its development infeasible, unless it makes written findings, based upon substantial evidence in the record, as to one of the following:

 

(a)    The City has met or exceeded the need for emergency shelters as identified in the housing element.

 

(b)    The emergency shelter would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development of the emergency shelter financially infeasible. As used in this subsection, a “specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. Inconsistency with the Zoning Ordinance or General Plan land use designation shall not constitute a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety.

 

(c)    The denial of the project or imposition of conditions is required in order to comply with specific State or Federal law, and there is no feasible method to comply without rendering the development of the emergency shelter financially infeasible.

 

(d)    The emergency shelter is proposed on land zoned for agriculture or resource preservation that is surrounded on at least two sides by land being used for agricultural or resource preservation purposes, or which does not have adequate water or wastewater facilities to serve the project.

 

(e)    The emergency shelter is inconsistent with both the City’s zoning ordinance and general plan land use designation as specified in any element of the general plan as it existed on the date the application was deemed complete, and the City has adopted a revised housing element in accordance with Government Code Section 65588 that is in substantial compliance with State law. (Added by Ord. 296 § 7, 2010)

 

 

CHAPTER 12 SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY FACILITIES
88.01201 Intent.
The provisions of this chapter are intended to provide opportunities for the development of permanent, affordable housing for small households and for people with special needs in proximity to services, and to establish standards for these small units. (Added by Ord. 296 § 8, 2010)

 

88.01205 Location.
A single room occupancy facility may only be proposed and approved in the Service Commercial (CS) Land Use District. (Added by Ord. 296 § 8, 2010)

 

88.01210 Project Review and Approval.
A proposed single room occupancy facility shall require the review and approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Section 83.030120 of this Code. (Added by Ord. 296 § 8, 2010)

 

88.01215 Development Standards.
(a)    Single Room Occupancy Facilities

 

(1)    Density

A single room occupancy facility is not required to meet density standards of the General Plan.

 

(2)    Common Area

Four square feet of common space per unit shall be provided, with at least 200 square feet in area of interior common space, excluding janitorial storage, laundry facilities and common hallways.

 

(3)    Laundry Facilities

Laundry facilities must be provided in a separate room at the ratio of one washer and dryer for every 20 units or fractional number thereof.

 

(4)    Cleaning Supply Room

A cleaning supply room or utility closet with a wash-tub with hot and cold running water shall be provided on each floor of the facility.

 

(5)    Mail Receptacles

A locking mail receptacle for each residential unit shall be provided, consistent with the applicable standards for apartment housing mail receptacles in the United States Postal Service Domestic Mail Manual.

 

(6)    Refuse Collection Areas

Refuse shall be stored in a trash collection area in conformance with the requirements for multiple residential housing, as described in Section 88.0215(b).

 

(b)    Single Room Occupancy Units

 

(1)    Unit Size

A single room occupancy unit shall have a minimum size of 150 square feet and a maximum size of 400 square feet.

 

(2)    Occupancy

A single room occupancy unit shall accommodate a maximum of two persons.

 

(3)    Bathroom

A single room occupancy unit is not required to, but it may contain partial or full bathroom facilities. A partial bathroom facility shall have at least a toilet and sink; a full facility shall have a toilet, sink and bathtub, shower or bathtub/shower combination. If a full bathroom facility is not provided, common bathroom facilities shall be provided in accordance with the California Building Code for congregate residences with at least one full bathroom per floor.

 

(4)    Kitchen

A single room occupancy unit is not required to, but it may contain partial or full kitchen facilities. A full kitchen includes a sink, a refrigerator and a stove, range top or oven. A partial kitchen is missing at least one of these appliances. If a full kitchen is not provided, common kitchen facilities shall be provided with at least one full kitchen per floor.

 

(5)    Closet

Each single room occupancy unit shall have a separate closet.

 

 

(6)    Code Compliance

Single room occupancy units shall comply with all requirements of the California Building Code.

 

(7)    Accessibility

All single room occupancy units shall comply with all applicable accessibility and adaptability requirements. All common areas shall be fully accessible.

 

(8)    Management

A single room occupancy facility with 10 or more units shall provide on-site management. A single room occupancy facility with less than ten (10) units shall provide a management office on-site. A management plan shall be submitted with the development application for a single room occupancy facility and shall be approved by the City. The management plan must address management and operation of the facility, rental procedures, the safety and security of residents, and building maintenance.

 

(9)    Parking

Off street parking shall be provided consistent with Section 87.0630(d) of this Code. Secure bicycle parking shall also be provided.

 

(10)  Tenancy

Tenancy of single room occupancy units shall be no less than 30 days.

 

(11)  Existing Structures

An existing structure may be converted to a single room occupancy facility, consistent with the provisions of this chapter. (Added by Ord. 296 § 8, 2010)

 

 

CHAPTER 13 HIGH DENSITY MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
88.01301 General Provisions.
(a)    Intent. The High Density Multiple Residential (RM-24) District is intended to facilitate the implementation of General Plan policies that allow for the development of high quality multiple-family housing that also may be affordable to lower income households. The RM-24 district provides alternate review procedures and development standards to the existing multiple residential requirements and standards that are specified by this Code. When the High Density Multiple Residential (RM-24) District is established on any property, including within the Freeway Corridor Specific Plan, the review procedures and development standards used for that site shall be those set forth in this chapter.

 

(b)    Location Requirements. The High Density Multiple Residential (RM-24) District shall be located as specified by the Yucaipa General Plan. The district shall encompass a minimum area of five gross acres.

 

(c)    Project Review Requirements. Dwelling units constructed in the High Density Multiple Residential (RM-24) District shall be permitted by right, pursuant to the administrative review procedures contained in Development Code Section 83.030305 (Land Use Compliance Review). (Added by Ord. 298 § 6, 2010)

 

88.01305 Parking Requirements.
(a)    Each studio/efficiency dwelling unit shall be provided with one and one-half parking spaces within a fully enclosed garage or within a covered carport. Each one or two bedroom dwelling unit shall be provided with two parking spaces within a fully enclosed garage or within a covered carport. Each dwelling unit with three or more bedrooms shall be provided with two and one-half parking spaces within a fully enclosed garage or within a covered carport. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the total number of required fully enclosed or covered parking spaces shall be provided within fully enclosed garages. An attempt shall be made to locate the carport/garage adjacent to the unit being served. If it is not located adjacent to the unit being served, the carport/garage shall be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the dwelling unit that it is designed to serve. All parking spaces shall maintain a minimum inside dimension of ten (10) feet in width by twenty (20) feet in length.

 

(b)    One open parking space for each two dwelling units shall be provided for guest parking. Such parking shall be distributed throughout the development site.

 

(c)    Required parking spaces shall be side by side, and tandem parking shall not be counted toward the minimum parking requirements.

 

(d)    Unless otherwise approved by the granting of a major variance, on-street parking shall not be used to satisfy any of the parking requirements. (Added by Ord. 298 § 6, 2010)

 

88.01310 Dwelling Size and Amenities.
(a)    Studio/efficiency units shall be a minimum of five hundred fifty (550) square feet; one bedroom units shall be a minimum of six hundred fifty (650) square feet; two bedroom units shall be a minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet; three or more bedroom units shall be a minimum of nine hundred (900) square feet. To assure that smaller units are not overly concentrated in one project, no more than ten (10) percent of the total number of units shall be studio/efficiency units, and no more than thirty-five (35) percent of the total number of units shall be one bedroom units.

 

(b)    In no case may any building or structure exceed three stories.

 

(c)    All bedrooms in any unit shall have a minimum area of one hundred (100) square feet, including any closet space. Projects with plans showing a bonus room, den or other similar nomenclature shall be treated as if an additional bedroom were being proposed, if said room has direct access to a bathroom and/or contains closet space.

 

(d)    A laundry facility including washer and dryer hook-ups shall be provided within each residential unit or in an attached garage. An automatic garbage disposal shall be provided in each dwelling unit.

 

(e)    Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of private open space of one hundred fifty (150) square feet, in the form of patio or private yard, with a minimum dimension of ten (10) feet. For units above the ground unit, one or two balconies with a combined area of one hundred (100) square feet shall be provided.

 

(f)    At least three items from the following list of amenities shall be provided to each unit, but only one of the items marked by an asterisk can be counted towards the three items that are provided:

 

(1)    Fireplace;

 

(2)    Bay or kitchen greenhouse windows;

 

(3)    Skylights;

 

(4)    Oversized closets;

 

(5)    Refrigerator;*

 

(6)    Automatic dishwasher;*

 

(7)    Washer/dryer units;*

 

(8)    Entry courtyard or arbor;

 

(9)    Decorative doors;

 

(10)  Enclosed garage, when not required;

 

(11)  Air conditioner;*

 

(12)  Security alarm system;

 

(13)  Automatic garage door opener;

 

(14)  Other comparable features.

 

(g)    Each door providing ingress and egress to any dwelling unit subject to this section shall be equipped with the following devices:

 

(1)    A peephole allowing a person inside the unit to see, at a wide angle, persons outside of the unit at the door, without the person inside being seen. The Planning Commission may consider other options to a peephole that provide like security features.


(2)    A deadbolt lock attached to the construction studding. Attachment to the doorjamb or trim shall not be sufficient to comply with the terms of this requirement.

 

(h)    Each unit shall be provided with a minimum of one hundred twenty-five (125) cubic feet of exterior lockable storage space. The storage space shall be located outside of the dwelling at grade or floor level and easily accessible by the residents. The design of the exterior storage space shall be architecturally integrated and/or compatible to the dwellings. The individual storage space units can be located within the fully enclosed garages designated for that dwelling unit. (Added by Ord. 298 § 6, 2010)

 

88.01315 Site Amenities.
(a)    Projects shall provide an entry statement, consisting of at least two of the following features:

 

(1)    Hardscape structure (trellis, decorative garden wall, decorative gate, etc.);

 

(2)    Specimen landscaping (large, distinctive vegetation) or mature trees;

 

(3)    Textured or stamped concrete;

 

(4)    Monument signage with accompanying landscaping.

 

(b)    Trash collection areas shall be provided within two hundred (200) feet of the farthermost unit they are to serve, and shall be situated so as to eliminate noise and visual intrusion on adjacent property as well as to eliminate fire hazards to adjacent structures. Trash enclosures shall be of masonry construction, with solid steel gates, and easily accessible to all residents and trash collection vehicles.

 

(c)    Each project shall provide outdoor open space for recreation and leisure activities within the development site in the following manner:

 

(1)    Outdoor open space shall comprise not less than forty (40) percent of the net acreage. Public driveways, parking spaces, or other areas designated for operational functions are not considered open space. Open space may include game courts or rooms, saunas, tennis courts, putting greens, play lots, outdoor cooking areas, lawn bowling, and front and rear and side yard setbacks, if landscaped and greater than the minimums required. Private patios and/or yards attached to individual units may be computed as required open space.

 

(2)    Swimming pools, with related deck areas, wading pools, fish ponds, volleyball courts, tennis courts, barbecue areas, game rooms, or other recreational facilities provided for the common use of all the residents may be constructed within the required outdoor living space; provided, however, that such facilities shall not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the required outdoor living space.

 

(3)    Projects consisting of one hundred (100) to two hundred (200) units shall provide at least five of the following recreational amenities:

 

(A)   Large open lawn area; one of the dimensions shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet.

 

(B)   Multiple enclosed tot lots with multiple play equipment. The tot lots shall be conveniently located throughout the site.

 

(C)   Pool and spa.

 

(D)   Barbeque facility equipped with multiple grills, picnic benches, etc. If more than one facility is provided, the barbeque facilities shall be conveniently located throughout the site.

 

(E)   Community multi-purpose room(s) equipped with kitchen, and defined areas for games, exercises, etc.

 

(F)    Sport court facilities (e.g., tennis, volleyball, basketball, etc.).

 

(G)   Jogging/walking trails with exercise stations.

 

(4)    For each one hundred (100) units above the first two hundred (200) units, an additional recreational amenity described in Section 88.01315(c)(3) shall be provided. (Added by Ord. 298 § 6, 2010)

 

88.01320 Architectural Requirements.
(a)    Energy Conservation

 

(1)    Each project shall fully comply with the requirements of the California Green Building Code.

 

(2)    All appliances and fixtures shall be energy conserving (e.g., energy star rated, reduced flow showerheads, water conserving toilets, etc.).

 

(b)    Architectural plans will be subject to review by the City Planner. In general, it is anticipated that the following standards will be applied:

 

(1)    Building Massing. Buildings should be interesting and should display an integrity of design and style. Flat, unarticulated building faces are strongly discouraged. Simple, stucco-box structures with standard simple roofs and tack on highlights shall be avoided. Building shapes and wall massing should be varied. Wall relief should be provided by introducing variables into the building equation. Rectangular box shapes shall be avoided in favor of second floor tiering and increasing the number of major building faces.

 

(2)    Unit Entry Areas. Entry areas shall be utilized to articulate building faces and provide a recognizable, perhaps more formal entry way to units. Entry areas should be located on different faces of the building to avoid a “motel-look.” Stairways and entries should be recessed, covered, or treated in such a fashion as to increase the sense of arrival and provide shelter from natural elements.

 

(3)    Roof and Roof Lines. Wood-shake roof materials are prohibited in new multi-family development due to fire hazards. Roofing materials shall consist of tile, metal, slate, or the imitation thereof, but not including composition shingles. Roof-lines should be varied and interesting. Long, continuous expanses of simple roofs shall be avoided. Hips and gables should be provided when consistent with other architectural elements. Rooftop equipment shall be screened from street view.

 

(4)    Scale. Buildings should be in scale for the area in which they are proposed, and should be compatible with surrounding properties. Views of existing residences shall be protected wherever possible.

 

(5)    Perimeter walls, fencing or other screening will be required where appropriate. In general, backyards and parking areas shall be screened from street view. (Added by Ord. 298 § 6, 2010)

 

88.01325 Landscape Requirements.
(a)    Landscape plans will be subject to review by the City. In general, it is anticipated that the following standards will be applied wherever possible:

 

(1)    All setback areas shall include landscape and irrigation installations.

 

(2)    All parking lots shall be provided with pockets for trees and shrubs. Landscape plans should be designed to provide reasonable shade for the parking lot areas.

 

(3)    Buildings should be provided with proper landscape screening. Landscape cutouts and pockets shall generally be provided along building walls, at building corners, or other highly visible locations around buildings.

 

(4)    All plant and tree material shall be verifiably appropriate for use in the Yucaipa area. Consideration should be given to resistance to drought, water requirements, adaptability to wind (if appropriate), longevity, and ease of maintenance. A specific attempt shall be made to utilize plant palettes and design plans which serve to promote energy and water conservation.

 

(5)    Invasive species (cottonwood or ash for example) should be installed away from hardscape improvements, or provided with root barriers, or avoided.

 

(6)    Irrigation systems should generally avoid spray methods in favor of bubbler or drip systems. All lines shall be placed underground.

 

(7)    On-site native vegetation should be incorporated into site or landscape plans wherever feasible. Special effort should be made to preserve and incorporate existing trees into design schemes. Mature trees removed from a site shall be replaced two to one with minimum twenty-four (24) inch box trees, unless prohibited by site dimensions. Where feasible, natural vegetation should be allowed to re-establish itself.

 

(8)    Parking lots shall be screened from street view wherever possible.

 

(9)    Sidewalks are required in conjunction with all new multi-family residential development. Builders/developers shall extend landscaping beyond the property to the sidewalk or curb line.

 

(10)  Building faces shall be softened by tree installation.

 

(11)  Buffer areas between potentially conflicting uses shall be well planted with large shrubs and fast growing evergreen trees.

 

(12)  The total number of trees to be planted for each project shall equal at least fifty (50) per gross acre of land. Ten (10) percent shall be forty-eight (48) inch boxed trees; ten (10) percent shall be thirty-six (36) inch boxed trees; ten (10) percent shall be twenty-four (24) inch boxed trees; and seventy (70) percent shall be fifteen (15) gallon trees. The boxed trees shall be concentrated at the exterior streetscapes and entry nodes. (Added by Ord. 298 § 6, 2010)

 

88.01330 Building Separations.
The following separations shall apply to any lot containing two or more dwelling units which are in separate detached structures. The separations shall be between opposite exterior walls. Walls shall be considered opposite if a perpendicular line drawn in a horizontal plane from one structure intersects another structure’s wall. The front side of a unit is the one containing the primary entrance to the dwelling unit.

 

Building Orientation

Separation

Side-to-Side

20 feet

Rear-to-Rear or Front-to-Side

25 feet

Front-to-Rear

30 feet

Front-to-Front or Interior Court Space

35 feet

Interior Court Space with Parking Access

40 feet

All Others

30 feet

 

(Added by Ord. 298 § 6, 2010)

 

88.01335 General Development Policies.
The General Development Policies set forth in this Section 88.01335 are intended to address the most critical issues associated with high-density residential development. These include assuring neighborhood compatibility, compliance with adopted plans, adequacy of public facilities and services, and protection of the environment and public health. Each project must satisfy all applicable General Development Policies before approval can be granted.

 

(a)    Plans and Policies

 

(1)    The project is consistent with the General Plan, Development Code, and any applicable Specific Plans.

 

(2)    The project is consistent with the Multi-Use Trails and Bike Paths Plan.

 

(3)    The project is consistent with the Circulation Plan.

 

(4)    The project is consistent with the Master Plan of Drainage.

 

(b)    Neighborhood Compatibility

 

(1)    The project is compatible with and sensitive to the immediate environment of the site and neighborhood relative to architectural design; scale, bulk, density and unit size; identity and neighborhood character; building orientation and setback; grading and visual integrity.

 

(2)    The project is designed so that the additional traffic generated does not have significant adverse impacts on surrounding developments.

 

(c)    Public Facilities and Services

 

(1)    The project includes sewer and water facilities, or adequate facilities exist, which are or will be available to serve the project. Written certification from the affected sewer and water purveyor is required prior to the issuance of building permits.


(2)    The project includes street improvements that are consistent with the street standards for all abutting roadways.

 

(3)    The project provides adequate access for emergency vehicles.

 

(4)    The project provides storm drains, master planned drainage facilities, or special drainage facilities necessary to adequately dispose of surface water runoff or alleviate grading constraints.

 

(5)    The project provides a Homeowners’ Association and/or Maintenance District to ensure both on-site and off-site maintenance.

 

(6)    The project provides community trails as required by the General Plan.

 

(d)    Public Health and Safety

 

(1)    If the project lies within, or partially within, an adopted “Special Studies Zone,” a geologic report has been submitted which locates the presence or absence of actual fault traces in accordance with the provisions of the Alquist-Priolo Act, and special engineering precautions have been taken to overcome those limitations or these areas have been set aside from development.

 

(2)    If the project is located within a Geologic Hazards Overlay District as identified in the General Plan, an adequate geologic or soils engineering investigation has been submitted, and special engineering precautions have been provided as required by Article 3 of Chapter 2 of Division 5 of this Code.

 

(3)    If the project is located within a Floodplain Safety Overlay District as identified in the General Plan, appropriate mitigation measures have been provided as required by Article 2 of Chapter 2 of Division 5 of this Code.

 

(4)    If the project is located within a Fire Safety Overlay District as identified in the General Plan, a program for fuel management has been developed to reduce the risk of fire, and applicable fire mitigation measures have been incorporated into the project design as required by Article 1 of Chapter 2 of Division 5 of this Code.

 

(e)    Resource Protection

 

(1)    If the project is located within a Biotic Resources Overlay District as identified in the General Plan, any site specific investigations required by the appropriate Mitigation Monitoring Plan shall be completed, and all applicable mitigation measures shall be implemented.

 

(2)    If the project is located within a Cultural Resources Preservation Overlay District as identified in the General Plan, any site specific investigations required by the appropriate Mitigation Monitoring Plan shall be completed, and all applicable mitigation measures shall be implemented.

 

(3)    If the project is located within a Paleontologic Resources Overlay District as identified by the General Plan, any site specific investigations required by the appropriate Mitigation Monitoring Plan shall be completed, and all applicable mitigation measures shall be implemented.

 

(4)    If the project is located in an area with protected plant communities (e.g., oak woodlands, riparian habitat), any site specific investigations required by the appropriate Mitigation Monitoring Plan shall be completed, and all applicable mitigation measures shall be implemented.

 

(f)    Multiple-Family Dwelling Maintenance

The following maintenance requirements shall be applicable to all developments in addition to other general maintenance provisions of this Code.

 

(1)    Buildings and Structures

 

(A)   Buildings and structures shall not be permitted to deteriorate or remain in an un-repaired or dilapidated condition.

 

(B)   Building exteriors shall be maintained, painted, or treated to provide for weather protection.

 

(C)   Damage to structures shall be repaired within thirty (30) days from the date of occurrence.

 

(D)   Doors, fences, gates, and similar structures shall be kept in proper operating condition, including their locking and latching devices.

 

(2)    Landscaping, Trees, Shrubs, Groundcover, and Irrigation Systems

 

(A)   Landscaped areas shall be kept free from weeds and debris and maintained in a healthy thriving condition.

 

(B)   All plant materials shall receive regular maintenance, including, but not limited to, fertilizing, mowing, and trimming.

 

(C)   Any damaged, dead, diseased, or decaying plant materials shall be replaced within thirty (30) days from the date of damage.

 

(D)   Irrigation systems shall be kept in proper working order to provide proper amounts of water and proper coverage.

 

(E)   Landscape screening materials, such as hedges, shall be pruned to maintain their screening ability.

 

(3)    Parking Areas, Walkways, and Open Space

 

(A)   Parking areas, walkways, and open spaces shall be kept clean and free of debris and items of storage.

 

(B)   Paved surfaces shall be maintained free of potholes, broken or raised sections, and other deterioration.

 

(C)   Outside lighting fixtures shall be kept in proper working order; inoperative lights shall be repaired or replaced within thirty (30) days of damage or failure.

 

(4)    Trash Enclosure and Refuse Containers

 

(A)   Trash enclosures and refuse containers shall be kept clean and the vicinity kept free of debris, and gates or doors shall be maintained in proper working order.

 

(B)   Accumulation of refuse shall not be permitted to exceed the capacity of the refuse containers.

 

(5)    Graffiti

Graffiti shall be removed within seventy-two (72) hours.

 

(6)    Recreation Areas

Recreation facilities, common use areas, amenities, and other site improvements shall be maintained in a usable condition free from deterioration.

 

(7)    Trail Maintenance

 

(A)   All community trails shall be maintained in a safe and passable manner, which does not detract from the appearance of the trail.

 

(B)   Scrap lumber, junk, trash, storage, or debris is prohibited.

 

(C)   Abandoned, discarded, or unused objects or equipment, such as automobiles, automotive parts, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, cans, containers, or similar items, are prohibited.

 

(D)   Trail surface and proper grade shall be continuously maintained for safety and reliability, including removal of excessive sized rocks, filling of pot holes, removal of weeds, and refilling of cuts caused by erosion or other disturbances.

 

(E)   Construction of any structure within or across the trail easement, including walls, fences, gates, planters, sidewalks, drive approaches, or similar structures, or installation of any vegetation or irrigation system are prohibited.

 

(F)    Vegetation shall be kept cleared from encroaching into the trail to a height of ten (10) feet and to the full width of the trail.

 

(G)   Trail fences and gates shall be kept in good repair at all times, including replacing damaged members and maintaining plumb.

 

(H)   Drainage swales, curb and gutter, or similar drainage structures, shall be kept clean and free of debris, trash, soil, vegetation, or other material in a manner that permits proper drainage. (Added by Ord. 298 § 6, 2010)

 

88.01340 General Design Guidelines.
(a)    Intent. The intent of the site plan and building guidelines set forth in Sections 88.01345 and 88.01350 is to assist the developer in understanding and complying with the City’s standards for building and site design. The guidelines are based upon community design goals as expressed in the General Plan, and they encourage the orderly and harmonious appearance of structures and property, along with associated facilities, such as signs, landscaping, parking areas, and streets. The guidelines establish a high standard for design quality but are flexible enough to allow individual expression and imaginative solutions.

 

(b)    Applicability. The provisions of Sections 88.01345 and 88.01350 shall apply to all developments within the RM-24 Land Use District, unless otherwise specified herein. Any addition, remodeling, relocation or construction requiring a building permit shall adhere to these guidelines where applicable. (Added by Ord. 298 § 6, 2010)

 

88.01345 Site Plan Design.
(a)    Well thought-out site planning is crucial in the development of successful high-density projects. In addition to other standards outlined in the Development Code, the following should be considered:

 

(1)    Relate the location of site uses with adjoining properties to avoid possible conflicts and take advantage of mutual potentials;

 

(2)    Consider sharing curb cuts with adjoining properties;

 

(3)    Buildings that are skewed in relationship to each other can create a variety of view orientations and streetscape interests;

 

(4)    Provide logical pedestrian connections between open spaces and dwelling units and to perimeter streets;

 

(5)    Create a logical circulation system that is understandable to the user;

 

(6)    Treat drive aisles like the streetscape; provide curvilinear lanes and parkway trees wherever possible;

 

(7)    Screen parking areas from the street with mounding, landscaping, low profile walls, and lowering the grade of the parking areas below the street;

 

(8)    Screen exterior trash areas, storage areas, utilities, etc., from view using elements compatible with architecture and landscaping;

 

(9)    Strengthen project entry statements with expanded accent landscaping, decorative paving and special architectural features incorporated into perimeter walls or monument signs;

 

(10)  Terminate the entry statement at an interior focal point, such as unique architecture or landscape elements, fountains, plazas, streams and/or waterfall elements, or landscape treatments which take aesthetic advantage of variations in grade;

 

(11)  Vary building setbacks whenever possible;

 

(12)  Preserve existing trees in place and design as a major landscape feature;

 

(13)  Consider visitor parking beyond minimum requirements, and distribute parking evenly throughout the development;

 

(14)  Avoid dead-end drive aisles over one hundred fifty (150) feet in length. (Added by Ord. 298 § 6, 2010)

 

88.01350 Building Design.
(a)    A recognizable design theme shall be established that is compatible with surrounding planned or existing developments. Subtle variations are encouraged that provide visual interest but do not create abrupt changes causing discord in the overall character of the immediate neighborhood. It is not intended that one style of architecture should be dominant, but that individual projects shall create and enhance a high quality and harmonious community appearance.

 

(b)    The architecture should consider compatibility with surrounding character, including harmonious building style, form, size, color, material, and roof-line. Shadow patterns created by architectural elements, overhangs, projection or recession of stories, balconies, reveals and awnings contribute to a building’s character while aiding in climate control. Changes in the roof level or planes provide architectural interest, and developments should be designed with upgraded architecture through increased delineation of surface treatments and architectural details. The City seeks well thought-out design solutions that reflect the best of a particular style and relate well to their surroundings. The following should be considered:

 

(1)    Provide architectural treatment to all four building elevations;

 

(2)    Upgrade design treatment of carport structures to reflect the architectural design of the dwelling units;

 

(3)    Enhance architectural elements exposed to public view;

 

(4)    Choose colors, textures, and materials that are consistent with the chosen design theme;

 

(5)    Garages should be architecturally designed to complement the residences;

 

(6)    Integrate screens for all roof-mounted equipment into the building design;

 

(7)    Use native rock for fieldstone; other forms of stone may be manufactured products;

 

(8)    Buildings should emphasize horizontal as well as vertical appearance; this can be achieved by the use of projections or recessions of stories, balconies, windows and doors, and changes in roof levels and planes;

 

(9)    Every project should be designed with a precise concept for adequate signage that is highly compatible with the building and site design relative to color, material and placement;

 

(10)  Any equipment, whether on the roof, side of a building, or ground, should be screened, and the method of screening shall be architecturally compatible in terms of material, color, shape, and size. (Added by Ord. 298 § 6, 2010)

 

 

CHAPTER 14 LARGE RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES
88.01401 Application Requirements for a Large Residential Care Facility.
In addition to the Conditional Use Permit submittal requirements, an applicant for a large residential care facility shall submit the following information with the application materials for the Conditional Use Permit:

 

(a)    Information regarding the State license that is required to operate the large residential care facility, including the license type and information regarding the State department approving the license.

 

(b)    The maximum number of residents who may be served by the facility at any one time.

 

(c)    The number of support staff who will be employed at the facility, including the maximum number of staff who may be present at the facility at any time.

 

(d)    The estimated or average term of a resident’s stay.

 

(e)    Information detailing the support services to be provided on-site.

 

(f)    Rules of conduct for residents, if any, and/or a management plan.

 

(g)    A list of the addresses of all similar facilities that the applicant operated in California within the past five years. The applicant shall certify under penalty of perjury that none of the facilities has been found by State or local authorities to be operating in violation of State or local law.

 

(h)    A list of other similar facilities within the area, and a statement demonstrating that the facility meets any separation requirements that may be required by State law. (Added by Ord. 345 § 16, 2016)

 

88.01405 Design Requirements for a Large Residential Care Facility.
(a)    Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with the requirements of Section 87.0615 of this Code.

 

(b)    The total number of occupants that occupy the facility shall be compliant with the occupancy requirements of the facility.

 

(c)    The facility shall meet all requirements for the approval of such use imposed by the City’s Building Code and Fire Code.

 

(d)    The development of a large residential care facility shall comply with all requirements of the subject zone and be compatible in design with the surrounding neighborhood. (Added by Ord. 345 § 16, 2016)

 

88.01410 Operational Requirements for a Large Residential Care Facility.
(a)    The facility shall be operated in compliance with applicable State, Federal, and local law and shall maintain all necessary State licenses required to provide services.

 

(b)    The operator shall comply with the City’s business license provisions.

 

(c)    The facility shall not provide any services other than those the facility is authorized and licensed to provide by the State of California.

 

(d)    Large residential care facilities shall operate in conformance with the rules of conduct and/or management plan that was submitted as part of the application for a Conditional Use Permit. Violations of those conditions and/or the conditions of approval may result in a revocation of the Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission. (Added by Ord. 345 § 16, 2016)

 

 

CHAPTER 15 BOARDING HOUSES
88.01501 Application Requirements for a Boarding House.
In addition to the Conditional Use Permit submittal requirements, an applicant for a boarding house, or any transitional or supportive housing project structured as a boarding house, shall submit the following information with the application materials for the Conditional Use Permit:

 

(a)    The maximum number of residents who will live in the facility at any one time.

 

(b)    The number of support staff who will be employed at the facility, including the maximum number of staff who may be present at any time.

 

(c)    The estimated or average term of a resident’s stay.

 

(d)    Rules of conduct and/or management plan.

 

(e)    The operator of the proposed facility shall provide a list of the addresses of all similar facilities that they operated within the past five years and shall certify under penalty of perjury that none of the facilities has been found by State or local authorities to be operating in violation of State or local law. (Added by Ord. 345 § 17, 2016)

 

88.01505 Design Requirements for a Boarding House.
(a)    Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with the requirements of Section 87.0615 of this Code.

 

(b)    Total number of occupants that occupy the facility shall be compliant with the occupancy requirements of the facility.

 

(c)    The facility shall meet all requirements for the approval of such use imposed by the City’s Building Code and Fire Code.

 

(d)    There shall not be any cooking facilities permitted in the residents’ rooms.

 

(e)    The sale of food or other materials is limited to guests who are currently residing on the premises where the use is located and not to the general public.

 

(f)    The development of a boarding house shall comply with all requirements of the subject zone and be compatible in design with the surrounding neighborhood. (Added by Ord. 345 § 17, 2016)

 

88.01510 Operational Requirements for a Boarding House.
(a)    The facility shall be operated in compliance with applicable State, Federal, and local law.

 

(b)    The operator shall comply with the City’s business license provisions.

 

(c)    The facility shall not provide any services that would require the facility to be licensed by the State of California.

 

(d)    The use shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for the delivery of materials to or from the premises beyond those commercial vehicles normally associated with residential uses.

 

(e)    There shall be no outdoor storage of materials or equipment, nor shall any materials or equipment be visible from outside the home.

 

(f)    The appearance of the structure shall not be altered, nor the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner that would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, or signs, or the emission of sounds, noises, or vibrations.

 

(g)    The use of amenities and community facilities shall be limited to that normally associated with the use of the property for residential purposes. Boarding houses shall operate in conformance with the rules of conduct and/or management plan that was submitted as part of the application for a Conditional Use Permit. Violations of those conditions and/or the conditions of approval may result in a revocation of the Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission. (Added by Ord. 345 § 17, 2016)

 

 

CHAPTER 16 BED AND BREAKFAST LODGES
88.01601 Application Requirements for a Bed and Breakfast Lodge.
In addition to the Conditional Use Permit submittal requirements, an applicant for a bed and breakfast lodge shall submit the following information with the application materials for the Conditional Use Permit:

 

(a)    The maximum number of guests who may be present in the bed and breakfast lodge at any one time.

 

(b)    The number of support staff who will be employed at the bed and breakfast lodge, including the maximum number of staff who may be present at any time. This number should include the owner(s) who reside on-site. (Added by Ord. 345 § 18, 2016)

 

88.01605 Design Requirements for a Bed and Breakfast Lodge.
(a)    Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with the requirements of Section 87.0615 of this Code.

 

(b)    A non-illuminated identification sign, not to exceed six square feet in area, is permitted. If not attached to the residence, such sign shall not exceed six feet in height and must blend with the architectural style of the structure and the neighborhood.

 

(c)    The bed and breakfast lodge shall meet all requirements for the approval of such use imposed by the City’s Building Code and Fire Code.

 

(d)    There shall not be any cooking facilities permitted in guest rooms.

 

(e)    The sale of food or other materials is limited to guests who are currently residing on the premises where the use is located and not to the general public.

 

(f)    The development of a bed and breakfast lodge shall comply with all requirements of the subject zone and be compatible in design with the surrounding neighborhood. (Added by Ord. 345 § 18, 2016)

88.01610 Operational Requirements for a Bed and Breakfast Lodge.
(a)    A bed and breakfast lodge shall be operated in compliance with applicable State, Federal, and local law.

 

(b)    A bed and breakfast lodge shall be an accessory use in that the residential structure shall serve as the primary residence of the owner of the bed and breakfast lodge, and the owner shall reside on-site. If a corporation is the owner, a majority shareholder of the corporation shall reside in the residential structure where the bed and breakfast lodge is located.

 

(c)    Records of all guests who stay at the bed and breakfast lodge shall be preserved for a minimum period of three years before such records are discarded.

 

(d)    A bed and breakfast lodge shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for the delivery of materials to or from the premises beyond those commercial vehicles normally associated with residential uses.

 

(e)    There shall be no outdoor storage of materials or equipment, nor shall merchandise be visible from outside the home.

 

(f)    The appearance of the structure shall not be altered, nor the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner that would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, or signs, or the emission of sounds, noises, or vibrations.

 

(g)    The use of amenities and community facilities shall be limited to that normally associated with the use of the property for residential purposes.

 

(h)    The operator shall comply with the City’s business license provisions.

 

(i)     Bed and breakfast lodges shall operate in conformance with the rules of conduct and/or management plan that was submitted as part of the application for a Conditional Use Permit. Violations of those conditions and/or the conditions of approval may result in a revocation of the Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission. (Added by Ord. 345 § 18, 2016)

DIVISION 9 PLANT PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
89.0101 Purpose.
The City finds that it is in the public interest to promote the continued health of this City’s abundant and diverse plant resources by providing regulations and guidelines for the management of the plant resources in the incorporated areas of the City of Yucaipa on property or combinations of property under private or public ownership for the following purposes:

 

(a)    To promote and sustain the health, vigor, and productivity of plant life and aesthetic values within the City through appropriate management techniques

 

(b)    To conserve the plant life heritage for the benefit of all, including future generations

 

(c)    To protect trees and plants from indiscriminate removal and to regulate such activity

 

(d)    To provide a uniform standard for appropriate removal of trees and plants in public and private places and streets to promote conservation of these valuable natural resources

 

(e)    To protect and maintain water productivity and quality in local watersheds

 

(f)    To preserve habitats for rare, endangered, or threatened plants and to protect animals with limited or specialized habitats

 

89.0105 Intent.
The general provisions established by this chapter shall apply to all subsequent chapters of this Division, unless specifically exempted.

 

89.0110 Scope.
(a)    The provisions of this Division shall apply to all private land within the incorporated areas of the City of Yucaipa and to public lands owned by the City, except as specified by the provisions of this Division.

 

(b)    Exceptions

The provisions of this Division, except those of Chapters 2 and 5, are not applicable to the removal of any regulated tree as part of any of the following situations:

 

(1)    Removal as part of a timber operation conducted under the Forest Practice Act of 1973 (California Public Resources Code, Division 4, Part 2, Chapter 8)

 

(2)    Removal from lands owned by the United States Government, State of California, or local governmental entity, excluding Special Districts

 

(3)    Removal by any public utility subject to jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission or any other constituted public agency, including franchised cable TV where to establish or maintain safe operation of facilities under their jurisdiction, trees are pruned, topped, or braced

 

(4)    Removal by the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection

 

(5)    Removal under the authority of the following

 

(A)   Forest Improvement Program

 

(B)   California Forest Improvement Program

 

(C)   Agricultural Conservation Program

 

(6)    Removal required by other codes, ordinances, or laws of the City of Yucaipa, the State of California, or the United States

 

(7)    Removal of trees and plants which are an immediate threat to the public health, safety, or welfare and require emergency removal to prevent probable damage to a structure or injury to people or fenced animals

 

(8)    Removal as part of a stocking control program prepared by a California Registered Professional Forester

 

(9)    Removal as part of a fire hazard reduction program approved by the local Fire Authority

 

(10)  Removal as part of a bona fide agricultural activity as determined by the Community Development Director or Planning Commission which subscribes to at least one of the following conditions

 

(A)   Conducted under a land conservation contract; and/or

 

(B)   An existing agricultural activity, including expansions of such activity onto undisturbed contiguous land; and/or

 

(C)   A proposed bona fide agricultural activity if the City Planner or Planning Commission is given 30 days written notice of the removal describing the location of the land, the nature of the proposed activity, and the proposed sources of water for the activity. The City Planner or Planning Commission shall notify the landowner in writing prior to the elapse of the 30-day period if, in the opinion of the City Planner or Planning Commission, the activity is not a bona fide agricultural activity, or else the activity shall be deemed bona fide. A bona fide agricultural activity is one which is served by a water distribution system adequate for the proper operation of such activity.

 

(11)  Removal on lots that have a net area of 20,000 square feet or less, which are developed with a primary structure, other than a sign structure

 

(12)  Any regulated plant or tree that is within 20 feet of a structure on the lot that was constructed or set down under a City development permit

 

(13)  Removal of two or fewer regulated trees in the mountain or valley area per year for private fuel wood purposes; the year shall be measured as the last 12 consecutive months

 

(c)    Conditions

The permits authorized by this Division may be subject to conditions required by the reviewing authority. Such conditions may specify criteria, methods, and persons authorized to conduct the proposed activities which are subject to the permit. Where applicable, regulated trees and plants may be required to be transplanted and/or stockpiled for future transplanting.

 

89.0115 Removal Permit.
(a)    A removal permit shall be required for the removal of any tree or plant that is subject to the provisions of this Division.

 

(b)    A land use application, a building permit, and all other development permits (e.g., grading, mobile home setdowns, etc.) shall consider and include a review of any proposed tree or plant removal. Any approved land use application and/or development permit shall be a permit for the removal of trees or plants, if such land use application or development permit specifically reviews and approves such removals. Such reviews shall consider and require compliance with the provisions of this Division.

 

(c)    The reviewing authority may require certification from an appropriate tree expert or plant expert that such tree removals are appropriate, supportive of a healthy environment, and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

 

(d)    Removals of trees or plants that are not requested in conjunction with a land use application or development permit may be accomplished only under a permit issued by either the Community Development Director, Planning Commission, or local Fire Authority subject to the provisions of this chapter.

 

(e)    The Building Official or the Community Development Director shall require a preconstruction inspection prior to approval of development permits.

 

(f)    The duration of a plant or tree removal permit, when issued in conjunction with a land use application and/or a development permit, shall be coterminous with the duration of the associated application or permit, unless otherwise specified. The Reviewing Authority shall specify the expiration date for all other tree and/or plant removal permits.

 

89.0120 Findings for Removal.
The Reviewing Authority shall authorize the removal of a tree or plant subject to the provisions of this chapter only if the following findings are made.

 

(a)    The removal of the tree or plant is justified for one of the following reasons.

 

(1)    The location of the tree or plant and/or its dripline interferes with an allowed structure, sewage disposal area, paved area, or other approved improvement or ground disturbing activity.

 

(2)    The location of the tree or plant and/or its dripline interferes with the planned improvement of a street or development of an approved access to the subject or adjoining private property.

 

(3)    The location of the tree or plant is hazardous to pedestrian or vehicular travel or safety.

 

(4)    The tree or plant or its presence interferes with or is causing extensive damage to utility services or facilities, roadways, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, pavement, sewer line(s), drainage or flood control improvements, foundations, existing structures, or municipal improvements.

 

(5)    The condition or location of the plant or tree is adjacent to and in such close proximity to an existing or proposed structure that the plant or tree has or will sustain significant damage.

 

(6)    In the mountain area only, a Registered Professional Forester must certify in writing that the condition or location of the subject tree is contributing to an overstocked tree stand condition such that its removal will improve the overall health, safety, and vigor of the stand of trees containing the subject tree.

 

89.0125 Plot Plan Requirements.
Prior to the issuance of a tree or plant removal permit in conjunction with a development permit and/or approval of a land use application which authorizes such removal, a plot plan shall be approved by the appropriate Review Authority for each site, indicating exactly which trees or plants are authorized to be removed. The required information can be added to any other required plot plan. Prior to issuance of development permits in areas with trees or plants that are subject to the provisions of this Division, a preconstruction inspection shall be conducted by the appropriate authority. Such preconstruction inspections may be combined with any other required inspection.

 

89.0130 Construction Standards.
During construction and prior to final inspection under a development permit, the following standards shall apply unless otherwise approved in writing by a Tree Expert.

 

(a)    Tree trunks and plants shall not be enclosed within roof lines or decking.

 

(b)    Utilities, construction signs, or other hardware shall not be attached so as to penetrate or abrase any live tree or plant.

 

(c)    Grade Alterations

There shall be no grade alterations which bury any portion of a tree or plant or significantly undercut the root system within the dripline.

 

89.0140 Enforcement.
(a)    The provisions of Division 1, Chapter 2, shall apply to this Division, including those regarding enforcement and enforcement officers.

 

(b)    The provisions of this Division shall be enforced by any authorized member of the Community Development Department, Local Fire Authority and may be enforced by the California Department of Forestry where applicable.

 

(c)    Extension of Time

If any of the land governed by this Division shall be subject to snow, flooding, or other conditions which shall render compliance with the provisions of this Division within the specified time periods impractical because of inaccessibility, an enforcement officer may extend the period of time for compliance.

 

(d)    A peace officer or any authorized enforcement officer may, in the enforcement of this chapter, make arrests without warrant for a violation of this chapter which he or she may witness, and may confiscate regulated trees or plants, or parts thereof which are unlawfully harvested, possessed, sold, or otherwise obtained in violation of this chapter. Also, any designated enforcement officer is hereby authorized and directed to enter in or upon any premises or other place, train, vehicle, or other means of transportation within or entering the State which is suspected of containing or having present therein or thereon plants in violation of this Division in order to examine permits and wood receipts and observe tags and seals and to otherwise enforce the provisions of this chapter.

 

(e)    When any power or authority is given by any provision of this chapter to any person, it may be exercised by any deputy, inspector, or agent duly authorized by that person. Any person in whom the enforcement of any provision of this chapter is vested has the power of a peace officer as to that enforcement, which shall include County, State, or Federal agencies with which cooperative agreements have been made by the City to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

 

(f)    No person shall remove or damage all or part of any tree or plant on another property without first obtaining notarized written permission from the landowner and any required permits, wood receipts, or tags and seals. Also, it is unlawful for any person to falsify any document offered as evidence of permission to enter upon the property of another to harvest all or parts of a tree or plant, whether it be alive or dead.

 

(g)    No person, except as provided in this chapter, shall commence with a disturbance of land (e.g. grading or land clearing) without first obtaining approval to assure that said disturbance will not result in the removal of any regulated trees or plants. Said approval may be in the form of a development permit, a plant harvesting permit, or a tree removal permit issued by the appropriate authority.

 

89.0145 Penalties.
Penalties shall be those specified in Division 1, Chapter 2 of the Development Code, and shall include the following and any other penalties specified by individual chapters of this Division.

 

(a)    Illegally-Removed Tree Plan Fine

In addition to other penalties and fees imposed by this Code or other law, any person, firm, or corporation convicted of a violation of the provisions of this Division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor upon conviction. When one or more plants or trees are removed in violation of the provisions of this Division, the removal of each such separate plant or tree shall be a new and separate offense. The penalty for such offense shall be a fine of not less than $500 nor more then $1,000, or six months in jail, or both. Payment of any penalty herein provided shall not relieve a person, firm, or corporation from the responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the violation.

 

(b)    Illegally-Removed Tree Plan Fine Replacement Penalty

 

(1)    In addition to other penalties imposed by this Code or other law, any person, firm, or corporation convicted of violating the provisions of this Division regarding improper removal of regulated trees or plants shall be required to retain, as appropriate, a tree or Native Plant expert to develop and implement a replacement program. Such expert shall determine the appropriate number, size, species, location, and planting conditions for replacement plants or trees in sufficient quantities to revegetate the illegally disturbed area.

 

If it is inappropriate to revegetate the illegally disturbed area, another appropriate location (e.g., a public park) may be substituted at the direction of the court.

 

(2)    The violator shall post a bond in an amount sufficient to remove and reinstall plant/tree materials that were planted as a part of such a replacement program and failed within two years.

 

(c)    Revocation of Permits

Upon conviction of a violation of this Division, all tree removal permits issued to the person, firm, or corporation convicted shall be revoked, and no new or additional removal permits shall be satisfied to the permittee for a period of one year from the date of conviction.

 

CHAPTER 2 TREE PROTECTION FROM INSECTS AND DISEASES
89.0201 Purpose.
The City finds that there is a serious danger to the trees in this City from coniferous trees which are cut in land clearing operations and are then allowed to remain exposed and untreated. When coniferous slash material is left untreated against noxious insects, the insects could multiply in such felled trees to later attack and damage the healthy coniferous trees of this City. It is in the public interest to establish standards for the proper treatment and disposition of felled trees to protect against damaging insects (e.g., bark beetles) and diseases.

 

89.0205 Disposition of Coniferous Trees.
Every person, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent, or employee, which has control of, or right of entry, or of access to, any land in the area described in Section 89.0215, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, any coniferous tree or portion thereof, including stumps, shall be treated in accordance with one of the methods specified in this section and Section 89.0210 within 15 days after such a tree or portion of such a tree has been cut. In the case of any construction activity, the Building Official or the City Planner shall not approve any development permit inspections until all felled coniferous trees or portions thereof are treated in accordance with the provisions of this section. The Building Official or the City Planner shall require a permittee to obtain, where necessary, a certificate from the local Fire Authority, or appropriately certified Pest Control Adviser, or a Qualified Applicator, that compliance with any measures that are not readily observable by the inspector on the construction site has been made in an acceptable manner.

 

Felled coniferous trees shall be treated by at least one or a combination of the following measures.

 

(a)    Remove to a solid waste disposal site specifically designated by the City for such use.

 

(b)    Burn sufficiently to consume the bark, when allowed by local Fire Protection Agency and Air Pollution Control District.

 

(c)    Lop and scatter material less than four inches in diameter so that it is piled no higher than 24 inches above the ground, when allowed by the local Fire Protection Agency.

 

(d)    Remove the bark.

 

(e)    Chip or grind.

 

(f)    Split and scatter with bark toward the sun for a minimum of 45 consecutive days or until final inspection is completed, whichever is less.

 

(g)    Stack in the sun and cover with six mil clear plastic, which has a continuous seal from the outside for at least 180 days.

 

(h)    Spray with a commercial insecticide for such purposes as approved by the City Planner for such insects and purposes.

 

(i)     Treat under any other method approved by the enforcement officer in writing.

 

89.0210 Stump Treatment.
Any fresh-cut stumps of any live coniferous trees shall be protected from infection by Annosus Root Rot (Fomes annosus) with borax powder (granular tech, 10 mole) as soon as possible after felling, covering the entire newly-exposed cut and/or broken surface completely with a thin uniform layer of white borax within two hours.

 

89.0220 Extension of Time of Enforcement.
If any of the land governed by this chapter is subject to snow or flooding which renders compliance with the provisions of Section 89.0205 within the specified time periods impractical because of inaccessibility to the cut timber, an enforcement officer may extend the period of time for compliance.

 

CHAPTER 3 MOUNTAIN FOREST AND VALLEY TREE CONSERVATION
89.0301 Purpose.
Additionally, the City finds that it is in the public interest in the valley area to provide for the conservation and wise use of our tree resources through management regulations, guidelines, and enforcement. It is also the purpose of this chapter to augment and coordinate with the State Department of Forestry and Fire Protection’s efforts to properly implement the mandates of the State Forest Practice Act of 1973, as amended.

 

89.0305 Scope.
(a)    Private Tree Harvesting

The provisions of this chapter shah apply to all native trees (except for oak trees) growing on private land within the City of Yucaipa and on public land owned by the City of Yucaipa.

 

(b)    Commercial Tree Harvesting

The commercial harvesting of trees shall be prohibited, except as allowed by and authorized by the State Department of Forestry and Fire Protection in accordance with the Forest Practice Act of 1973, as amended.

 

89.0315 Subject Trees.
Except as otherwise provided by this Division, any person who intends to remove a living native tree with a six-inch or greater stem diameter, measured at 4.5 feet above the average ground level of the tree base, shall first obtain approval from the City to do so in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Division. For the purposes of the chapter, three or more trees in linear plantings which are 50 feet or greater in length within established windrows or parkway plantings shall be considered to be heritage trees and shall be subject to the provisions of this Division regarding trees.

 

CHAPTER 4 RIPARIAN PLANT CONSERVATION
89.0401 Purpose.
The City finds that it is in the public interest to promote healthy and abundant riparian habitats. Riparian habitats are located along the sides of canyon bottoms, streams, and rivers, providing watershed protection as well as control transmission and storage of natural water supplies. Riparian areas provide a unique wildlife habitat and contribute to an attractive environment. Rare, endangered, and threatened plants and animals are most often found in riparian areas. Riparian areas also provide natural soil erosion and sedimentation control, protecting stream banks subject to erosion and undercutting. In addition, riparian areas provide sufficient shade to reduce temperature and evaporation and the growth of algae in streams. The provisions of this chapter are designed to augment and coordinate with the responsibilities of the California Department of Fish and Game.

 

89.0405 Scope.
(a)    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all riparian areas located on private land within the incorporated areas of the City of Yucaipa and to riparian areas on public land owned by the City of Yucaipa, except as specified by Chapter 1 of this Division and this chapter.

 

(b)    Exceptions

 

(1)    The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to emergency Flood Control District operations or water conservation measures established and authorized by an appropriate independent Special District with such responsibility.

 

(2)    The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to any area that has an existing man-made impervious structure which is greater than 120 square feet in roof area between the area proposed to be disturbed by a development permit and the bank of a subject stream, as measured in a straight line perpendicular to the centerline of such stream.

 

89.0410 Subject Areas and Plants.
The removal of any vegetation within 200 feet of the bank of a stream or in an area indicated as a protected riparian area on an overlay map or Specific Plan shall be subject to a tree or plant removal permit in accordance with the procedures detailed by Chapter 3 of this Division, and shall be subject to environmental review, except as otherwise provided or excepted by the provisions of this Division. For the purposes of this chapter, streams include those shown on United States Geological Survey Quadrangle topographic maps as perennial or intermittent, blue or brown lines (solid or dashed), and river wash areas. Pre-construction inspections shall include the verification of the presence of any riparian vegetation. Any necessary conditions of approval for removal of riparian vegetation may be imposed in addition to and in combination with any condition imposed pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Division.

 

CHAPTER 5 OAK TREE CONSERVATION
89.0501 Purpose.
Further uncontrolled and indiscriminate destruction of oak trees would detrimentally affect the safety and welfare of the citizens of Yucaipa. The conservation program outlined in this chapter contributes to the welfare and aesthetics of the community and retains the great historical and environmental value of these trees. This chapter sets forth the policy of the City to require the conservation of all healthy oak trees unless reasonable and conforming use of the property justifies the removal, cutting, pruning and/or encroachment into the protected zone of an oak tree.

 

89.0505 Definitions.
(a)    “Cutting” means the detaching or separating, from a protected tree, any limb, branch or root. Cutting shall include pruning.

 

(b)    “Damage” means any action undertaken which causes injury, death, or disfigurement to a tree. This includes, but is not limited to, cutting, poisoning, overwatering, relocation or transplanting a protected tree, or trenching excavating or paving within the protected zone of a tree.

 

(c)    “Deadwood” means limbs, branches or a portion of a tree that contains no green leaves during a period of the year when they should be present.

 

(d)    “Dripline” shall mean the outermost edge of the tree’s canopy. When depicted on a map, the dripline will appear as an irregular shaped circle that follows the contour of the tree’s branches as seen from overhead.

 

(e)    “Encroachment” means any intrusion or human activity into the protected zone of an oak tree including, but not limited to, pruning, grading, excavating, trenching, parking of vehicles, storage of materials or equipment, or the construction of structures or other improvements.

 

(f)    “Oak tree” shall mean any oak tree of the Genus Quercus except for Scrub Oak (Quercus dumosa).

 

(g)    “Oak Tree Conservation and Protection Guidelines” or “Guidelines” means the policy established by the City Council and the administrative procedures and rules established by the Community Development Director for implementing this chapter.

 

(h)    “Person” means any natural person, partnership, firm, corporation, governmental agency or other legal entity.

 

(i)     “Protected zone” shall mean a specifically defined area totally encompassing an oak tree within which work activities are strictly controlled. When depicted on a map, the outermost edge of the protected zone will appear as an irregular shaped circle that follows the contour of the dripline of the tree. Using the dripline as a point of reference, the protected zone shall commence at a point five feet (5’) outside of the dripline and extend inward to the trunk of the tree. In no case shall the protected zone be less than fifteen feet (15’) from the trunk of an oak tree.

 

(j)     “Removal” means the physical removal of a tree or causing the death of a tree through damaging, poisoning or other direct or indirect action.

 

(k)    “Routine maintenance” means actions needed for the continued good health of an oak tree including, but not limited to, removal of deadwood, insect control spraying and watering.

 

89.0510 Oak Tree Conservation.
Any person who owns, controls, has custody or possession of any real property within the City that is improved or has been approved for development, or which is part of or associated with the City approved development of another piece of property, such as any parcel to be maintained as permanent open space or for recreational purposes, shall maintain all oak tree(s) located thereon in a state of good health pursuant to the Oak Tree Conservation and Protection Guidelines adopted by City Council resolution. Failure to do so will constitute a violation of this article.

 

89.0515 Permit Required.
(a)    Permit required. No person shall cut, remove, encroach into the protected zone, or relocate any oak tree on any public or private property within the City unless a valid oak tree permit has been issued by the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and the Oak Tree Conservation and Protection Guidelines. The status of limbs or trees as deadwood or dead trees must be confirmed by an Oak Tree Conservation Consultant.

 

(b)    Exemptions. A permit is not required to cut or remove a tree(s) under the following circumstances:

 

(1)    Trees that do not exceed two inches (2”) in diameter when measured at a point four and half feet (4 1/2′) above the tree’s natural grade.

 

(2)    Trees damaged by thunderstorms, windstorms, floods, earthquakes, fires or other natural disasters and determined to be dangerous by the Planning Agency. The Department of Community Development shall be promptly notified of the nature of the emergency and action taken.

 

(3)    When removal is determined necessary by fire department.

 

(4)    Trees planted, grown and/or held for sale as part of a licensed nursery business.

 

(c)    Use of explosives. All tree fellers, tree surgeons, or anyone using explosives within the City limits in connection with the cutting down or removal of any oak tree shall first apply to the City Manager for a permit to do so and shall furnish such bond or insurance as the City Manager shall deem necessary for the protection of the property owner or any other person from any possible damage as a result of such work.

 

89.0520 Processing of Permits.
(a)    Processing. The applicant shall furnish all necessary information as required by the Oak Tree Conservation and Protection Guidelines in a clear and accurate format to the Community Development Department and pay the appropriate filing fee prescribed by City Council resolution. The Community Development Director may approve, deny, or conditionally approve a request for removal of three or fewer oak trees on a single parcel. For requests involving three or fewer trees, the decision of the Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission and the Commission’s decision may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to the provisions of this code. Any request for removal of four or more oak trees on a single parcel shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission which shall make recommendations to the Council which shall approve or deny the permit.

 

(b)    Standards. An oak tree may be removed based upon one of the following findings by the decisionmaker:

 

(1)    The condition or location of the oak tree requires cutting to maintain or aid its health, balance or structure.

 

(2)    The condition of the tree(s) with respect to disease, danger of falling, proximity to existing structures, high pedestrian traffic areas such as parking lots, pedestrian walkways or interference with utility services cannot be controlled or remedied through reasonable preservation and/or preventative procedures and practices.

 

(3)    A permit may be approved when necessary to remove, relocate, cut or encroach into the protected zone of an oak tree to enable the reasonable and conforming use of the subject property which is otherwise prevented by the presence of the tree. Reasonable use of the property shall be determined in accordance with the Oak Tree Conservation and Protection Guidelines.

 

89.0525 Conditions on Removal.
The conditions may be imposed on the permit at the discretion of the decisionmaker including, but not limited to, any of the following:

 

(a)    A condition requiring the replacement or placement of additional trees on the subject property to offset the impacts associated with the loss of a tree, limbs or encroachment into the protected zone of an oak tree;

 

(b)    The relocating of a tree on-site or off-site, or the planting of a new tree off-site within the City to offset the loss of a tree;

 

(c)    A condition requiring an objectively observable maintenance and care program be initiated to insure the continued health and care of oak tree(s) on the property;

 

(d)    Payment of a fee equal to the replacement cost of the tree or donation of a boxed tree to the City or other public agency to be used elsewhere in the community should a suitable replacement location of the tree not be possible on-site or off-site.

 

89.0530 Non-liability of City.
Nothing in this ordinance or within the Oak Tree Conservation Guidelines shall be deemed to impose any liability or damages or a duty of care and maintenance upon the City or upon any of its officers or employees. The person in possession of any public property or the owner of any private property shall have a duty to keep the oak trees upon the property and under their control in a safe, healthy condition. Except as provided in Section 89.0515(b), any person who fells a tree located on property possessed, owned or controlled by them is a danger to the safety of themselves, others or structural improvements on-site or off-site shall have an obligation to secure the area around the tree or support the tree, as appropriate to safeguard both persons and improvements from harm.

 

89.0535 Enforcement.
(a)    Violation, penalty. Any person who cuts, damages, moves, or removes any oak tree within the City or encroaches into the dripline of an oak tree in violation of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, may be punished as set forth in Chapter 2 of Division 1 of this Code.

 

(b)    Violation, restitution. It has been determined that the oak trees within the City are valuable assets to the citizens of this community and to the citizens of the Yucaipa Valley and as a result of the loss or damage to any of these trees, the public should be recompensed. In addition to any penalties provided by subsection (a) above, any person who cuts, damages or removes any tree in violation of the terms of this chapter is responsible for proper restitution and may be required to replace the oak tree(s) so removed or damaged, by the donation of or by replanting two or more oak trees of reasonable equivalent size and value to the tree damaged or removed. The number, size and location of said equivalent replacement oak tree shall be determined by the Community Development Director.

DIVISION 10 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
CHAPTER 1 SURFACE MINING AND LAND RECLAMATION
810.0101 Intent.
It is the intent of the City Council to create and maintain an effective and comprehensive surface mining and reclamation policy with regulation of surface mining operations so as to assure that the following goals are accomplished.

 

(a)    Adverse environmental effects are prevented or minimized, and mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternative land use.

 

(b)    The production and conservation of minerals are encouraged, while giving consideration to values relating to recreation, watershed, wildlife, range, and forage and aesthetic enjoyment.

 

(c)    Residual hazards to the public health and safety are eliminated.

 

(d)    The extraction of minerals is essential to the continued economic well-being of the City and to the needs of society, and reclamation of mined lands is necessary to prevent or minimize adverse effects on the environment and to protect the public health and safety.

 

(e)    The reclamation of mined lands as provided in this chapter will permit the continued mining of minerals and will provide for the protection and subsequent beneficial use of the mined and reclaimed land.

 

(f)    Surface mining takes place in diverse areas where the geologic, topographic, climatic, biological, and social conditions are significantly different, and reclamation operations and the specification therefor may vary accordingly.

 

810.0110 Scope.
(a)    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all areas within the City of Yucaipa.

 

(b)    The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to the following.

 

(1)    Excavations or grading for farming, on-site construction, or restoration of land following a flood or natural disaster.

 

(2)    Reclamation of lands mined prior to January 1, 1976.

 

(3)    Operations conducted prior to January 1, 1976 on mining claims located under the mining laws of 1872, et seq., and not recorded by January 1, 1976 as abandoned.

 

(4)    Those underground operations with tailings or waste dumps in total amounts of less than 1,000 cubic yards not exceeding one acre in extent at any one site of underground access opening, providing such openings are secured.

 

(5)    Surface mining operations that are required by Federal law in order to protect a mining claim, if such operations are conducted solely for that purpose.

 

(6)    Prospecting for, or the extraction of, minerals for commercial purposes and the removal of overburden in total amounts of less than 1,000 cubic yards in any one location of one acre or less.

 

(7)    Such operations that the City determines to be of an infrequent nature and that involve only minor surface disturbance.

 

810.0115 Conditional Use Permit and Reclamation Plan Required.
(a)    Any person who proposes to engage in surface mining activity shall, prior to the commencement of said operations, first file and obtain approval from the City Planner for a Conditional Use Permit application as provided in Section 84.0320 of the Development Code and a Reclamation Plan in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter, and as further provided in Section 2772 (f) of the California Public Resources Code. A fee as established in the City Schedule of Fees shall be paid to City Planner at the time of filing. A reclamation plan shall be filed for existing nonexempted operations within 18 months or as established by the City Planner for the review and approval for the reclamation of surface mining activity for those portions of the site mined after January 1, 1976. A fee, as established in the City Schedule of Fees, shall be paid to the City Planner at the time of filing of the Reclamation Plan.

 

Application for a Conditional Use Permit or Reclamation Plan for surface mining or land reclamation projects shall be made on forms provided by the Yucaipa City Planner. Said application shall be filed in accord with this chapter and procedures to be established by the City Planner.

 

(b)    No person who has obtained a vested right to conduct surface mining operations prior to January 1, 1976, shall be required to secure a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter as long as such vested right continues, provided, however, that no substantial changes are made in any such operation except in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. Expenses incurred in obtaining the enactment of an ordinance in relation to a particular operation or the issuance of a permit shall not be deemed liabilities for work or materials.

 

A person who has obtained a vested right to conduct surface mining operations prior to January 1, 1976 shall submit to the City Planner (and receive within a reasonable period of time) approval of a Reclamation Plan for operations to be conducted after January 1, 1976, unless a Reclamation Plan was approved by the City prior to January 1, 1976, and the person submitting the plan has accepted responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with the reclamation plan.

 

Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring the filing of a Reclamation Plan for, or the reclamation of, mined lands on which surface mining operations were conducted prior to January 1, 1976.

 

810.0120 Review Procedures.
Upon completion of the Environmental Review procedure and filing of all documents required by the City Planner, consideration of the Conditional Use Permit or Reclamation Plan for the proposed or existing surface mine shall be completed pursuant to the Development Code and Section 2774 of the California Public Resources Code.

 

810.0125 Periodic Review.
As a condition of approval for either the Conditional Use Permit or the Reclamation Plan, a periodic review schedule shall be established to evaluate compliance with the said plan.

 

810.0130 Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Community Development Director, an authorized designee, or deputies.

 

810.0135 Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by an act or determination of the City Planner in the exercise of the authority granted herein shall have the right to appeal to the Planning Commission or the City Council, whichever is the next higher authority, pursuant to Section 2775 of the California Public Resources Code. An appeal shall be filed in writing on forms provided within 15 calendar days after a decision has been rendered.

 

 

CHAPTER 2 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
810.0201 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to eliminate and prevent conditions of accelerated erosion that have led to, or could lead to, the degradation of water quality, loss of fish habitat, damage to property, loss of topsoil and vegetation cover, disruption of water supply, increased danger from flooding, and the deposition of sediments and associated nutrients.

 

810.0205 Scope.
This chapter requires control of all existing and potential conditions of human-induced accelerated erosion within specified City areas which are within or adjacent to mountains and hillsides. This chapter sets forth required provisions for project planning, preparation of erosion control plans, runoff control, land clearing, and winter operations and establishes procedures for administering those provisions.

 

810.0210 General Provisions.
(a)    No person shall cause or allow the continued existence of a condition on any site that is causing or is likely to cause accelerated erosion as determined by the City Engineer.

 

(b)    Upon notification by the City Engineer, the responsible person shall take all appropriate measures to control erosion on the site specified in the notification within a reasonable period of time as determined by the City Engineer.

 

(c)    The City Engineer may require that a property owner whose property has been cited in accordance with Subsection 810.0210 (b) file and obtain approval of a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and/or Permit in accordance with Section 810.0220.

 

(d)    The City Engineer may direct that any particular operation, process, or construction be stopped during periods of inclement weather if he or she determines that erosion problems are not adequately being controlled.

 

810.0215 Project Design Considerations.
The following shall be incorporated into design considerations of all land use projects that are subject to the provisions of this chapter.

 

(a)    Identify building and access construction envelopes, and identify areas which will not be disturbed by construction activity in order to minimize disturbance of erodible areas of any proposed development site.

 

(b)    Preserve existing streams and drainage courses in their natural condition in order to retain their ability to accommodate runoff and water drainage with a minimum of erosion.

 

(c)    Incorporate all appropriate measures that can be addressed at the time of the proposed land use decision that will facilitate the preparation of an adequate Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and/or Permit measures as specified by this chapter.

 

810.0220 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
(a)    No land clearing or grading, other than those activities listed as exemptions by this chapter or as determined by the City Engineer, shall occur unless the said land clearing or grading is in compliance with an approved Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and/or Permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

 

(b)    A Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be submitted and approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the issuance of building permits, soil erosion and sediment control permits, grading permits, or any other permit where, in the opinion of the City Engineer, erosion can reasonably be expected to occur.

 

(c)    Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plans shall include the measures required by this chapter. Additional measures or modifications of proposed measures may be required by the City Engineer prior to the approval of a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.

 

(d)    Authority

The City Engineer shall specify the application requirements for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plans and Permits including, but not limited to, the following.

 

(1)    Requirements for the submittal of plans and supporting data to accompany applications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plans and/or Permits

 

(2)    Licensing and/or certification requirements for those preparing Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and/or Permit submittals

 

(3)    The incorporation and coordination of Soil Erosion Control Plans and/or Permits with other plan requirements

 

(e)    Exemptions

Applications for activities where the City Engineer recognizes that no land disturbance will take place shall not be required to include a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and/or Permit. Such activities may include, but are not limited to, the following.

 

(1)    Change of use permits where there would be no expansion of land-disturbing activities

 

(2)    Construction within an existing structure

 

810.0225 Runoff Control.
Runoff from activities subject to a development permit shall be properly controlled to prevent erosion. Erosion control and surface flow containment facilities shall be constructed and maintained to prevent discharge of sediment to surface waters or storm drainage systems. The following measures shall be used for runoff control, and shall be adequate to control runoff from a ten-year storm.

 

(a)    Where soils having a permeability rate of more than two inches per hour, runoff in excess of predevelopment levels shall be retained on the site by methods and in quantities approved by the City Engineer. This may be accomplished through the use of infiltration basins, percolation pits or trenches, or other suitable means. This requirement may be waived where the City Engineer determines that high groundwater, slope stability problems, etc. would inhibit or be aggravated by on-site retention, or where retention will provide no benefits for groundwater recharge or erosion control.

 

(b)    Where soils have a permeability rate of two inches per hour or less and on-site percolation is not feasible, runoff should be detained or dispersed over nonerodible vegetated surfaces so that the runoff rate does not exceed the predevelopment level. When the runoff rate must exceed the predevelopment level, the runoff water shall be discharged over nonerodible surfaces or at a velocity that will not erode. On-site detention shall be required by the City Engineer unless the applicant shows that the runoff which is created will not contribute to downstream erosion, flooding, or sedimentation.

 

(c)    Any concentrated runoff which cannot be effectively dispersed over nonerodible channels or conduits to the nearest drainage course shall be contained within on-site percolation devices. Where water will be discharged to natural ground or channels, appropriate energy dissipators shall be installed to prevent erosion at the point of discharge.

 

(d)    Runoff from disturbed areas shall be detained or filtered by berms, vegetated filter strips, catch basins, or other means as necessary to prevent the escape of sediment from the disturbed area.

 

(e)    No earth, organic, or construction material shall be deposited in or placed where it may be directly carried into a stream, lake, marsh, slough, lagoon, or body of water.

 

(f)    Where land-disturbing activities are in proximity to lakes or natural watercourses, a buffer zone is required along the land-water margin of sufficient width to confine visible siltation within 25% of the buffer zone nearest the land-disturbing activities.

 

810.0230 Land Clearing.
Land clearing shall be kept to a minimum. Vegetation removal shall be limited to that amount necessary for building, access, fire protection, and construction as shown on the approved Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan or as allowed by the City Engineer through a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Permit.

 

(a)    All disturbed surfaces shall be prepared and maintained to control erosion and to establish vegetative growth compatible with the area. This control shall consist of any one or a combination of the following.

 

(1)    Effective temporary planting such as rye grass or some other fast-germinating native seed and/or mulching with straw, pine needles, chippings, or other slope stabilization material

 

(2)    Permanent planting of compatible drought-resistant species of ground cover, shrubs, trees, or other vegetation

 

(3)    Mulching, fertilizing, watering, or other methods necessary to establish new vegetation

 

(b)    The protection required by this section shall be installed prior to calling for final approval of the project and at all times between October 15 and April 15. Such protection shall be maintained for at least one year or until permanent protection is established.

 

(c)    No land clearing activities except as otherwise allowed by this chapter shall take place prior to approval of the erosion control plan and/or permit. Vegetation removal between October 15 and April 15 shall not precede subsequent grading or construction activities by more than 15 days. During this period, erosion and sediment control measures shall be in place.

 

810.0235 Winter Operations.
(a)    The City Engineer shall only authorize the following between October 15 and April 15 when it is found that such projects comply with the provisions and are consistent with the purposes of this chapter.

 

(1)    Contiguous land clearing operations involving greater than one acre in a one-year period of time

 

(2)    Major grading operations (greater than 100 cubic yards)

When construction will be delayed due to the limitation on winter operations, the date for expiration of the permit shall be extended by that amount of time that work is delayed by the requirements of this chapter.

 

(b)    The City Engineer and the City Planner shall stamp or attach the following statement to all development permits and plans issued within areas subject to the provisions of this chapter.

 

NOTICE: IF THE CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY WILL EXTEND INTO THE WINTER OPERATIONS PERIOD (OCTOBER 15 THROUGH APRIL 15), ADDITIONAL SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL MEASURES MAY BE REQUIRED.

 

ANY DEVELOPMENT PROJECT WHICH IS REQUIRED TO IMPLEMENT AN APPROVED SOIL EROSION CONTROL PLAN SHALL HAVE SUCH APPROVED PLAN AMENDED IF IT DOES NOT COMPLY WITH THE PROVISIONS ESTABLISHED FOR WINTER OPERATION BY SECTION 810.0535 OF THE YUCAIPA CODE. ALL REQUIRED WINTER OPERATION EROSION CONTROL DEVICES SHALL BE INSTALLED PRIOR TO OCTOBER 15 FOR ONGOING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS AND PRIOR TO ANY CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY FOR THOSE DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS COMMENCING BETWEEN OCTOBER 15 AND APRIL 15.

 

(c)    The following winter operation measures shall be taken to prevent accelerated erosion. Additional measures may be required by the City Engineer when determined to be necessary by field inspection.

 

(1)    Between October 15 and April 15, disturbed surfaces not involved in the immediate operation shall be protected by mulching or other effective means of soil protection.

 

(2)    All roads and driveways shall have drainage facilities sufficient to prevent erosion on or adjacent to the roadway or on downhill properties. Erosion-resistant surfacing may include, but is not limited to, slag, crushed rock, or natural soil when compacted to 90% of maximum density as determined by Test D1557-58T of the American Society for Testing and Materials for the top 12 inches.

 

(3)    Runoff from a site shall be detained or filtered by berms, vegetated filter strips, or catch basins to prevent the escape of sediment from the site. These drainage controls shall be maintained by the permittee or property owner as necessary to achieve their purpose throughout the life of the project.

 

(4)    Erosion control measures shall be in place at the end of each day’s work.

 

810.0240 Continued Responsibility.
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner and the permittee to ensure that accelerated erosion does not occur from any activity during and after project construction. Additional measures beyond those specified in an approved Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan may be required by the City Engineer as deemed necessary to control erosion after project completion.

 

810.0245 Exemptions.
(a)    Conditions of accelerated erosion existing prior to adoption of this chapter are not exempted. The intent of this section is not to invalidate existing discretionary permits, but rather to prevent or mitigate accelerated erosion. The following work is exempted from all provisions of this chapter except Sections 810.0510, General Provisions, and 810.0520, Appeals.

 

(1)    Agriculture Activities

Agricultural grading, routine agricultural activities such as plowing, harrowing, discing, ridging, listing, land planing, and similar operations to prepare a field for a crop, including routine clearing to maintain existing rangeland

 

(2)    Timber Harvesting

Work done pursuant to a valid timber harvest permit

 

(3)    Quarrying

Quarrying done pursuant to a valid conditional use permit

 

(4)    Septic Systems and Wells

Work done pursuant to a valid permit for septic system installation and repair or well drilling; however, subsections 810.0230 (b), Land Clearing, and 810.0235 (c), Winter Operations, shall apply, and sediment from these activities shall not be allowed to enter any stream or body of water

 

(5)    Soil Tests

Routine testing of soil type and characteristics to determine soil suitability, water percolation, or similar soil tests, provided, however, that sediment from these activities shall not be allowed to enter any stream, drainage course, or body of water

 

(6)    Resource Management

Clearing, fuel management, reforestation, erosion control, or other resource management programs carried out under the auspices of a government agency which include appropriate erosion control measures; agencies should notify the City Engineer of such projects.

 

(7)    Land Clearing for Fire Protection

Land clearing and vegetation clearance around structures as required by State and local fire codes and fire prevention guidelines; land clearing exempted under the provisions of the subsection shall be limited to that required to comply with applicable fire codes and regulations

 

(b)    Road construction and maintenance, as well as installation of utilities in accordance with plans and procedures approved by the City Engineer or his designated representative, are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, provided that adequate measures consistent with the intent of this chapter have been taken to control erosion and the flow of sediment into lakes, streams, and drainage courses.

 

810.0250 Variances.
A request for a variance from the provisions of this chapter, the permit conditions, or the plan specifications may be approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may refer any variance request filed in accordance with the provisions of this section to the appeal authority as defined in Section 810.0570. A request for a variance must state in writing the provision from which it is to be varied, the proposed substitute provisions, when it would apply, and its advantages. In granting a variance, the City Engineer shall be guided by the following criteria.

 

(a)    That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property

 

(b)    That the variance is necessary for the proper design and/or function of a reasonable project for the property

 

(c)    That adequate measures will be taken to ensure consistency with the purpose of this chapter

 

810.0260 Inspection and Compliance.
The City Engineer shall conduct inspections to ensure compliance with this Chapter.

 

(a)    Inspection

The following inspections may be performed by the City Engineer.

 

(1)    Pre-Site Inspection

To determine the potential for erosion resulting from the proposed project

 

(2)    Operation Progress Inspections

To determine ongoing compliance

 

(3)    Final Inspection

To determine compliance with approved plans and specifications

 

(b)    Notification

The permittee shall notify the City Engineer at least 24 hours prior to the start of the authorized work, and also nine business hours prior to any inspection requested by the permittee or the permittee’s authorized agent.

 

(c)    Right of Entry

The filing of an application for a development permit constitutes a grant of permission for the City to enter the permit area for the purpose of administering this chapter from the date of the application to the termination of the erosion control maintenance period.

 

810.0265 Applicable Laws and Regulations.
Any person doing work in conformance with this chapter must also abide by all other applicable local, State and Federal laws and regulations. Where there is a conflict with other pre-existing City regulations, that conflict shall be resolved before the project is allowed to proceed.

 

810.0270 Appeals.
Any property owner or other person aggrieved or any person whose interests are adversely affected by any act or determination of the City Engineer under the provisions of this chapter or by any act or determination of any other authorized employee charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter may appeal the act or determination to the Planning Commission.

 

810.0275 Subject Areas.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to and be enforced in all areas within the Fire Safety (FR) Overlay District.

 

 

CHAPTER 3 WIND-BORNE SOIL EROSION
810.0301 Statement of Hazardous Condition.
The Yucaipa City Council does hereby find and determine that there exists within the City serious and hazardous wind erosion problems creating conditions that affect the health, safety, welfare, and property of the residents of the City. These conditions exist because of the improper and untimely disturbance of the surface or subsurface of the land, the soil of which is coarse textured and of a sandy nature, and because of the character and the presence of strong prevailing winds, seasonal and otherwise, which progressively erode the land and blow it in substantial quantity onto public roads and other public and private property.

 

810.0305 Enforcement.
The Community Development Director will be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.

 

810.0310 Permit Requirement.
(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, or any agent thereof who owns or is in possession or control of land to disturb the surface or subsurface of land by excavating, leveling, cultivating, discing, plowing, blading, removing residues, natural or planted, tree, vine or root crops, or by distributing or spreading a substantial quantity of similar soil on said land, or by any other action likely to cause or contribute to wind erosion of said land, or to aggravate said erosion thereon within the subject area at any time without first having obtained a valid permit therefore and having complied with the terms of said permit as provided for in this chapter.

 

(b)    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or any agent thereof who obtains a valid permit to fail to comply with the terms of said permit. A violation of the terms of this chapter or the permit may be found without present evidence of blowing sand or soil erosion.

 

810.0315 Prevention of Dust Storms.
To conserve the natural resources within the area described in Section 810.0330 of this chapter and to minimize the injurious effects of dust storms, the owner and all persons in possession of real property within said area shall prevent dust blowing therefrom, as nearly as that can be done by the taking of reasonable measures and means.

 

810.0320 Penalty for Violations.
Unless otherwise provided, any person, firm, company, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified, and each day or portion thereof such violation is in existence shall be a new and separate offense.

 

Any person so convicted shall be subject to the following.

 

(a)    They shall be guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not exceeding $100 and not less than $50 for a first violation.

 

(b)    They shall be guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not exceeding $200 and not less than $100 for a second violation.

 

(c)    The third and any additional violations shall constitute a misdemeanor offense and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $5,000 and not less than $500 or six months in jail, or both.

 

Notwithstanding the above, a first or second offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor. Payment of any penalty herein provided shall not relieve a person, firm, corporation, or other entity from the responsibility of correcting the condition, resulting from the violation.

 

810.0325 Authority to Investigate, Detain, and/or Issue Citation.
The Community Development Director and such persons as he or she designates shall have authority to, at all reasonable times, enter upon any property to investigate for violations of this Code, to detain for purposes of investigation or to issue a citation in conformance with relevant State law and of this jurisdiction to any person committing a misdemeanor or infraction offense in their presence, which is a violation of this Code.

 

810.0330 Subject Area.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any area included within the exterior City boundaries as determined by the Community Development Director with approval of the Planning Commission and City Council.

 

810.0345 Permit.
(a)    Application

Application for the permit required by this chapter shall be made in writing to the Community Development Director on forms provided by the City for this purpose, and shall set forth such information required to enable the Community Development Director or his deputy to fix and prescribe appropriate conditions which will prevent or minimize wind erosion of the permittee’s soil.

 

(b)    Permit Conditions

The permit shall be subject to such conditions as the Community Development Director may require which will assure that surface protection at or prior to the time of the disturbance of the surface or subsurface of the land is provided for, so as to prevent the soil on said land from being eroded by wind and blown onto public roads or other public or private property. Such protective measures as required by the Community Development Director shall be provided by means of agricultural measures or any other effective method or combination of methods of holding the soil in place as determined by the Planning Commission.

 

(c)    Appeal from Denial of Permit or Permit Conditions

Any applicant may appeal to the Planning Commission the decision of the Community Development Director in disapproving a permit as required herein, or the conditions of approval imposed by said Community Development Director. The appeal shall be taken in accordance with Section 810.0360 of this chapter.

 

(d)    Temporary Stop Work Orders

The Community Development Director may issue a temporary stop work order, and the subject soil disturbing operation shall be stopped subject thereto, whether a permit has been issued or not when the following conditions exist.

 

(1)    A permit has been issued, but not all of the permit requirements have been complied with. The stop work order may require that all work cease until all the permit requirements have been met.

 

(2)    Operations are in progress, with a permit or not, and weather conditions are such that substantial dust is being carried into the air. The stop work order may require that all work cease until the current dust air pollution is abated.

 

(3)    Operations are in progress, regardless of weather conditions, and a soil disturbance permit has not been issued.

 

The provisions of this subsection, (d), shall not be subject to an appeal.

 

810.0350 Permit Renewal.
The term of the permit shall run for one calendar year from date of issue. An annual renewal is required, as are the appropriate fees specified by the City Schedule of Fees.

 

810.0355 Exemptions.
A permit will not be required to disturb the surface or subsurface of the land under the following circumstances; however, prevention of dust storms as stated in Section 810.0315, above, will still apply when the following conditions exist.

 

(a)    Such activities are required by another ordinance, statute, rule, or regulation.

 

(b)    It is necessary to grade, trench, or otherwise install, repair, or replace utility services within the boundaries of utility or public rights-of-way.

 

(c)    The disturbance or proposed activity is confined to an area of one acre or less.

 

(d)    A viticulturalist properly utilizes a Noble blade to control weed growth within a vineyard.

 

(e)    The soil disturbance occurs as an agricultural practice within an established Agricultural Preserve.

 

810.0365 Annexation of Additional Area.
On the recommendation of the Community Development Director and with the approval of the City Council and Planning Commission, additional areas can be annexed to the area described in Section 810.0330, above, under the following conditions.

 

(a)    Conditions exist that are stated in Section 810.0301, above.

 

(b)    The area is contiguous to the area described in Section 810.0330, above.

 

810.0370 Notice.
In case any land presents a hazardous condition that may affect the health, safety, and welfare of neighboring residents because of the condition of the land with regard to loose soil and windy conditions, the owners of record will be notified of such conditions. If these conditions are not corrected within 30 days, the Community Development Director may order such conditions to be corrected as reasonably and economically as possible in accordance with the discretion of the Community Development Director. However, when time is of the essence and emergency action is necessary to put into effect these protective provisions, the Community Development Director may take immediate steps to abate the hazardous soil erosion condition. The City Finance Director shall pay the cost of such compliance from the funds of the Community Development Director. The total cost of such compliance shall be computed, and an administrative fee of 20% of such cost shall be added thereto. A bill for the entire sum of the costs and administrative fee shall be mailed to the record owner of such land, and a copy shall be sent to the City Finance Director. The bill shall include an itemized statement covering the work necessary for such abatement of hazardous condition. If the record owner of the land or his agent does not pay the bill within 30 days after said mailing, the Community Development Director shall certify to the Finance Director the demands remaining unpaid on said bill, together with any information required by law in such cases. The City Finance Director shall cause the amount of the same to be entered on the tax roll as a special assessment and tax lien on the property from which abatement of hazardous condition was accomplished. The special assessment shall be included on the next succeeding tax statement. Thereafter, the amounts of the assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in cases of delinquencies as provided in ordinary taxes. All or any portion of such special assessment, penalty, or costs entered shall on order of the City Council be canceled by the Finance Director if uncollected or refunded by the Treasurer under order of the City Council, if assessment, penalty, or costs were entered, charged or paid in the following manner:

 

(a)    More than once

 

(b)    Through clerical error

 

(c)    Through the error or mistake of the City Council or of the Community Development Director in respect to any material fact, including the case where the costs rendered show the City abated the land, but such was not the fact

 

(d)    Illegally

 

(e)    On property acquired after the lien by the State or any city, county, school district, or other political subdivision and because of this public ownership not subject to sale for delinquent taxes

 

 

No order for refund under the foregoing shall be made except on a claim verified by the person who paid the special assessment or the representative of such person or his estate, and said claim is filed within three years after making the payment to be refunded.

 

 

CHAPTER 4 WATER CONSERVATION
810.0401 Findings and Purpose.
(a)    That the waters of the State are of limited supply and are subject to ever increasing demands;

 

(b)    That the continuation of California’s economic prosperity is dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for future uses;

 

(c)    That it is the policy of the State to promote the conservation and efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource;

 

(d)    That landscapes are essential to the quality of life in California by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an enhancement to the environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion, offering fire protection, and replacing ecosystems lost to development; and

 

(e)    That landscape design, installation, maintenance and management can and should be water efficient; and

 

(f)    That Section 2 of Article X of the California Constitution specifies that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for the beneficial use to be served and the right does not and shall not extend to waste or unreasonable method of use.

 

(g)    Consistent with these findings, the purpose of this chapter is to:

 

(1)    Promote the values and benefits of landscaping practices that integrate and go beyond the conservation and efficient use of water;

 

(2)    Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects by encouraging the use of a watershed approach that requires cross-sector collaboration of industry, government and property owners to achieve the many benefits possible;

 

(3)    Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes;

 

(4)    Use water efficiently without waste by setting a Maximum Applied Water Allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount;

 

(5)    Promote the benefits of consistent landscape ordinances with neighboring local and regional agencies;

 

(6)    Establish economic incentives that promote the efficient use of water, such as implementing a tiered-rate structure; and

 

(7)    Adopt the necessary authority that implements and enforces the provisions of the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0405 Applicability.
(a)    Except as provided in subsection (d), this chapter shall apply to all of the following landscape projects:

 

(1)    New construction projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than 500 square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review;

 

(2)    Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review;

 

(3)    Existing landscapes limited to Sections 810.0495 and 810.0500; and

 

(4)    Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to Sections 810.0425, 810.0460, and 810.0465; and existing cemeteries are limited to Sections 810.0495 and 810.0500.

 

(b)    Any project with an aggregate landscape area of 2,500 square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this chapter or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in Appendix B.

 

(c)    For projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater captured on site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than 2,500 square feet of landscape and meets the lot or parcel’s landscape water requirement (Estimated Total Water Use) entirely with treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater captured on site is subject only to Appendix B Section (5).

 

(d)    This chapter does not apply to:

 

(1)    Registered local, State or Federal historical sites;

 

(2)    Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

 

(3)    Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or

 

(4)    Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0410 Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter have the meaning set forth below:

(a)    “Applied water” means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

 

(b)    “Automatic irrigation controller” means timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers are able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data.

 

(c)    “Backflow prevention device” means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system.

 

(d)    “Certificate of Completion” means the document required under Section 810.0450.

 

(e)    “Certified irrigation designer” means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense irrigation designer certification program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Irrigation Designer program.

 

(f)    “Certified landscape irrigation auditor” means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense irrigation auditor certification program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor program.

 

(g)    “Check valve” or “anti-drain valve” means a valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.

 

(h)    “Common interest developments” means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per California Civil Code Section 1351.

 

(i)     “Compost” means the safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth.

 

(j)     “Conversion factor (0.62)” means the number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year.

 

(k)    “Distribution uniformity” means the measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area.

(l)     “Drip irrigation” means any non-spray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

 

(m)   “Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

 

(n)    “Effective precipitation” or “usable rainfall” (Eppt) means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth.

 

(o)    “Emitter” means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil.

 

(p)    “Established landscape” means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth.

 

(q)    “Establishment period of the plants” means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may need three to five years for establishment.

 

(r)    “Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU)” means the total water used for the landscape as described in Section 810.0425.

 

(s)    “ET adjustment factor (ETAF)” means a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) Special Landscape Areas shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8.

 

(t)     “Evapotranspiration rate” means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time.

 

(u)    “Flow rate” means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second.

 

(v)    “Flow sensor” means an inline device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves. This combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter or submeter.

 

(w)   “Friable” means a soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded.

 

(x)    “Fuel Modification Plan Guideline” means guidelines from a local fire authority to assist residents and businesses that are developing land or building structures in a fire hazard severity zone.

 

(y)    “Graywater” means untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. “Graywater” includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers.

 

(z)    “Hardscapes” means any durable material (pervious and non-pervious).

 

(aa)  “Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs and rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.

 

(bb)  “Infiltration rate” means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).

 

(cc)  “Invasive plant species” means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database.

 

(dd)  “Irrigation audit” means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association’s Landscape Irrigation Auditor Certification program or other U.S. Environmental Protection Agency “WaterSense” labeled auditing program.

(ee)  “Irrigation efficiency (IE)” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this chapter are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems.

 

(ff)   “Irrigation survey” means an evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system.

 

(gg)  “Irrigation water use analysis” means an analysis of water use data based on meter readings and billing data.

 

(hh)  “Landscape architect” means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state of California Business and Professions Code, Section 5615.

 

(ii)    “Landscape area” means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the Maximum Applied Water Allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

 

(jj)    “Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the State of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

 

(kk)  “Landscape Documentation Package” means the documents required under Section 810.0420.

 

(ll)    “Landscape project” means total area of landscape in a project as defined in “landscape area” for the purposes of this chapter, meeting requirements under Section 810.0405.

 

(mm) “Landscape water meter” means an inline device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is connected to a totalizer to record water use.

 

(nn)  “Lateral line” means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve.

 

(oo)  “Local water purveyor” means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service.

(pp)  “Low volume irrigation” means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

 

(qq)  “Main line” means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet.

 

(rr)   “Master shut-off valve” is an automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is closed water will not be supplied to the irrigation system. A master valve will greatly reduce any water loss due to a leaky station valve.

 

(ss)   “Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA)” means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 810.0425. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET Adjustment Factor, and the size of the landscape area. The Estimated Total Water Use shall not exceed the Maximum Applied Water Allowance. Special Landscape Areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo)(0.62)[(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)]

 

(tt)    “Median” is an area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses.

 

(uu)  “Microclimate” means the climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces.

 

(vv)  “Mined-land reclamation projects” means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

 

(ww) “Mulch” means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion.

 

(xx)  “New construction” means a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

 

(yy)  “Non-residential landscape” means landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas.

 

(zz)  “Operating pressure” means the pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate.

 

(aaa) “Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems” or “overhead spray irrigation systems” means systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors).

 

(bbb)        “Overspray” means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area.

 

(ccc) “Parkway” means the area between a sidewalk and the curb or traffic lane. It may be planted or unplanted, and with or without pedestrian egress.

 

(ddd)        “Permit” means an authorizing document issued by the City for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.

 

(eee) “Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

 

(fff)  “Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor that, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this chapter, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0.

 

(ggg)        “Project applicant” means the individual or entity submitting a Landscape Documentation Package to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the City. A project applicant may be the property owner or designee.

 

(hhh)        “Rain sensor” or “rain sensing shutoff device” means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains.

 

(iii)   “Record drawing” or “as-builts” means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor.

 

(jjj)   “Recreational area” means areas, excluding private single family residential areas, designated for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters or golf course tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds and greens.

 

(kkk)        “Recycled water,” “reclaimed water,” or “treated sewage effluent water” means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.

 

(lll)   “Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the Maximum Applied Water Allowances so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated.

 

(mmm) “Rehabilitated landscape” means any relandscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of Section 810.0405, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet.

 

(nnn)        “Residential landscape” means landscapes surrounding single-family or multifamily homes.

 

(ooo)        “Runoff” means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.

 

(ppp)        “Soil moisture sensing device” or “soil moisture sensor” means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event.

 

(qqq)        “Soil texture” means the classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay.

 

(rrr)  “Special Landscape Area” (SLA) means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, recreational areas, areas irrigated with recycled water, or water features using recycled water.

 

(sss) “Sprinkler head” or “spray head” means a device which delivers water through a nozzle.

 

(ttt)   “Static water pressure” means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing.

 

(uuu)        “Station” means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously.

(vvv)        “Swing joint” means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage.

 

(www) “Submeter” means a metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed after the primary utility water meter.

 

(xxx)        “Turf” means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.

 

(yyy)        “Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.

 

(zzz) “Water conserving plant species” means a plant species identified as having a very low or low plant factor.

 

(aaaa) “Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation.

 

(bbbb) “Watering window” means the time of day irrigation is allowed.

 

(cccc) “WUCOLS” means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension and the Department of Water Resources 2014. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0415 Compliance with Landscape Documentation Package.
(a)    Prior to construction, the City shall:

 

(1)    Provide the project applicant with the ordinance and procedures for permits, plan checks or design reviews;

 

(2)    Review the Landscape Documentation Package submitted by the project applicant;

 

(3)    Approve or deny the Landscape Documentation Package;

(4)    Issue a permit or approve the plan check or design review for the project applicant; and

 

(5)    Upon approval of the Landscape Documentation Package, submit a copy of the Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet to the local water purveyor.

 

(b)    Prior to construction, the project applicant shall:

 

(1)    Submit a Landscape Documentation Package to the City.

 

(c)    Upon approval of the Landscape Documentation Package by the City, the project applicant shall:

 

(1)    Receive a permit or approval of the plan check or design review and record the date of the permit in the Certificate of Completion;

 

(2)    Submit a copy of the approved Landscape Documentation Package along with the record drawings, and any other information to the property owner or designee; and

 

(3)    Submit a copy of the Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet to the local water purveyor. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0420 Elements of the Landscape Documentation Package.
(a)    The Landscape Documentation Package shall include the following six elements:

 

(1)    Project information:

 

(A)   Date,

 

(B)   Project applicant,

 

(C)   Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s)),

 

(D)   Total landscape area (square feet),

 

(E)   Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed),

 

(F)    Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well,

 

(G)   Checklist of all documents in Landscape Documentation Package,

 

(H)   Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner,

 

(I)    Applicant signature and date with statement, “I agree to comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape ordinance and submit a complete Landscape Documentation Package”;

 

(2)    Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet:

 

(A)   Hydrozone information table,

 

(B)   Water budget calculations:

 

1.     Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA),

 

2.     Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU);

 

(3)    Soil management report;

 

(4)    Landscape design plan;

 

(5)    Irrigation design plan; and

 

(6)    Grading design plan. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0425 Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet.
(a)    A project applicant shall complete the Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet in Appendix A which contains information on the plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency, and area associated with each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that the evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas, exclusive of Special Landscape Areas. The ETAF for a landscape project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected. The Maximum Applied Water Allowance is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required. The Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU) is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation method selected for the landscape design. ETWU must be below the MAWA.

(b)    In calculating the Maximum Applied Water Allowance and Estimated Total Water Use, a project applicant shall use the following ETo values:

 

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Annual ETo

2.0

2.3

3.4

4.4

6.1

7.1

7.6

7.9

6.0

3.9

2.6

1.7

55.0

 

(c)    Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements:

 

(1)    The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS or from horticultural researchers with academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, from 0.1 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants.

 

(2)    All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone.

 

(3)    All Special Landscape Areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as shown in Appendix A.

 

(4)    ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) Special Landscape Areas shall not exceed 1.0. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0430 Soil Management Report.
(a)    In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project applicant, or designee, as follows:

 

(1)    Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations.

 

(A)   Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants.

 

(B)   The soil analysis shall include:

 

1.     Soil texture;

 

2.     Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table;

 

3.     pH;

 

4.     Total soluble salts;

 

5.     Sodium;

 

6.     Percent organic matter; and

 

7.     Recommendations.

 

(C)   In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) a soil sampling rate of 1 in 7 lots or approximately 15% will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a rate equivalent to 1 in 7 lots.

 

(2)    The project applicant, or designee, shall comply with one of the following:

 

(A)   If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the City as part of the Landscape Documentation Package; or

 

(B)   If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the City as part of the Certificate of Completion.

 

(3)    The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.

 

(4)    The project applicant, or designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the City with the Certificate of Completion. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0435 Landscape Design Plan.
(a)    For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package.

 

(1)    Plant Material

 

(A)   Any plant may be selected for the landscape, providing the Estimated Total Water Use in the landscape area does not exceed the Maximum Applied Water Allowance. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following:

 

1.     Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation;

 

2.     Selection of water-conserving plant, tree and turf species, especially local native plants;

 

3.     Selection of plants based on local climate suitability, disease and pest resistance;

 

4.     Selection of trees based on applicable local tree ordinances or tree shading guidelines, and size at maturity as appropriate for the planting area;

 

5.     Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists; and

 

6.     Selection of plants from local Fuel Modification Plan Guidelines.

 

(B)   Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in Section 810.0440(a)(2)(D).

 

(C)   Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following:

 

1.     Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate;

 

2.     Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure [e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines]; allow for adequate soil volume for healthy root growth; and

 

3.     Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain.

 

(D)   Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than 25% where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where 25% means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length (rise divided by run x 100 = slope percent).

 

(E)   High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street medians.

 

(F)    A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per California Public Resources Code Section 4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches.

 

(G)   The use of invasive plant species, such as those listed by the California Invasive Plant Council, is strongly discouraged.

 

(H)   The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group.

 

(2)    Water Features

 

(A)   Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features.

 

(B)   Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features.

 

(C)   Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.

 

(D)   Pool and spa covers are highly recommended.

 

(3)    Soil Preparation, Mulch and Amendments

 

(A)   Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting holes need meet this requirement.

 

(B)   Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected.

 

(C)   For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four cubic yards per 1,000 square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated to a depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than six percent organic matter in the top six inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and tilling.

 

(D)   A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, up to five percent of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such.

 

(E)   Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet current engineering standards.

 

(F)    The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement.

 

(G)   Organic mulch materials made from recycled or post-consumer shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally available. Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local Fuel Modification Plan Guidelines or other applicable local ordinances.

 

(b)    The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall:

 

(1)    Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method;

 

(2)    Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation;

 

(3)    Identify recreational areas;

 

(4)    Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;

 

(5)    Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;

 

(6)    Identify type of mulch and application depth;

 

(7)    Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity;

(8)    Identify type and surface area of water features;

 

(9)    Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious);

 

(10)  Identify location, installation details, and 24-hour retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Project applicants shall refer to the City or Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan;

 

(11)  Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies as discussed in Section 810.0485 and their 24-hour retention or infiltration capacity;

 

(12)  Identify any applicable graywater discharge piping, system components and area(s) of distribution;

 

(13)  Contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan”; and

 

(14)  Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0440 Irrigation Design Plan.
(a)    This section applies to landscaped areas requiring permanent irrigation, not areas that require temporary irrigation solely for the plant establishment period. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers’ recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package.

 

(1)    System

 

(A)   Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or private submeter, shall be installed for all non-residential irrigated landscapes of 1,000 square feet but not more than 5,000 square feet and residential irrigated landscapes of 5,000 square feet or greater. A landscape water meter may be either:

 

1.     A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided by the local water purveyor; or

 

2.     A privately owned meter or submeter.

 

(B)   Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing non-volatile memory shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.

 

(C)   If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure regulating device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer’s recommended pressure range for optimal performance.

 

1.     If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.

 

2.     Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation.

 

(D)   Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain.

 

(E)   Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair.

 

(F)    Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to the applicable City code for additional backflow prevention requirements.

 

 

(G)   Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are required for all on non-residential landscapes and residential landscapes of 5,000 square feet or larger.

 

(H)   Master shut-off valves are required on all projects except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low pressure shut down features.

 

(I)    The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures.

 

(J)    Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems.

 

(K)   The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan.

 

(L)   The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in Section 810.0425 regarding the Maximum Applied Water Allowance.

 

(M)  All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers’/International Code Council’s (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 “Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard.” All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.

 

(N)   It is highly recommended that the project applicant inquire with the local water purveyor about peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system.

 

(O)   In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.

 

(P)    Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer’s recommendations.

(Q)   Head to head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer’s recommendations.

 

(R)   Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high traffic areas of turfgrass.

 

(S)    Check valves or anti-drain valves are required on all sprinkler heads where low point drainage could occur.

 

(T)   Areas less than 10 feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or overspray.

 

(U)   Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within 24 inches of any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow non-spray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if:

 

1.     The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

 

2.     The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or

 

3.     The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the Landscape Documentation Package and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in Section 810.0440(a)(1)(I). Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

 

(V)   Slopes greater than 25% shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with an application rate exceeding 0.75 inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the Landscape Documentation Package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

 

(2)    Hydrozone

(A)   Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.

 

(B)   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.

 

(C)   Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone shall be considered when designing irrigation for the tree.

 

(D)   Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if:

 

1.     Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or

 

2.     The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations.

 

(E)   Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted.

 

(F)    On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve.

 

(b)    The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain:

 

(1)    Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;

 

(2)    Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;

 

(3)    Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;

 

(4)    Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;

 

(5)    Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in Section 810.0475;

(6)    The following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan”; and

 

(7)    The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0445 Grading Design Plan.
(a)    For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading plan shall be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other City permits satisfies this requirement.

 

(1)    The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including:

 

(A)   Height of graded slopes;

 

(B)   Drainage patterns;

 

(C)   Pad elevations;

 

(D)   Finish grade; and

 

(E)   Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.

 

(2)    To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that project applicants:

 

(A)   Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain onto non-permeable hardscapes;

 

(B)   Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil; and

 

(C)   Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas.

 

(3)    The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design plan” and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0450 Certificate of Completion.
(a)    The Certificate of Completion, a sample of which is available through the City, shall include the following six elements:

 

(1)    Project information sheet that contains:

 

(A)   Date,

 

(B)   Project name,

 

(C)   Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address,

 

(D)   Project address and location, and

 

(E)   Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address;

 

(2)    Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the approved Landscape Documentation Package:

 

(A)   Where there have been significant changes made in the field during construction, these “as-built” or record drawings shall be included with the certification,

 

(B)   A diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones shall be kept with the irrigation controller for subsequent management purposes;

 

(3)    Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller;

 

(4)    Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule;

 

(5)    Irrigation audit report; and

 

(6)    Soil analysis report, if not submitted with Landscape Documentation Package, and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations.

 

(b)    The project applicant shall:

 

(1)    Submit the signed Certificate of Completion to the City for review;

 

(2)    Ensure that copies of the approved Certificate of Completion are submitted to the local water purveyor and property owner or designee.

 

(c)    The City shall:

 

(1)    Receive the signed Certificate of Completion from the project applicant;

 

(2)    Approve or deny the Certificate of Completion. If the Certificate of Completion is denied, the City shall provide information to the project applicant regarding reapplication, appeal, or other assistance. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0455 Irrigation Scheduling.
(a)    For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria:

 

(1)    Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers.

 

(2)    Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. If allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local water purveyor, the stricter of the two shall apply. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

 

(3)    For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the Estimated Total Water Use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data.

 

(4)    Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following:

 

(A)   The plant establishment period;

 

(B)   The established landscape; and

 

(C)   Temporarily irrigated areas.

 

(5)    Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply:

 

(A)   Irrigation interval (days between irrigation);

 

(B)   Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff);

 

(C)   Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff;

 

(D)   Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis;

 

(E)   Application rate setting;

 

(F)    Root depth setting;

 

(G)   Plant type setting;

 

(H)   Soil type;

 

(I)    Slope factor setting;

 

(J)    Shade factor setting; and

 

(K)   Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0460 Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance Schedule.
(a)    Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the Certificate of Completion.

 

(b)    A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; auditing, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; topdressing with compost, replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas, and removing obstructions to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

 

(c)    Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents or with components with greater efficiency.

 

(d)    A project applicant is encouraged to implement established landscape industry sustainable Best Practices for all landscape maintenance activities. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0465 Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, and Irrigation Water Use Analysis.
(a)    All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a City landscape irrigation auditor or a third party certified landscape irrigation auditor. Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the person who designed the landscape or installed the landscape.

 

(b)    In large projects or projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) an auditing rate of 1 in 7 lots or approximately 15% will satisfy this requirement.

 

(c)    For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after December 1, 2015, as described in Section 810.0405, the project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the Certificate of Completion to the City that may include, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or run off that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule, including configuring irrigation controllers with application rate, soil types, plant factors, slope, exposure and any other factors necessary for accurate programming. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0470 Irrigation Efficiency.
For the purpose of determining Estimated Total Water Use, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip system devices. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0475 Recycled Water.
(a)    The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use of recycled water.

 

(b)    All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and State laws.

 

(c)    Landscapes using recycled water are considered Special Landscape Areas. The ET Adjustment Factor for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) Special Landscape Areas shall not exceed 1.0. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0480 Graywater Systems.
Graywater systems promote the efficient use of water and are encouraged to assist in on-site landscape irrigation. All graywater systems shall conform to the California Plumbing Code (Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16) and any applicable City standards. (Added by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015)

 

810.0485 Stormwater Management and Rainwater Retention.
(a)    Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on-site rainwater retention and infiltration are encouraged.

 

(b)    Project applicants shall refer to the City or Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements.

 

(c)    All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to maximize water retention and infiltration.

 

(d)    It is strongly recommended that landscape areas be designed for capture and infiltration capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from impervious surfaces (i.e., roof and paved areas) from either: (1) the one-inch, 24-hour rain event; or (2) the 85th percentile, 24-hour rain event, and/or additional capacity as required by any applicable local, regional, State or Federal regulation.

 

(e)    It is recommended that storm water projects incorporate any of the following elements to improve on-site stormwater and dry weather runoff capture and use:

 

(1)    Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction to drain to vegetated areas.

 

(2)    Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roof and concrete driveways.

 

(3)    Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff.

 

(4)    Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds or landscaped areas to maximize site water capture and reuse.

 

(5)    Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or catchment systems.

(6)    Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins and drywells to capture stormwater and dry weather runoff and increase percolation into the soil.

 

(7)    Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize excess flow, and filter pollutants. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0490 Public Education.
(a)    Publications. The City will provide information to owners of permitted renovations and new, single-family residential homes regarding the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes based on a water budget.

 

(b)    Model Homes. All model homes that are landscaped shall use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this chapter.

 

(1)    Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme. Signage shall include information about the site water use as designed per this chapter; specify who designed and installed the water efficient landscape; and demonstrate low water use approaches to landscaping such as using native plants, graywater systems, and rainwater catchment systems.

 

(2)    Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0495 Existing Landscaping: Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, and Irrigation Water Use Analysis.
(a)    This section shall apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before December 1, 2015 and are over one acre in size.

 

(1)    For all landscapes that have a water meter, the City shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the Maximum Applied Water Allowance for existing landscapes. The Maximum Applied Water Allowance for existing landscapes shall be calculated as: MAWA = (0.8)(ETo)(LA)(0.62).

 

(2)    For all landscapes that do not have a meter, the City shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste.

(b)    All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0500 Water Waste Prevention.
(a)    Runoff shall not leave the target landscape due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures.

 

(b)    Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if:

 

(1)    The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

 

(2)    The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

810.0505 Effective Precipitation.
The City may consider Effective Precipitation (25% of annual precipitation) in tracking water use and may use the following equation to calculate Maximum Applied Water Allowance:

 

MAWA = (ETo-Eppt)(0.62)[(0.55 x LA) + (0.45 x SLA)] for residential areas.

MAWA = (ETo-EPPT)(0.62)[(0.45 x LA) + (0.55 x SLA)] for non-residential areas.

(Added by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015)

 

810.0510 Appendices.
All references in this chapter to Appendix A and Appendix B are to the uncodified appendices adopted by Ordinance No. 338. (Amended by Ord. 338 § 1, 2015; Ord. 293 § 3, 2009)

 

CHAPTER 5 ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS
810.0601 Authority and Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the approval, installation, and operation of onsite wastewater treatment systems (OWTS) within the City of Yucaipa, consistent with the appropriate California Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) standards and basin plans. The standards are adopted to prevent the creation of health hazards and nuisance conditions and to protect surface and groundwater quality. The City has prepared a Local Agency Management Program (LAMP) for OWTS permitting and regulation throughout the City, and that program has been approved by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board for the Santa Ana Region. (Added by Ord. 379 § 1, 2019)

 

810.0605 Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems.
Installation and replacement of onsite wastewater treatment systems shall be in accordance with and conform to the City of Yucaipa Local Agency Management Program for Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems as adopted by resolution of the City Council, and as may be amended from time to time. (Added by Ord. 379 § 1, 2019)

DIVISION 11 PUBLIC FACILITIES FINANCING
CHAPTER 1 DRAINAGE FACILITIES FINANCING
811.0101 Intent.
The intent of this Chapter is to require the payment of drainage fees for most new construction within an adopted Drainage Plan in order to defray the actual or estimated costs of constructing planned drainage facilities. The authority for this Chapter is derived from the power granted to local governments by the Constitution of the State of California to preserve the public health, safety and general welfare. (Amended by Ord. 279 § 3, 2008; Ord. 210 § 28, 2001)

 

811.0105 Establishment of Drainage Plans.
(a)    The provisions of this Chapter shall only affect those portions of the City that are within the boundaries of an adopted Drainage Plan.

 

(b)    The City Council in adopting a Drainage Plan shall find and determine that development or redevelopment of the property in the Plan Area will require the construction of the facilities described in the Plan Area and that the drainage fees are fairly apportioned within the drainage area.

 

(c)    The drainage fees shall be fairly apportioned based on one of the following: 1) on the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed to be developed or redeveloped, 2) on the need for drainage facilities created by such development and the development of other property in the drainage area, or 3) on the basis of the proportionate storm water run-off from each parcel. Fees to be paid shall not exceed the pro rata share of the amount of the total actual or estimated costs of all facilities within such area which would be assessable on such property if such costs were apportioned uniformly on a per acre basis.

 

(d)    The City Council, in adopting or amending the Drainage Plan, shall do all of the following:

 

(1)    Identify the purpose of the fee.

 

(2)    Identify the use to which the fee is to be put. If the use is financing public facilities, then the facilities should be identified. The facilities may be identified by reference to any public document which identifies the facilities for which the fee is charged.

 

(3)    Determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the public facility and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed.

 

(4)    Determine how there is a relationship between the amount of the fees and the cost of the flood control facilities, or portion thereof, attributable to the development on which the fee is imposed.

 

(e)    Drainage Plans and/or the drainage fee may be adopted by the Council, and thereafter amended at any time, only after holding a public hearing. The requirements of Government Code Section 66004 shall be followed prior to holding a public hearing establishing or modifying a fee for a Drainage Plan.

 

811.0110 Fee Collection and Accounting.
(a)    Except as otherwise provided in Section 811.0120(c), whenever a building permit, grading permit, or other City approval in connection with new construction is requested within the boundaries of a Drainage Plan, the specified drainage fee may be paid on the date of issuance of the building permit, grading permit, or other City approval in connection with new construction, and shall become due and payable at the time of final inspection, or the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. If the drainage fee is paid in full on the date of issuance of the building permit, the amount of the drainage fee shall be that which is in effect in the Schedule of Fees for the applicable drainage Plan on the date of payment of such fee. If the drainage fee is not fully paid on the date of issuance of the building permit, the fee, or applicable portion thereof, shall be secured by the recordation of a Deferral Agreement. The amount of the drainage fee secured by the Deferral Agreement shall be that which is in effect in the Schedule of Fees for the applicable drainage plan at the time the fee becomes due and payable, and shall be paid on that date. The drainage fee shall be deposited to the appropriate Drainage Facilities Fund. Any interest income earned by the money in the Drainage Facilities Fund shall also be deposited in the fund.

 

(b)    Drainage fees required by this chapter shall be paid to the City and deposited into a Drainage Facilities Fund. Monies in such funds, including interest, shall be expended solely for the construction and reimbursement for the construction of drainage facilities, including related administration expenses, within the area from which the fees comprising the fund were collected, and/or to reimburse the local agency for the cost of engineering, right of way acquisition and administrative services required to design and construct facilities within the Drainage Plan.

 

(c)    Money may be advanced by the City to design and construct drainage facilities, related administrative services or to acquire necessary right-of-way within the area of an adopted Drainage Plan. Money so advanced shall be reimbursed to the City from the appropriate Drainage Facilities Fund. (Amended by Ord. 279 § 4, 2008)

 

811.0115 Drainage Fee Calculation.
(a)    Assessed drainage fees shall be based upon the total net area of the parcel. If the parcel has a net area of more than one (1) acre, and it is located within a Residential Land Use District, the maximum fee assessed shall be for one (1) acre.

 

(b)    The amount of fees assessed and the area on which said fee is based shall be determined by the City Planner. The City Planner may require an applicant to submit all information necessary to calculate said fee(s). (Amended by Ord. 279 § 5, 2008)

 

811.0120 Credit and Exceptions.
(a)    (1)    When required for the implementation of an adopted Drainage Plan, an agreement may be entered into between a developer and the City whereby the developer may advance money for the construction of facilities, or design of such facilities within a Drainage Plan. Subject to the restrictions in subsection (a)(2), the sole security to the developer for repayment of money or other consideration advanced shall be money subsequently accruing in the appropriate Drainage Facilities Fund. Reimbursement shall be for the amount agreed upon in advance only and shall not include interest or other charges. The agreement shall expire ten (10) years after the date it was entered into, and any subsequent money paid into the fund shall accrue to the fund without obligation to a developer whose agreement has expired.

 

(2)    The City may designate that up to ten percent (10%) of the funds collected in a Drainage Facilities Fund be utilized for reimbursement for any agreement entered into pursuant to subsection (a)(1). Other than the amount so designated by the City, Drainage Facilities Funds shall not be used as reimbursement for any agreements authorized by subsection (a)(1).

 

(b)    An agreement may be entered into between a developer and the City whereby considerations such as dedication of right-of-way, actual construction, or design work by a civil engineer may be accepted in lieu of part or all of the payment of drainage fees, the City Council shall find that the alternative is acceptable and is equal to or greater in value than the required fee, prior to approving such an agreement.

 

(c)    Drainage fees shall not be required as a condition of building permits on existing developed parcels for:

 

(1)    Maintenance and repair of existing improvements.

 

(2)    Reconstruction, when permits are issued within two years of the destruction of a structure due to fire, vandalism, wind, earthquakes or other natural or man-made disasters.

 

(3)    Construction of garages, carports, storage buildings, patio covers, swimming pools, and similar structures, accessory to a single-family residence.

 

(4)    Other construction or reconstruction which does not involve grading causing an increased rate of runoff when such construction or reconstruction falls within the boundaries of the net area described in Section 811.0115 as the “area of the developed portion of the parcel”, as it existed prior to the effective date of an applicable area drainage plan. Applicant shall be responsible for providing sufficient information to establish that the proposed grading would not increase the rate of runoff. Assessment of fees due to such grading shall apply to only the portion of the parcel on which grading would contribute to an increased rate of runoff.

 

(d)    If a drainage fee for a parcel, or portion thereof, has been previously paid, credit shall be given for such prior payment toward any fee payment required by this chapter.

 

(e)    The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to property subject to other assessments for the same drainage facilities.

 

811.0125 Surplus and Refunds.
(a)    After completion of facilities and the payment of all claims from any Drainage Facilities Fund, the City Council shall determine by resolution or other legislative action the amount of the surplus, if any, remaining in any of these funds. Any surplus shall be used, in those amounts as the Council may determine, for one or more of the following purposes:

 

(1)    For transfer to the General Fund of the City, provided that the amount of the transfer shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the total amount expended from the particular fund, and provided that the funds transferred are used to support the operation and maintenance of those facilities for which the fees were collected.

 

(2)    For the construction of additional or modified facilities within the same Drainage Plan.

 

(3)    As a refund in the manner provided in subsection (b), below.

 

(b)    Any surplus remaining shall be refunded as follows:

 

(1)    There shall be refunded to the current owners of property for which a fee was previously collected, the balance of such monies in the same proportion which each individual fee collected bears to the total of all individual fees collected from the particular drainage area;

 

(2)    Where property for which a fee was previously collected has subsequently been subdivided into more than one lot, each current owner of a lot shall share in the refund payable to the owners of the property for which a fee was previously collected in the same proportion which the area of each individual lot bears to the total area of the property for which a fee was previously collected; and

 

(3)    There shall be transferred to the general fund of the City any remaining portion of the surplus which has not been paid to or claimed by the persons entitled thereto within two years from the date either of the completion of the improvements, or the adoption by the City Council of a resolution declaring a surplus, whichever is later to occur.

 

(c)    Subject to the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) above, commencing on the fifth year after imposition of a fee for a Drainage Plan and annually thereafter, the Council shall hold a hearing with respect to any portion of the fee remaining unexpended or uncommitted five or more years, and shall refund to the then owners of lots or units in development projects within the Drainage Plan on a pro rata basis any such unexpended or uncommitted fees plus interest accrued thereon, for which the Council is unable to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the need for the fee and the purpose for which it was charged. When applicable, refunds shall be made in accordance with Government Code Section 66001.

 

 

CHAPTER 2 CIRCULATION FACILITIES FINANCING
811.0201 Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to require the payment of circulation facilities fees for new development that is within the boundaries of an adopted Circulation Facilities Plan. Such fees shall be for the purposes of defraying the actual or estimated costs of constructing circulation facilities that are necessary to accommodate vehicular traffic generated by new development within the Circulation Facilities Plan from which such fees are collected. The authority for this chapter is derived from the power granted to local governments by the Constitution of the State of California to preserve the public health, safety and general welfare.

 

811.0205 Establishment of Circulation Facilities Plans.
(a)    The provisions of this chapter shall only effect those portions of the City that are within the boundaries of an adopted Circulation Facilities Plan.

 

(b)    The City Council, in adopting or amending a Circulation Facilities Plan, shall do all of the following:

 

(1)    Identify the purpose of the fee.

 

(2)    Identify the uses which are supportive of the fee and the circulation facilities which will be provided with the fees.

 

(3)    Determine that a reasonable relationship exists between the fee’s use and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed.

 

(4)    Determine that a reasonable relationship exists between the need for the circulation facilities and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed.

 

(5)    Determine that a relationship exists between the amount of the fee and the cost of the Circulation Facility, or portion thereof, attributable to the development on which the fee is imposed.

 

(c)    The circulation facilities which constitute major thoroughfares as set forth in California Government Code Section 66474 and the freeways, streams or canyons for which bridges are required, shall be identified in the circulation, transportation or flood control element of the City General Plan in the area of Circulation Facilities Plan at least 30 days prior to implementation of a fee for such facilities. Major thoroughfares shall be in addition to, or a reconstruction of, existing major thoroughfares, and bridges shall be original bridges or addition to existing bridges.

 

(d)    Circulation Facilities Plans and/or the transportation facilities fee may be adopted by the Council, and thereafter amended at any time, only after holding a public hearing. The requirements of California Government Code Section 66004 shall be followed prior to holding a public hearing establishing or increasing a fee for circulation facilities.

 

811.0210 Fee Payment.
(a)    Except as otherwise provided in Section 811.0225 and Section 811.0230, whenever a building or mobilehome setdown permit is issued within the boundaries of an adopted Circulation Facilities Plan, circulation facilities fees shall be required in the amount specified in the Schedule of Fees for such plan, and shall be paid within the time periods specified in Subsections 811.0210(b), (c) and (d).

 

(b)    Circulation facilities fees required pursuant to this Chapter as a result of a building permit may be paid on the date of issuance of the building permit by the Building and Safety Division, and shall become due and payable at the time of the final inspection, or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. If the circulation facilities fee is not fully paid on the date of issuance of the building permit, the fee, or applicable portion thereof, shall be secured by the recordation of a Deferral Agreement. The amount of the circulation facilities fee secured by the Deferral Agreement shall be that which is in effect in the Schedule of Fees for the applicable Circulation Facilities Plan at the time the fee becomes due and payable, and shall be paid on that date.

 

(c) Circulation facilities fees required pursuant to this Chapter as a result of a mobilehome setdown permit for those mobilehomes not located within a legally established Mobilehome Park may be paid on the date of issuance of the mobilehome setdown permit, and shall become due and payable at the time of the final inspection, or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. If the circulation facilities fee is not fully paid on the date of issuance of the mobilehome setdown permit, the fee, or applicable

        portion thereof, shall be secured by the recordation of a Deferral Agreement. The amount of the circulation facilities fee secured by the Deferral Agreement shall be that which is in effect in the Schedule of Fees for the applicable Circulation Facilities Plan at the time the fee becomes due and payable, and shall be paid on that date.

 

(d)    Circulation facilities fees required pursuant to this Chapter as a result of a building permit for those mobilehomes to be located within a legally established Mobilehome Park may be paid on the date of issuance of the building permit for the construction of each space or combination of spaces, and shall become due and payable at the time of the final inspection for such spaces, or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. If the circulation facilities fee is not fully paid on the date of issuance of the building permit, the fee, or applicable portion thereof, shall be secured by the recordation of a Deferral Agreement. The amount of the circulation facilities fee secured by the Deferral Agreement shall be that which is in effect in the Schedule of Fees for the applicable Circulation Facilities Plan at the time the fee becomes due and payable, and shall be paid on that date.

 

(e)    If the circulation facilities fee is paid in full on the date of issuance of the building permit or the mobilehome setdown permit, the amount of the circulation facilities fee shall be that which is in effect in the Schedule of Fees for the applicable Circulation Facilities Plan on the date of payment of such fee. (Amended by Ord. 279 §§ 6—9, 2008)

 

811.0215 Circulation Facilities.
(a)    Circulation facilities fees, required pursuant to this Chapter within the boundaries of a Circulation Facilities Plan shall be deposited into a Circulation Facilities Fund. Any interest income earned by money in the fund shall also be deposited in the fund. Such fees shall cease to be required within the boundaries of a Circulation Facilities Plan when they have been collected in an amount adequate to pay for all of the circulation facilities proposed in such Plan.

 

(b)    Monies in a Circulation Facilities Fund, including interest, shall be expended solely for the construction, financing or purchase of circulation facilities within the boundaries of the Circulation Facilities Plan from which the fees comprising the fund were collected, and/or to reimburse the City for the cost of engineering, property acquisition and administrative services required to design, finance, construct or purchase facilities in the Circulation Facilities Plan.

 

(c) Monies may be advanced by the City to design, construct, finance, or purchase circulation facilities, or related administrative services, and to acquire necessary property or right-of-

        way within the boundaries of an adopted Circulation Facilities Plan. Money so advanced shall be reimbursed to the City from the applicable Circulation Facilities Fund.

 

811.0220 Fee Calculation.
(a)    Fees assessed on new residential and non-residential development within the boundaries of an adopted Circulation Facilities Plan shall not exceed the estimated cost of providing the circulation facilities identified in the applicable Circulation Facilities Plan. For the purposes of this Chapter, the types of structures and/or uses defined as non-residential shall be as specified in each separate Circulation Facilities Plan.

 

811.0225 Agreements Between The City And A Developer.
(a)    Advances

 

        An agreement may be entered into between a developer and the City whereby the developer may advance money for the construction, financing or purchase of facilities, or design of such facilities, within the boundaries of a Circulation Facilities Plan, provided that the sole security to the developer for repayment of money or other consideration advanced shall be money subsequently accruing in the applicable Circulation Facilities Fund. Reimbursement shall only be for the amount agreed upon in advance, and shall not include interest or other charges. The total amount of money reimbursed within a Circulations Facilities Plan for one fiscal year shall not exceed approximately ten percent (10%) of the fees collected within such plan area during the same fiscal year, except as may otherwise be provided in the applicable Circulation Facilities Plan. The agreement shall expire ten (10) years after

 

        the date it was entered into, and any subsequent money paid into the fund shall accrue to the fund without obligation to the developer whose agreement has expired.

 

(b)    Agreements for consideration in-lieu of fees

 

An agreement may be entered into between a developer and the City whereby considerations such as dedication of land, right-of-way, equipment, facilities, actual construction, or design work by a civil engineer may be accepted in-lieu of part or all of the payment of circulation facilities fees. Prior to approving such an agreement, the City Council shall find that the in-lieu consideration is equal to or greater in value than the required fee.

 

811.0230 Exclusions.
(a)    Intent

 

The intent of this section is to exclude from the payment of circulation facilities fees the replacement of structures or uses with new structures or uses, that generate the same or a lesser amount of vehicular traffic than those being replaced on the same parcel, including:

 

(1)    Legally established existing structures, or uses in operation (including mobilehome parks), on the effective date of the applicable Circulation Facilities Plan. Expansion of such structures or uses shall be subject to such fees.

 

(2)    Replacements of structures or uses for which fees have been paid pursuant to this Chapter where such replaced structure or use generates the same or less traffic as the structure or use for which the fees were originally paid.

 

(b)    Residential Exclusions

 

No circulation facilities fee shall be required for residential building permits or residential mobilehome setdown permits for the following:

 

(1)    Alterations, repairs, and construction of garages, carports, accessory storage buildings, patio covers, swimming pools, spas, boundary or decorative fences, amateur radio devices or earth stations or any other residential accessory structures.

 

(2)    Replacements of a legally established residential dwelling unit, including a unit destroyed or damaged by fire, flood, or other accidents or catastrophe provided that:

 

(A)   Such a replacement will not result in an increase in the number of residential dwelling units, and;

 

(B)   The proposed type of residential dwelling unit (i.e., single family, multi family, mobilehome, etc.) is within a fee category, as identified in the applicable Circulation Facilities Plan, for which the per-dwelling unit fee amount is less than or equal to the per-dwelling unit amount of the fee category for the dwelling unit to be replaced. If the proposed type of residential dwelling unit is within a fee category for which the fee amount is greater than the amount of the fee category for the dwelling unit being replaced, the amount of the fee required shall be the difference between the two fee categories.

 

(c)    Non-Residential Exclusions

 

No circulation facilities fees shall be required for non-residential uses or buildings for the following activities:

 

(1)    Alterations and Repairs.

 

(2)    Replacement of non-residential structures or uses if:

 

(A)   New or replacement construction will not increase the area or square footage upon which fees are assessed as prescribed in the applicable Circulation Facilities Plan; and

 

(B)   The proposed type of structure or use is within a fee category (as identified in the applicable Circulation Facilities Plan) that has a fee amount that is less than or equal to the amount of the fee category for the structure or use to be replaced. If the proposed type of structure or use is within a fee category that has a fee amount that is greater than the amount of the fee category for the structure or use being replaced, the amount of the fee required shall be the difference between the two fee categories.

 

811.0235 Surplus And Refunds.
(a)    Commencing on the fifth year after imposition of a fee for a Circulation Facilities Plan and annually thereafter, the Council shall hold a hearing with respect to any portion of the fee remaining unexpended or uncommitted five or more years, and shall refund to the then owners of lots or units in development projects within the Plan areas on a prorata basis any such unexpended or uncommitted fees plus interest accrued thereon, for which the Council is unable to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the need for the fee and the purpose for which it was charged. Refunds shall be made in accordance with California Government Code Section 66001.

 

(b)    After completion of facilities and the payment of all claims from any Circulation Facilities Fund, the Council shall determine by resolution or other legislative action the amount of the surplus monies, if any, remaining in any of these funds. Any surplus shall be refunded in accordance with California Government Code Section 66001.

 

CHAPTER 3 RECREATIONAL FACILITIES FINANCING
811.0301 Intent and General Provisions.
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 66477 of the Government Code of the State of California and shall be interpreted to be consistent with the provisions thereof. The park and recreational facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of a fee is required by the terms of this Chapter shall be provided in accordance with the standards, specifications, and requirements of the General Plan of the City of Yucaipa, any specific plan adopted thereto, and any other adopted resolution, policy, or standard of the City.

 

811.0305 Definitions.
The following definitions shall govern the meaning of words in this Chapter, unless from the context in which the word is used, a different meaning is clearly intended:

 

(a)    “Park” means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land which is owned, operated, and maintained by a public agency or private association and which provides recreational land and facilities for the benefit and enjoyment the residents of the subdivision and of persons residing, working, or visiting in the City. Parks may be classified as community parks, including community centers, athletic facilities, large multi-use swimming pools, picnic areas, cultural centers, or similar facilities; public neighborhood parks, including playground equipment, sports fields, and picnic areas; and private neighborhood parks, generally intended to serve only the immediate subdivision/development or specified planned community in which they are located. Parks may also include, or be limited to open space areas suitable for active or passive uses.

 

(b)    “Park and recreational facilities” mean any public improvements deemed necessary by the City to develop, improve, or rehabilitate land and facilities for park and recreational purposes. Such improvements may include but not be limited to grading; landscaped areas for active and passive recreational use, open space, and sports fields; irrigation and drainage systems; lawn, shrubs, and trees; facilities for recreational community gardening; walkways, bicycle facilities, and park lighting; playground or other recreational equipment; picnic facilities; community center or other buildings; swimming pools; volleyball, basketball, tennis, racquet ball, and other courts; vehicle driveways and parking areas and any other facilities which may hereafter be authorized by State law or approved by the City.

 

(c)    “Private open space” means that privately owned land and facilities for park and recreation purposes provided within a subdivision and perpetually maintained and operated by the future residents or owner of the subdivision, which land and facilities can be credited against the dedication and payment requirements established in this Chapter, when the following criteria are met:

 

1.   That the private park land meet a minimum size requirement of one-third (0.3) acre;

 

2.   That the proposed private park land be reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access, and location of the private park land;

 

3.   That the following areas or subdivision design features shall not be eligible for private park credit; yards, court areas, setbacks, subdivision edges, landscaped subdivision entries, greenbelts, meandering streams, and circulation improvements such as bicycle, hiking, and equestrian trails;

 

4.   That the location of the land provide convenient access to housing and schools;

 

5.   That the perpetual private ownership and maintenance of the land is adequately provided for by a recorded written agreement; and

 

6.   That the use of the private park land is perpetually restricted for park and recreational purposes which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the City Council and in no event without providing equivalent park and recreational space elsewhere in the subdivision.

 

(d)    “Fair market value” means the value of the land being subdivided based upon the current assessed value, modified to equal market value in accordance with the current practice of the County Assessor, or at the option of City based upon an appraisal by a qualified appraiser selected by City. In the event the subdivider disagrees with this fair market value determination, the subdivider may select a qualified appraiser who, together with the original appraiser, shall select a third qualified appraiser. The three (3) appraisers so selected shall conduct a fair market value analysis of the property and their determination shall be binding upon the City and the subdivider for the purposes of this Chapter. All costs of appraisal shall be paid by the subdivider prior to the recordation of any final map or the issuance of any building permit. The fair market value shall be determined as of the time the final map or parcel map is filed. With regards to any park and recreation improvements or equipment provided by the subdivider, the fair market value shall be the actual cost to acquire, construct, or install the improvement or equipment.

 

811.0310 Requirements.
(a)    Park Dedication Required. As a condition of approval of a tentative or final tract map or parcel map for a residential subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the City, in the amount provided in this Chapter, for park or recreational purposes, unless the subdivider is exempted from this requirement by the express provisions of this Chapter. The dedication of land and/or payment of a fee shall be at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in this Chapter. As a requirement for the issuance of a building permit, all residential development occurring on lots of record created prior to June 6, 1990, shall be required to pay a Park Facilities Fee, as such fee may be determined by resolution of the City Council.

 

(b)    Standards for Determining Dedication.

 

(1)    General. If the park dedication is required under Section 811.0310, the park area required shall be determined in accordance with the standards provided in this Section.

 

(2)    Standard of Park Area to Population. It is hereby found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City require that three and a half (3.5) acres of property for every one thousand (1,000) persons residing within the City of Yucaipa be devoted to local park and recreational purposes, and that such park area is necessary to provide for the needs of the current and future persons residing and working in the City. Said ratio of .0035 is hereafter referred to as the Park Area Standard.

 

(3)    Dwelling Unit Occupancy Factor. Based upon the latest available census data, the dwelling unit occupancy factors shall be as follows: 2.2 for multiple family dwelling units, 3.0 for planned community single family dwelling units, 1.5 for all mobile home dwelling units or spaces, and 3.5 for all other single family dwelling units. These figures may be revised from time to time by resolution of the advisory agency.

 

(4)    Computation of Area of Park to be Dedicated. The dedication of park land required for any subdivision shall be determined by multiplying the number of dwelling units in the subdivision for each housing type by the occupancy factor for each housing type by .0035 (i.e., the ratio of the Park Area Standard of three and a half (3.5) acres to one thousand (1,000) population). This is represented as follows:

 

(# dwelling units) (occupancy factor)

(3.5/1,000) = Area of Park to be Dedicated

 

(5)    Qualification of Land Being Dedicated. In addition to meeting the requirements set forth in this Section, any land offered for park dedication shall meet the criteria specified in Section 811.0310(d)(4).

 

(c)    Fees in Lieu of Dedication. When permitted by Section 811.0310(d), the subdivider may pay to City a fee in lieu of making such dedication. The fee shall be computed by multiplying the area of park to be dedicated under Section 811.0310(b)(4) by the fair market value of the land being developed.

 

(d)    Determination of Dedication, Fees, or Combination.

 

(1)    Dedication Generally Required. Where a park or recreational facility has been designated in the General Plan of the City or other adopted resolution, policy or standard of the City, and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the resident as the subdivision and other members of the public, the subdivider shall dedicate land for a park and provide recreational facilities thereon as provided herein unless the City determines that dedication is not desirable as provided in this Section. The fair market value of the land and recreational facilities provided by the subdivider hereunder shall be a credit against the subdivider’s obligations hereunder. If the fair market value of the park and recreational facilities provided is less than that required hereunder, the difference shall be paid by the subdivider as an in lieu fee.

 

(2)    In Lieu Fees. Where no park or recreational facility located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision is designated in the General Plan of the City or other adopted resolution, policy or standard of the City, the subdivider shall, in lieu of dedicating land, pay a fee computed in accordance with Section 811.0310(c) to be used for park and recreational purposes to serve the resident as the area being subdivided and other members of the public.

 

(3)    Combination of Land and Fees. The City may accept a combination of land and fees, with the respective amounts to be determined in the sole discretion of City, so long as the aggregate fair market value plus in lieu fees does not exceed the limits established in this Chapter.

 

(4)    Determination of Land or Fee. Whether the City accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall, in the City’s sole discretion, be determined by consideration of the following:

 

(A)   The provisions of the City’s General Plan, any specific plan, adopted thereto, or any other adopted resolution, policy, or regulation of the City pertinent to the determination and consistent with the requirements of law;

 

(B)   Topography, geology, access, and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication;

 

(C)   Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication;

 

(D)   The feasibility of dedication;

 

(E)   Access and location of other park sites to subdivision; and

 

(F)    Need of other accessible park sites for development, improvement and rehabilitation.

 

The determination of the City as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive.

 

(5)    In Lieu Fees for Subdivisions of Fifty (50) Parcels or Less. If the subdivision contains fifty (50) parcels or less, only the payment of in lieu fees may be required, except that condominium, stock cooperative, or community apartment projects may be required to dedicate land if they have more than fifty (50) dwelling units.

 

(e)    Subdivider Credits.

 

(1)    Public Parks. The subdivider shall receive a credit against the park dedication requirement for the fair market value of any land dedicated and for the value of any park and recreation improvements provided by subdivider in conjunction with any public park. The value of such improvements shall be determined by City based upon Section 811.0305(d).

 

(2)    Private Park. In conjunction with any planned development, real estate development, stock cooperative, community apartment, or condominium, as defined by State law, if the subdivider provides private open space as defined in Section 811.0305, then the subdivider may receive a credit equal to the fair market value of the private open space against the park dedication requirement of this Chapter, but such credit shall not exceed one-third of such park dedication requirement. The City, based upon the comparability of the private open space to public park area and the adequacy of such private open space to serve the needs of the subdivision for active recreational uses, shall have sole discretion to accept or reject all requests for credit.

 

(3)    Application of Credits. The credits provided in this Section shall be applied to reduce the subdivider’s obligation to dedicate and/or pay an in lieu fee as required under this Chapter, but only to the extent of such credit.

 

(f)    Disposition of Land or Fees. The amount and location of land to be dedicated or the fees to be paid shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision. In accordance with Government Code Section 66477, it is expressly acknowledged that the land to be dedicated or fees to be paid may be for both neighborhood and community parks. In addition, such fees may be used to improve or rehabilitate existing parks. Fees paid by a subdivider pursuant to this Chapter may be spent to develop, improve, and rehabilitate community and neighborhood parks even though such parks may be used by nonresidents of the subdivision, so long as the benefit of the park and recreational facilities to residents of the subdivision is reasonable in relation to the location of the park and amount of the fees.

 

(g)    Time of Dedication or Payment of Fees. All park fees shall be paid directly to the City cashier upon the date of final inspection, or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs last provided that the City may require payment on a prorata basis for each dwelling or upon a percentage of dwellings when they have received final inspection or a Certificate of Occupancy, whichever occurs last. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may require earlier payment of such fees if necessary to reimburse the City for previous expenditures or if the fees are collected for park and recreation improvements where the City has established an account, appropriate funds, and adopted a construction schedule or plan for the park and recreation improvements prior to final inspection or certificate of occupancy. In the event of dedication, dedication shall be made at the time of recordation of the final map.

 

(h)    Schedule for Performance.

 

(1)    City’s Schedule. The Community Services Director shall prepare and maintain a schedule specifying how, when, and where the land or fees, or both, which were dedicated to the City to develop park or recreational facilities will be used. Any fees collected under this Chapter shall be committed within five (5) years after the payment of such fees or the issuance of building permits on one-half (1/2) of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later.

 

(2)    Subdivider’s Schedule. In the event that the subdivider improves or develops parks for public or private ownership, he shall prepare a schedule specifying when, how, and where he will develop the park or recreational facilities to serve the residents of the subdivision. This schedule will be required as a condition of subdivision map approval.

 

811.0315 Procedure.
(a)    Approval of Subdivision Map. Unless otherwise expressly provided herein, any decision or action required by City herein, shall be made after the duly noticed public hearing at the time of approval of the tentative tract map or parcel map, by the advisory body. Such decision or action shall be made a condition of approval of the subdivision map.

 

(b)    Appeals. Any person may appeal a determination of the advisory body made pursuant to this Chapter. Appeals shall be made as provided in Chapter 1 of Division 3 of this Code.

 

811.0320 Exemptions.
The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to industrial or commercial developments; nor do they apply to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five (5) years old, when no new dwelling units are added.

 

Subdivisions containing less than five (5) parcels and not used for residential purposes shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that a condition shall be placed on the approval of such parcel map that if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels within four (4) years, the fee shall be required to be paid by the owner of each such parcel as a condition of the issuance of such permit.

 

 

 

CHAPTER 4 FIRE FACILITIES FINANCING
811.0401 Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to require the payment of fire facilities fees for new development that is within the boundaries of an adopted Fire Facilities Plan. Such fees shall be for the purposes of defraying the actual or estimated costs of constructing fire facilities that are necessary to accommodate new development within the Fire Facilities Plan from which such fees are collected. The authority for this chapter is derived from the power granted to local governments by the Constitution of the State of California to preserve the public health, safety and general welfare.

 

811.0405 Establishment of Fire Facilities Plans.
(a)    The provisions of this chapter shall only effect those portions of the City that are within the boundaries of an adopted Fire Facilities Plan.

 

(b)    The City Council, in adopting or amending a Fire Facilities Plan, shall do all of the following:

 

(1)    Identify the purpose of the fee.

 

(2)    Identify the uses which are supportive of the fee and the fire facilities which will be provided with the fees.

 

(3)    Determine that a reasonable relationship exists between the fee’s use and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed.

 

(4)    Determine that a reasonable relationship exists between the need for the fire facilities and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed.

 

(5)    Determine that a relationship exists between the amount of the fee and the cost of the Fire Facility, or portion thereof, attributable to the development on which the fee is imposed.

 

(c)    Fire Facilities Plans and/or the fire facilities fee may be adopted by the Council, and thereafter amended at any time, only after holding a public hearing. The requirements of California Government Code Section 66004 shall be followed prior to holding a public hearing establishing or increasing a fee for fire facilities.

 

811.0410 Fee Payment.
(a)    Except as otherwise provided in Section 811.0425 and Section 811.0430, whenever a building or mobilehome setdown permit is issued within the boundaries of an adopted Fire Facilities Plan, fire facilities fees shall be required in the amount specified in the Schedule of Fees for such plan, and shall be paid within the time periods specified in Subsections 811.0410(b), (c) and (d).

 

(b)    Fire facilities fees required pursuant to this Chapter as a result of a building permit may be paid on the date of issuance of the building permit by the Building and Safety Division, and shall become due and payable at the time of the final inspection, or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. If the fire facilities fee is not fully paid on the date of issuance of the building permit, the fee, or applicable portion thereof, shall be secured by the recordation of a Deferral Agreement. The amount of the fire facilities fee secured by the Deferral Agreement shall be that which is in effect in the Schedule of Fees for the applicable Fire Facilities Plan at the time the fee becomes due and payable, and shall be paid on that date.

(c)    Fire facilities fees required pursuant to this Chapter as a result of a mobilehome setdown permit for those mobilehomes not located within a legally established Mobilehome Park may be paid on the date of issuance of the mobilehome setdown permit, and shall become due and payable at the time of the final inspection, or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. If the fire facilities fee is not fully paid on the date of issuance of the mobilehome setdown permit, the fee, or applicable portion thereof, shall be secured by the recordation of a Deferral Agreement. The amount of the fire facilities fee secured by the Deferral Agreement shall be that which is in effect in the Schedule of Fees for the applicable Fire Facilities Plan at the time the fee becomes due and payable, and shall be paid on that date.

 

(d) Fire facilities fees required pursuant to this Chapter as a result of a building permit for those mobilehomes to be located within a legally established Mobilehome Park may be paid on the date of issuance of the building permit for the construction of each space or

        combination of spaces, and shall become due and payable at the time of final inspection for such spaces, or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. If the fire facilities fee is not fully paid on the date of issuance of the building permit, the fee, or applicable portion thereof, shall be secured by the recordation of a Deferral Agreement. The amount of the fire facilities fee secured by the Deferral Agreement shall be that which is in effect in the Schedule of Fees for the applicable Fire Facilities Plan at the time the fee becomes due and payable, and shall be paid on that date.

 

(e)    If the fire facilities fee is paid in full on the date of issuance of the building permit or the mobilehome setdown permit, the amount of the fire facilities fee shall be that which is in effect in the Schedule of Fees for the applicable Fire Facilities Plan on the date of payment of such fee. (Amended by Ord. 279 §§ 10—13, 2008)

 

811.0415 Fire Facilities.
(a)    Fire facilities fees, required pursuant to this Chapter within the boundaries of a Fire Facilities Plan shall be deposited into a Fire Facilities Fund. Any interest income earned by money in the fund shall also be deposited in the fund. Such fees shall cease to be required within the boundaries of a Fire Facilities Plan when they have been collected in an amount adequate to pay for all of the fire facilities proposed in such Plan.

 

(b)    Monies in a Fire Facilities Fund, including interest, shall be expended solely for the construction, financing or purchase of fire facilities or equipment within the boundaries of the Fire Facilities Plan from which the fees comprising the fund were collected, and/or to reimburse the City for the cost of engineering, property acquisition and administrative services required to design, finance, construct or purchase facilities or equipment in the Fire Facilities Plan.

 

(c)    Monies may be advanced by the City to design, construct, finance, or purchase fire facilities or equipment, or related administrative services, and to acquire necessary property within the boundaries of an adopted Fire Facilities Plan. Money so advanced shall be reimbursed to the City from the applicable Fire Facilities Fund.

 

811.0420 Fee Calculation.
(a)    Fees assessed on new residential and non-residential development within the boundaries of an adopted Fire Facilities Plan shall not exceed the estimated cost of providing the fire facilities identified in the applicable Fire Facilities Plan. For the purposes of this Chapter, the types of structures and/or uses defined as non-residential shall be as specified in each separate Fire Facilities Plan.

 

811.0425 Agreements Between the City and a Developer.
(a)    Advances

 

An agreement may be entered into between a developer and the City whereby the developer may advance money for the construction, financing or purchase of facilities or equipment, or design of such facilities, within the boundaries of a Fire Facilities Plan, provided that the sole security to the developer for repayment of money or other consideration advanced shall be money subsequently accruing in the applicable Fire Facilities Fund. Reimbursement shall only be for the amount agreed upon in advance, and shall not include interest or other charges. The total amount of money reimbursed within a Fire Facilities Plan for one fiscal year shall not exceed approximately ten percent (10%) of the fees collected within such plan area during the same fiscal year, except as may otherwise be provided in the applicable Fire Facilities Plan. The agreement shall expire ten (10) years after the date it was entered into, and any subsequent money paid into the fund shall accrue to the fund without obligation to the developer whose agreement has expired.

 

(b)    Agreements for consideration in-lieu of fees

 

An agreement may be entered into between a developer and the City whereby considerations such as dedication of land, right-of-way, equipment, facilities, actual construction, or design work by a civil engineer may be accepted in-lieu of part or all of the payment of fire facilities fees. Prior to approving such an agreement, the City Council shall find that the in-lieu consideration is equal to or greater in value than the required fee.

 

811.0430 Exclusions.
(a)    Intent

 

The intent of this section is to exclude from the payment of fire facilities fees the replacement of structures or uses with new structures or uses, that equal the same or a lesser amount of square footage than those being replaced on the same parcel, including:

 

(1)    Legally established existing structures, or uses in operation (including mobilehome parks), on the effective date of the applicable Fire Facilities Plan. Expansion of such structures or uses shall be subject to such fees.

 

(2)    Replacements of structures or uses for which fees have been paid pursuant to this Chapter where such replaced structure or use equals the same or less square footage as the structure or use for which the fees were originally paid.

 

(b)    Residential Exclusions

 

No fire facilities fee shall be required for residential building permits or residential mobilehome setdown permits for the following:

 

(1)    Alterations, repairs, and construction of garages, carports, accessory storage buildings, patio covers, swimming pools, spas, boundary or decorative fences, amateur radio devices or earth stations or any other residential accessory structures.

 

(2)    Replacements of a legally established residential dwelling unit, including a unit destroyed or damaged by fire, flood, or other accidents or catastrophe provided that:

 

(A)   Such a replacement will not result in an increase in the number or square footage of residential dwelling units; and

 

(B)   The proposed type of residential dwelling unit (i.e., single family, multi family, mobilehome, etc.) is within a fee category, as identified in the applicable Fire Facilities Plan, for which the per-dwelling unit fee amount is less than or equal to the per-dwelling unit amount of the fee category for the dwelling unit to be replaced. If the proposed type of residential dwelling unit is within a fee category for which the fee amount is greater than the amount of the fee category for the dwelling unit being replaced, the amount of the fee required shall be the difference between the two fee categories.

 

(c)    Non-Residential Exclusions

 

No fire facilities fees shall be required for non-residential uses or buildings for the following activities:

 

(1)    Alterations and Repairs.

 

(2)    Replacement of non-residential structures or uses if:

 

(A)   New or replacement construction will not increase the area or square footage upon which fees are assessed as prescribed in the applicable Fire Facilities Plan; and

 

(B)   The proposed type of structure or use is within a fee category (as identified in the applicable Fire Facilities Plan) that has a fee amount that is less than or equal to the amount of the fee category for the structure or use to be replaced. If the proposed type of structure or use is within a fee category that has a fee amount that is greater than the amount of the fee category for the structure or use being replaced, the amount of the fee required shall be the difference between the two fee categories.

 

811.0435 Surplus and Refunds.
(a)    Commencing on the fifth year after imposition of a fee for a Fire Facilities Plan and annually thereafter, the Council shall hold a hearing with respect to any portion of the fee remaining unexpended or uncommitted five or more years, and shall refund to the then owners of lots or units in development projects within the Plan areas on a prorata basis any such unexpended or uncommitted fees plus interest accrued thereon, for which the Council is unable to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the need for the fee and the purpose for which it was charged. Refunds shall be made in accordance with California Government Code Section 66001.

 

(b)    After completion of facilities and the payment of all claims from any Fire Facilities Fund, the Council shall determine by resolution or other legislative action the amount of the surplus monies, if any, remaining in any of these funds. Any surplus shall be refunded in accordance with California Government Code Section 66001.

 

CHAPTER 5 PUBLIC FACILITIES FINANCING
811.0501 Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to require the payment of public facilities fees for new development that is within the boundaries of an adopted Public Facilities Plan. Such fees shall be for the purposes of defraying the actual or estimated costs of constructing public facilities that are necessary to accommodate population growth generated by new development within the Public Facilities Plan from which such fees are collected. The authority for this chapter is derived from the power granted to local governments by the Constitution of the State of California to preserve the public health, safety and general welfare.

 

811.0505 Establishment of Public Facilities Plans.
(a)    The provisions of this chapter shall only effect those portions of the City that are within the boundaries of an adopted Public Facilities Plan.

 

(b)    The City Council, in adopting or amending a Public Facilities Plan, shall do all of the following:

 

(1)    Identify the purpose of the fee.

 

(2)    Identify the uses which are supportive of the fee and the public facilities which will be provided with the fees.

 

(3)    Determine that a reasonable relationship exists between the fee’s use and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed.

 

(4)    Determine that a reasonable relationship exists between the need for the public facilities and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed.

 

(5)    Determine that a relationship exists between the amount of the fee and the cost of the Public Facility, or portion thereof, attributable to the development on which the fee is imposed.

 

(c)    Public Facilities Plans and/or the public facilities fee may be adopted by the Council, and thereafter amended at any time, only after holding a public hearing. The requirements of California Government Code Section 66004 shall be followed prior to holding a public hearing establishing or increasing a fee for public facilities.

 

811.0510 Fee Payment.
(a)    Except as otherwise provided in Section 811.0525 and Section 811.0530, whenever a building or mobilehome setdown permit is issued within the boundaries of an adopted Public Facilities Plan, public facilities fees shall be required in the amount specified in the Schedule of Fees for such plan, and shall be paid within the time periods specified in Subsections 811.0510(b), (c) and (d).

 

(b)    Public facilities fees required pursuant to this Chapter as a result of a building permit may be paid on the date of issuance of the building permit by the Building and Safety Division, and shall become due and payable at the time of the final inspection, or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. If the public facilities fee is not fully paid on the date of issuance of the building permit, the fee, or applicable portion thereof, shall be secured by the recordation of a Deferral Agreement. The amount of the public facilities fee secured by the Deferral Agreement shall be that which is in effect in the Schedule of Fees for the applicable Public Facilities Plan at the time the fee becomes due and payable, and shall be paid on that date.

 

(c)    Public facilities fees required pursuant to this Chapter as a result of a mobilehome setdown permit for those mobilehomes not located within a legally established Mobilehome Park may be paid on the date of issuance of the mobilehome setdown permit, and shall become due and payable at the time of the final inspection, or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. If the public facilities fee is not fully paid on the date of issuance of the mobilehome setdown permit, the fee, or applicable portion thereof, shall be secured by the recordation of a Deferral Agreement. The amount of the public facilities fee secured by the Deferral Agreement shall be that which is in effect in the Schedule of Fees for the applicable Public Facilities Plan at the time the fee becomes due and payable, and shall be paid on that date.

 

(d) Public facilities fees required pursuant to this Chapter as a result of a building permit for those mobilehomes to be located within a legally established Mobilehome Park may be paid on the date of issuance of the building permit for the construction of each space or

        combination of spaces, and shall become due and payable at the time of final inspection for such spaces, or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. If the public facilities fee is not fully paid on the date of issuance of the building permit, the fee, or applicable portion thereof, shall be secured by the recordation of a Deferral Agreement. The amount of the public facilities fee secured by the Deferral Agreement shall be that which is in effect in the Schedule of Fees for the applicable Public Facilities Plan at the time the fee becomes due and payable, and shall be paid on that date.

 

(e)    If the public facilities fee is paid in full on the date of issuance of the building permit or the mobilehome setdown permit, the amount of the public facilities fee shall be that which is in effect in the Schedule of Fees for the applicable Public Facilities Plan on the date of payment of such fee. (Amended by Ord. 279 §§ 14—17, 2008)

 

811.0515 Public Facilities.
(a)    Public facilities fees, required pursuant to this Chapter within the boundaries of a Public Facilities Plan shall be deposited into a Public Facilities Fund. Any interest income earned by money in the fund shall also be deposited in the fund. Such fees shall cease to be required within the boundaries of a Public Facilities Plan when they have been collected in an amount adequate to pay for all of the public facilities proposed in such Plan.

 

(b)    Monies in a Public Facilities Fund, including interest, shall be expended solely for the construction, financing or purchase of public facilities within the boundaries of the Public Facilities Plan from which the fees comprising the fund were collected, and/or to reimburse the City for the cost of engineering, property acquisition and administrative services required to design, finance, construct or purchase facilities in the Public Facilities Plan.

 

(c)    Monies may be advanced by the City to design, construct, finance, or purchase public facilities, or related administrative services, and to acquire necessary property or right-of-way within the boundaries of an adopted Public Facilities Plan. Money so advanced shall be reimbursed to the City from the applicable Public Facilities Fund.

 

811.0520 Fee Calculation.
(a)    Fees assessed on new residential and non-residential development within the boundaries of an adopted Public Facilities Plan shall not exceed the estimated cost of providing the public facilities identified in the applicable Public Facilities Plan. For the purposes of this Chapter, the types of structures and/or uses defined as non-residential shall be as specified in each separate Public Facilities Plan.

 

 

811.0525 Agreements Between the City and a Developer.
(a)    Advances

 

        An agreement may be entered into between a developer and the City whereby the developer may advance money for the construction, financing or purchase of facilities, or design of such facilities, within the boundaries of a Public Facilities Plan, provided that the sole security to the developer for repayment of money or other consideration advanced shall be money subsequently accruing in the applicable Public Facilities Fund. Reimbursement shall only be for the amount agreed upon in advance, and shall not include interest or other charges. The total amount of money reimbursed within a Public Facilities Plan for one fiscal year shall not exceed approximately ten percent (10%) of the fees collected within such plan area during the same fiscal year, except as may otherwise be provided in the applicable Public Facilities Plan. The agreement shall expire ten (10) years after the date it was entered into, and any subsequent money paid into the fund shall accrue to the fund without obligation to the developer whose agreement has expired.

 

(b)    Agreements for consideration in-lieu of fees

 

        An agreement may be entered into between a developer and the City whereby considerations such as dedication of land, right-of-way, equipment, facilities, actual construction, or design work by a civil engineer may be accepted in-lieu of part or all of the payment of public facilities

 

        fees. Prior to approving such an agreement, the City Council shall find that the in-lieu consideration is equal to or greater in value than the required fee.

 

811.0530 Exclusions.
(a)    Intent

 

The intent of this section is to exclude from the payment of public facilities fees the replacement of structures or uses with new structures or uses, that generate the same or a lesser amount of population growth than those being replaced on the same parcel, including:

 

(1)    Legally established existing structures, or uses in operation (including mobilehome parks), on the effective date of the applicable Public Facilities Plan. Expansion of such structures or uses shall be subject to such fees.

 

(2)    Replacements of structures or uses for which fees have been paid pursuant to this Chapter where such replaced structure or use generates the same or less population as the structure or use for which the fees were originally paid.

 

(b)    Residential Exclusions

 

No public facilities fee shall be required for residential building permits or residential mobilehome setdown permits for the following:

 

(1)    Alterations, repairs, and construction of garages, carports, accessory storage buildings, patio covers, swimming pools, spas, boundary or decorative fences, amateur radio devices or earth stations or any other residential accessory structures.

 

(2)    Replacements of a legally established residential dwelling unit, including a unit destroyed or damaged by fire, flood, or other accidents or catastrophe provided that:

 

(A)   Such a replacement will not result in an increase in the number of residential dwelling units; and

 

(B)   The proposed type of residential dwelling unit (i.e., single family, multi family, mobilehome, etc.) is within a fee category, as identified in the applicable Public Facilities Plan, for which the per-dwelling unit fee amount is less than or equal to the per-dwelling unit amount of the fee category for the dwelling unit to be replaced. If the proposed type of residential dwelling unit is within a fee category for which the fee amount is greater than the amount of the fee category for the dwelling unit being replaced, the amount of the fee required shall be the difference between the two fee categories.

 

(c)    Non-Residential Exclusions

 

No public facilities fees shall be required for non-residential uses or buildings for the following activities:

 

(1)    Alterations and Repairs.

 

(2)    Replacement of non-residential structures or uses if:

 

(A)   New or replacement construction will not increase the area or square footage upon which fees are assessed as prescribed in the applicable Public Facilities Plan; and

 

(B)   The proposed type of structure or use is within a fee category (as identified in the applicable Public Facilities Plan) that has a fee amount that is less than or equal to the amount of the fee category for the structure or use to be replaced. If the proposed type of structure or use is within a fee category that has a fee amount that is greater than the amount of the fee category for the structure or use being replaced, the amount of the fee required shall be the difference between the two fee categories.

 

811.0535 Surplus and Refunds.
(a)    Commencing on the fifth year after imposition of a fee for a Public Facilities Plan and annually thereafter, the Council shall hold a hearing with respect to any portion of the fee remaining unexpended or uncommitted five or more years, and shall refund to the then owners of lots or units in development projects within the Plan areas on a prorata basis any such unexpended or uncommitted fees plus interest accrued thereon, for which the Council is unable to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the need for the fee and the purpose for which it was charged. Refunds shall be made in accordance with California Government Code Section 66001.

 

(b)    After completion of facilities and the payment of all claims from any Public Facilities Fund, the Council shall determine by resolution or other legislative action the amount of the surplus monies, if any, remaining in any of these funds. Any surplus shall be refunded in accordance with California Government Code Section 66001.

DIVISION 12 GENERAL DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER 1 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “A”
812.01005 Access Envelope.
“Access Envelope”: An area delineated on the site plan to which all clearing and land disturbance for construction of access must be defined

 

 

812.01010 Access Rights.
“Access Rights”: The right, claim, title, or privilege of access, by pedestrians or vehicles, or a public road or way

 

812.01015 Accessibility for the Disabled.
“Accessibility for the Disabled”: Accessible services, structures, or facilities are those which may be entered and used by individuals despite handicapping conditions. Accessibility also includes responding to the needs of people with sight or hearing disabilities, in addition to those with developmental, activity, manual, or mobility impairments, so that they may enjoy the full and free use of those services, structures, or facilities.

 

812.01020 Accessory Building.
“Accessory Building”: An accessory building is a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building or main use of the land. The use of an accessory building may be for either a primary or an accessory use allowed by the appropriate Land Use District. An accessory building shall be located on either the same parcel as the main building or main use or shall be located on a contiguous abutting parcel that is owned by the same owner who owns the parcel which has the main building or use. An accessory building shall always exist in conjunction with and never without a legally established main building or main use that has the same common owner.

 

812.01025 Accessory Use.
“Accessory Use”: An accessory use is a subordinate use which may be permanent or temporary. The use is incidental and supported by the primary use. An example of an accessory use is a carport or garage for a single family dwelling.

 

812.01035 Action.
“Action”: The decision made by the Responsible Agency on Land Use Applications, coupled together with the appropriate findings, environmental determination, and Conditions of Approval

 

812.01040 Adult-Oriented Business.
“Adult-Oriented Business”: Any Business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and from which minors are specifically excluded, either by law or by the operators of such businesses, provided that any business licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control shall not be an Adult-Oriented Business unless it complies with another definition within this section; and/or any businesses where employees or patrons expose “specified anatomical areas” or engage in “specified sexual activities”; and/or any businesses or establishments which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.” “Adult-Oriented Business”

 

 

shall have the same meaning in all respects as “Sexually-Oriented Business” and shall be subject to all conditions and requirements of a “Sexually-Oriented Business.”

 

These types of businesses shall not include the following: any bona fide medical establishment operated by properly licensed and registered medical personnel with appropriate medical credentials for the treatment of patients; any massage establishment, the clientele of which consists substantially of persons referred to the establishment in writing for massage therapy by physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, or osteopaths duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California, provided that the massage establishment retains such written referrals in its records for a period of not less than three years and makes such written references available for inspection by the County Health Officer or his designated representative at all times during the normal business hours of operation of the massage establishment; and an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, State-licensed cosmetology or barber establishment, reducing salon, spa, or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory service.

 

Adult-Oriented Businesses shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

 

(a)    Adult Bookstore/Adult Video Store/Adult Novelty Store

Any establishment which on a regular and substantial basis sells or rents, or offers for sale or rental, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following:

 

(1)    Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, sculptures, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” and/or “specified anatomical areas.”

 

(2)    Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with “specified sexual activities,” including goods which are replicas of, or which simulate “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities,” and goods which are designed to be placed on or in “specified anatomical areas.”

 

(b)    Adult Cabaret

A nightclub, bar, restaurant, bottle shop, or similar commercial establishment whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which, on a regular and substantial basis, features (1) persons or entertainers who appear on state, (2) live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” or (3) films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified anatomical activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”

 

(c)    Adult Dance Studio

Any business or commercial establishment which provides for members of the public a partner for dance where the partner, or the dance, is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter involving, depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” and/or “specified anatomical areas.”

 

(d)    Adult Motel or Hotel

A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which, on a regular and substantial basis, (1) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” and/or “specified anatomical areas;” and/or (2) offers, rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a ten hour period, or (3) offers or allows a tenant or occupant to rent or sub-rent a sleeping room for a period of less than ten hours.

 

(e)    Adult Motion Picture Theater

Any establishment, where, for any form of consideration, one or more motion picture projectors, video cassette players, slide projectors or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used on a regular and substantial basis to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” and/or “specified anatomical areas.”

 

(f)    Adult-Oriented Business or Adult Business

Shall have the same meaning in all respects as sexually-oriented business and shall be subject to all conditions and requirements of a sexually-oriented business as defined herein.

 

(g)    Adult Tanning Salon

A business establishment where patrons receive tanning services for groups of two or more and where patrons or employees of the establishment expose specified anatomical areas. “Adult tanning salon” or “tanning parlor” shall also include a business establishment where a patron and an employee of the establishment are nude or expose “specified anatomical areas.” An “adult tanning salon” or “tanning parlor” shall also include a business establishment where the employees thereof are nude or expose “specified anatomical areas” for any form of consideration.

 

(h)    Adult Theater

A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration, and on a regular and substantial basis, features live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on “specified anatomical areas” and/or “specified sexual activities.”

 

(i)     Advertise

Public notice or announcement of items or services through the use of newspaper, handbills, radio, television or other means of public communication.

 

(j)     Day(s)

Business day(s), which shall not include weekends or legal holidays observed by the city and which shall further include regular business hours maintained by city offices.

 

(k)    Employee of a Sexually-Oriented Business

A person who works or performs, as an employee or as an independent contractor, in and/or for a sexually-oriented business, regardless or whether said person is paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the business.

 

(l)     Entertainer or Live Entertainer

Any person who is an employee or independent contractor of a sexually-oriented business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of a sexually-oriented business.

 

(m)   Escort

Any person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a “striptease” for another person. Escort shall not include any person hired by a state licensed school for purposes of modeling in any art education class while such person acts in that capacity or any federal, state, and/or city of Yucaipa licensed limousine or taxi service.

 

(n)    Escort agency

A person or business entity which furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for any form of consideration.

 

(o)    Establishment of a Sexually-Oriented Business

Includes any of the following:

 

(1)    The opening or commencement of any sexually-oriented business as a new business; or

 

(2)    The conversion of an existing business, whether or not it is a sexually-oriented business, to any sexually-oriented business; or

 

(3)    The addition of any sexually-oriented business to any other existing sexually-oriented business; or to another existing non-sexually-oriented business, with or without expansion of floor area; or

 

(4)    The relocation of any sexually-oriented business; or

 

(5)    The substantial enlargement of the premises of a sexually-oriented business.

 

(p)    Figure Model

Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, poses in a nude modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculpted, photographed or otherwise depicted.

 

(q)    Notice

Written notice given by personal service upon the addressee, or given by the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his or her last known address. Service of such notice shall be effective upon the completion of personal service, upon placing the same in the custody of the United States Postal Service.

 

(r)    Nude Modeling Studio

A business which provides, for compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display specified “anatomical areas” to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. “Nude modeling studio” does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education, or any classroom of any school licensed under state law to provide art education while such classroom is being used in a manner consistent with such state license. “Nude modeling studio” further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit or make available “specified sexual activities.”

 

(s)    Nudity or State of Nudity

The showing or display of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered genitals in a discernable turgid state.

 

(t)     Off Premises

Any business where the primary services or entertainment are provided at a location or locations other than the premises of the subject business.

 

(u)    Operate a Sexually-Oriented Business

The supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of a sexually-oriented business or activities within a sexually-oriented business.

 

(v)            Operator of a Sexually-Oriented Business

Includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator, or person in charge of any permitted or licensed business.

 

(w)   Private Viewing Area

An area or areas in a sexually-oriented business designed to accommodate no more than five or less patrons or customers for purposes of viewing or watching a performance, picture, show, film, videotape, slide, movie, or other presentation.

 

(x)    Public Nudity

“Nudity” or a “state of nudity” that occurs in a business open to the public, whether or not a fee is charged for admission to such business.

 

(y)    Public Park

A park, playground, swimming pool, athletic field, or similar recreational facility within the city which is under the control, operation or management of the city or any other public agency.

 

(z)    Regular and Substantial Basis

An activity or performance shall be deemed to be on a regular or substantial basis when it constitutes more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total performance time, stock-in-trade, revenue, floor space, advertisement or similar element of the business. For purposes of this definition, revenue shall include gross revenue generated by the business, including revenue received by entertainers and others who work as independent contractors. For purposes of this definition, the floor space devoted to a regulated activity shall include all the area devoted to the activity, including, but not limited to, display area, sales area, performance areas, viewing areas, dressing rooms, and all aisles and pathways between and within such areas.

 

(aa)  Religious Institution

A structure which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities, including, but not limited to a church, chapel or similar place of worship.

 

(bb)  Residential Use or Residential Zone

Property which is zoned for a residential use and/or a single family dwelling, duplex, townhouse, multiple family dwelling or mobile home park subdivision or recreational vehicle park, but not including a caretaker’s/security house or trailer, or a legal nonconforming residential use as permitted by the Yucaipa Municipal Code.

 

(cc)  School

Any child care facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education. This definition includes, but is not limited to, a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school or middle school, senior high school or any special institution of education within the city.

 

(dd)  Semi-Nude

A state of dress in which clothing, including supporting straps or devices, covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast. Semi-nude shall also include a person with partial clothing to include lingerie or similar clothing where “specified anatomical areas” are exposed.

 

(ee)  Sex Supermarket/Sex Mini-Mall

The establishment or operation of more than one type of sexually-oriented business or use as defined in this title within the same building.

 

(ff)   Sexual Encounter Establishment

A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort in connection with “specified sexually activities” and/or the exposure of “specified anatomical areas.” This definition does not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in sexual therapy.

 

(gg)  Sexually-Oriented Business

A business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage, either by law and/or by the operators of such business, and which is characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” and/or “specified anatomical areas.” Sexually-oriented also means and includes any adult motion picture theater, adult bookstore/adult video store/adult novelty store, adult cabaret, adult dance studio, adult hotel or motel, adult theater, sexual encounter establishment, nude modeling studio, adult tanning salon, sex supermarket/sex mini-mall, and any other business or establishment that, on a regular and substantial basis, offers its patrons entertainment or services which involve, depict, describe or relate to “specified sexual activities” and/or “specified anatomical areas.”

 

(hh)  Specified Anatomical Areas

Includes any of the following:

 

(1)    Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or

 

(2)    Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or

 

(3)    Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsections (1) or (2) above.

 

(ii)    Specified Sexual Activities

Includes any of the following:

 

(1)    The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals for the purpose of sexual arousal, or fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts; or

 

(2)    Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including, but not limited to, intercourse, oral/anal copulation, bestiality, and flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship; or

 

(3)    Masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or ejaculation of human or animal, actual or simulated; or

 

(4)    Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or

 

(5)    Excretory functions, urination, vaginal or anal irrigation as part of or in connection with any of the activities described in subdivisions 1 through 4 of this subsection.

 

(jj)    Substantial Enlargement of a Sexually-Oriented Business

An increase or expansion, over the lifetime of a sexually-oriented business, of more than ten percent or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less in the portion of the floor area of the business which is devoted to products, services or entertainment with an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to “specified anatomical areas” and/or “specified sexually activities.”

 

(kk)  Transfer of Ownership or Control of Sexually-Oriented Business

Includes any of the following:

 

(1)    The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; or

 

(2)    The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or

 

(3)    The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership of control. (Amended by Ord. 196 § 3, 2000)

 

812.01045 Advertising Structure.
“Advertising Structure”: Any structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for advertising purposes upon which any advertising sign may be placed, including advertising statuary.

 

812.01050 Advisory Agency.
See Planning Agency.

 

812.01055 Agriculture.
“Agriculture”: The tilling of soil, the raising of crops, horticulture, small livestock farming, dairying, or animal husbandry, including all uses customarily incidental thereto except the following: slaughterhouses, feed yards, hog farms, fertilizer works, bone yards, plants for the reduction of animal matter, or any other industrial or agricultural use which is determined by the Planning Commission to be similarly objectionable because of noise, odor, smoke, dust, or fumes.

 

812.01060 Agricultural Grading.
“Agricultural Grading”: Grading on land designated for exclusive agricultural use.

 

812.01065 Agricultural Preserve.
“Agricultural Preserve”: An agricultural preserve is designated areas of existing, viable, and productive agricultural land within which land conservation contracts can be enforced under the provisions of the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 (Williamson Act) to stay in agricultural use for a designated period of time. Under such contracts, the property owner is granted certain tax advantages for the continuation of agricultural use of the land.

 

812.01070 Agriculture Land, Prime.
“Prime agricultural land” shall be any of the following:

 

(a)    All land which qualifies for a rating as Class I or Class II in the Soil Conservation Service land use capability classifications.

 

(b)    Land which qualifies for a rating 80 through 100 in the Storie Index Rating.

 

(c)    Land which supports livestock used for the production of food and fiber and which has an annual carrying capacity equivalent to at least one animal unit per acre as defined by the United States Department of Agriculture.

 

(d)    Land planted with fruit or nut-bearing trees, vines, bushes, or crops which have a nonbearing period of less than five years and which will normally return during the commercial bearing period on an annual basis from the production of unprocessed agricultural plant production not less than $200 per acre.

 

(e)    Land which from the production of unprocessed agricultural plant products has returned an annual gross value of not less than $200 per acre for three of the previous five years.

 

812.01075 Agricultural Use.
“Agricultural Use”: The use of land for the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock, usually for commercial purposes.

 

812.01080 Airport or Heliport.
“Airport or Heliport”: An airport or heliport is any area of land or water designed and set aside for the landing and taking off of any aircraft. An airport or heliport must be utilized in the interest of the public for such purposes, have a valid airport permit from the State of California Aeronautics Division, have airspace clearance as required by the Federal Aviation Agency, and have approval under the County Adopted General Plan of Airports. Military airports are not required to obtain the listed Federal, State, or County approvals.

 

812.01085 Airport Hazard.
“Airport Hazard”: Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport, or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft

 

812.01100 Aliquot Part.
“Aliquot Part”: An Aliquot part is the division of sectionalized land by a series of divisions by one quarter. Such divisions shall not be less than 2.5 acres or equivalent as allowed by Section 87.0325.

 

812.01105 Alley.
“Alley”: A public thoroughfare not exceeding 30 feet in width for the use of pedestrians or vehicles which affords only a secondary means of access to the abutting property

 

812.01110 Aliquist-Priolo Geologic Hazard Zones Act.
“Alquist-Priolo Geologic Hazard Zones Act”: The Alquist-Priolo Geologic Hazard Zones Act is also known as the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Act of 1972. The purpose of this act is to provide for public safety in hazardous fault zones. The Act requires the delineation of potential damage areas called “Special Studies Zones” along known active faults throughout California. It requires local governments to withhold approval of construction permits in those zones until geologic investigation has determined that the site is not threatened by surface displacement from future faulting.

 

812.01111 Alternative Tower Structure.
“Alternative tower structure” means man-made trees, water towers, clock towers, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2(part), 2001)

 

812.01112 Amusement Arcade.
“Amusement Arcade”: Means any business establishment in which there are more than ten (10) mechanical or electronic play devices, as defined in this Division, which are available for use by the public or business invitees, or both. Any business establishment that anticipates receipt of more than 50% of its gross income from the sale of food and beverages, and which possesses a valid County Health Department permit to operate a restaurant, shall not be considered an amusement arcade for the purposes of this Section. (Ord. 142 § 2(A), 1995)

 

812.01115 Anatomical Areas, Specified.
“Specified Anatomical Areas” shall include any of the following human anatomical areas:

 

(a)    Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or

 

(b)    Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. (Amended by Ord. 151 § 3, 1996)

 

812.01120 Animals, Beneficial or Endangered.
(a)    Beneficial animals are those species which do not contribute to a strain on an ecosystem. They may also serve to eradicate pest species for agricultural or health purposes.

 

(b)    An endangered species is an animal species which has been diminished in quantities sufficiently large enough to raise questions regarding the future propagation of the species.

 

812.01125 Antenna.
“Antenna” means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other commercial signals. “Antenna” shall not include any satellite dish antenna utilized for radio, citizens band radio, television, AM/FM or short-wave radio reception purposes. (Ord. 204 § 2, 2001)

 

812.01130 Apartment.
“Apartment”: A room or suite of rooms when combined constitute a single dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling structure and which are designed for, intended for, suitable as a residence for, and/or occupied by one family

 

812.01135 Applicant.
“Applicant”: The property owner(s), or authorized agent of the owner(s) who is legally authorized to act for the owner(s) of record

 

812.01140 Approved Access.
(a)    “Approved access” refers to a dedicated right-of-way to the City of Yucaipa, an easement for public road, Highway and public utility purposes of a width as established by the Transportation Element of the General Plan. The road constructed thereon shall not be brought into the City-maintained road system until and unless the Yucaipa City Council, by appropriate resolution, has caused said road to be accepted into the City Road System.

 

(b)    “Approved access” also refers to an existing traveled way where a prescriptive right by user has been established for public use by a Court decree.

 

(c)    “Approved access” also refers to a traveled way which was in existence prior to 1967, as determined by the City Surveyor. Such traveled way must connect to a publicly maintained roadway and must met each of the following criteria.

 

(1)    The way must have all-weather capability for normal passenger car use.

 

(2)    The way must be of adequate width to provide two-way vehicular access.

 

(3)    The way must be improved and maintained by the use of hand or power machinery or tools in order to allow relatively regular and continuous use. A traveled way maintained solely by the passage of vehicles does not constitute “Approved Access.”

 

Approved Access shall not be approved by the City Surveyor unless the access satisfies the following two conditions.

 

(a)    Substantially conforms to the alignment shown in the Transportation Element of the General Plan or Specific Plan where applicable

 

(b)    The access should practically and feasibly be applied to road use. The approved access provisions apply to divisions of land resulting in lots of 20 acres or more.

 

812.01150 Automobile and Trailer Sales Area.
“Automobile and Trailer Sales Area”: An open area used for the display and sale or rental of new or used automobiles or trailers, and where repair work is limited to minor incidental repair of those automobiles or trailers to be displayed, rented, or sold on the premises

 

 

CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “B”
812.02005 Backhaul Network
“Backhaul network” means the lines that connect a provider’s towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2, 2001)

 

812.02010 Basement or Cellar.
“Basement or Cellar” refers to a room of a structure partly or wholly underground and having more than one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement, having more than one-half of its height above the average level of the adjoining ground, shall be considered a story.

 

812.02015 Bed and Breakfast Lodge.
“Bed and Breakfast Lodge”: An accessory use to a single dwelling unit, where guest rooms are made available to transient guests for overnight sleeping accommodations on a daily basis. (Amended by Ord. 345 § 1, 2016)

 

812.02025 Block.
“Block”: The property abutting on one side of a street between two nearest intersection streets, railroad right-of-way, or other natural barrier; provided, however, that where a street curves so that any two chords thereof form an angle of 120 degrees or less measured on the lot side, each curve shall be construed as an intersection street.

 

812.02030 Board or Board of Supervisors.
“Board” or “Board of Supervisors”: The legislative or law-making body for San Bernardino County, composed of five members which is the final nonjudicial level for decision making and hearings on land use cases in incorporated areas, except major and minor deviations and appeals thereof.

 

812.02035 Boarding House.
“Boarding House”: A residence or dwelling unit, or part thereof, wherein a room or rooms are rented under two or more separate written or oral rental agreements, for a term of at least 30 days, whether or not the owner, agent, or rental manager resides within the residence or dwelling unit, and where the residents do not operate as a single housekeeping unit. (Amended by Ord. 345 § 2, 2016)

 

812.02040 Buffer.
“Buffer”: A buffer is a strip of land established to separate incompatible or different land uses. Normally a buffer area is landscaped and retained as open space. The term may be used more broadly to describe any area or use that separates two unlike land uses, such as the use of multiple-family housing between single-family housing and commercial uses.

 

812.02045 Building.
“Building”: Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, fowl, chattels, or property of any kind.

 

812.02050 Building Coverage.
“Building Coverage”: The alterations of a lot by the creation of surface area upon which a building rests. The percentage surface coverage does not include roadways, swimming pools, tennis courts, solar collection devices, or related apparatus.

 

812.02055 Building Envelope.
“Building Envelope”: The building envelope is an area delineated on development plans in which all clearing and land disturbance for building construction must be confined unless otherwise authorized by this code. If not delineated, it is the area of a lot not included within any required front yard, rear yard, side yard, or side street yard setback area, or any recorded easement, or offer of dedication.

 

 

812.02060 Building Height.
“Building Height”: Building height refers to the vertical distance above a referenced datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of building.

 

(a)    The reference datum may be selected by the elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five-foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than 10 feet above lowest grade.

 

(b)    The reference datum may be selected by an elevation 10 feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in (a) above is more than 10 feet above lowest grade. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building.

 

812.02063 Building-Mounted.
“Building-mounted” means an antenna mounted to the side or façade of a building, or to the side of another structure such as a water tank, church steeple, freestanding sign, utility tower, light pole, or similar structure, but not to include the roof of any structure. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2, 2001)

 

812.02065 Building Official.
“Building Official”: The City Officer, charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or a duly authorized representative.

 

812.02070 Building Site.
“Building Site”: The ground area occupied or to be occupied by a building or group of buildings, together with all open spaces as required by the City Code.

 

 

 

CHAPTER 3 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “C”
812.03003 Calf Ranch or Raising.
“Calf ranch or raising”: Any premises used for the raising or keeping of 10 or more weaned calves.

 

812.03005 Camp, Organized.
“Organized Camp”: A site with program and facilities established for the primary purpose of providing an outdoor group living experience with social, spiritual, educational, or recreational objectives normally for five days or more during one or more seasons of the year. Such camps are located on a permanent site and have a well-defined program of organized supervised activities in which campers are required to participate. There is present at the camp a qualified program director and a staff adequate to carry out the daily program activities which are mainly out of doors. Establishments which rent or lease facilities on an individual family or group basis for the principal purpose of sporting or other unorganized recreational activities should not be considered an organized camp.

 

812.03010 Camp, Public.
“Public Camp”: Land or premises used or intended to be used, let, or rented for camping purposes by two or more camping parties in trailers, tents, or other movable or temporary dwellings

 

812.03015 Capital Facilities.
“Capital Facilities”: Physical facilities or equipment such as roads, libraries, schools, government buildings, water, and sewer systems

 

812.03020 Carport.
“Carport”: A permanent roofed structure with no more than two enclosed sides, used or intended to be used for shelter and storage

 

812.03023 Cellular.
“Cellular” means analog or digital wireless telecommunication technology that is based on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2(part), 2001)

 

812.03025 Cemetery.
“Cemetery”: “Cemetery” refers to land used or intended to be used for the permanent internment of dead human bodies or the cremated remains thereof dedicated for cemetery purposes. A cemetery is established and operated in compliance with the State Health and Safety Code and any mapping and Conditional Use Permit requirements of this Title. Cemetery purposes include columbariums, crematoriums, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such a cemetery. “Pet Cemetery” shall be a cemetery for domesticated animals and shall be in compliance with applicable State, County, and City regulations, including mapping and applicable Conditional Use Permit requirements.

 

812.03030 Centerline.
“Centerline”: The centerline of a street shall mean the right-of-way centerline as established by the County Surveyor, the City Engineer, or the State Division of Highways of the State of California. If no such centerline has been established and in any case in which the foregoing definition is not applicable, the reviewing authority shall designate the centerline.

 

812.03035 Channel Acquisition.
“Channel Acquisition”: The buying or leasing of drainage courses for the purpose of routing or controlling water runoff or floods

 

812.03040 Circulation Element.
“Circulation Element”: Any street, highway, boulevard, freeway, parkway, road, lane, alley, public easement, or public right-of-way designed or designated for the use of pedestrians or vehicles by the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan

 

812.03045 City.
“City”: The City of Yucaipa

 

812.03050 City Procedures.
“City Procedures”: Any policies or procedures which have been adopted by the Board of Supervisors and are described, delineated, and on file for use and examination by the public in the Office of Clerk of the City Council

 

812.03055 City Schedule of Fees or Fee Schedule.
“City Schedule of Fees or Fee Schedule”: Refers to Title 2, Chapter 2.28, City Service Fees and Charges

 

812.03060 City Standards.
“City Standards”: Any current improvement standards or design standards which have been adopted by the City Council and are described, delineated, and on file for use and examination by the public in the Office of the Clerk of the City Council

 

 

812.03065 City Surveyor.
“City Surveyor”: The City Surveyor of the City of Yucaipa or an authorized designee

 

812.03070 City Council.
“City Council”: The legislative or law-making body for the City of Yucaipa, composed of five members which is the final non-judicial level for decision making and hearings of land use cases, except minor deviations and appeals thereof.

 

812.03075 City Planner.
“City Planner”: Director of the Community Development Department is responsible for all city staff level decision making related to land use.

 

812.03080 City Engineer.
“City Engineer”: Director of the City Engineering Department.

 

812.03085 Club.
“Club”: An association of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated and organized for some common nonprofit purpose, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a business

 

812.03087 Co-located.
“Co-located” means the locating of wireless telecommunication equipment from more than one provider on single wireless telecommunication facilities. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2(part), 2001)

 

812.03090 Commercial Coach.
“Commercial Coach”: A vehicle with or without motive power, designed and equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional, or commercial purposes, including vehicles containing mobile offices

 

812.03095 Common Carrier.
“Common Carrier”: Any corporation or business that performs a service for or delivers a commodity to the public or any portion thereof via a pipeline or other transmission line or device for which any compensation or payment whatsoever is received and is subject to the Federal Mineral Leasing Act of 1920, as amended by Public Law 93-153

 

812.03100 Common Interest Development.
“Common Interest Development”: A real property development which consists or will consist of separately owned lots, parcels, areas, or spaces with either or both of the following features:

(a)    One or more additional contiguous or noncontiguous lots, parcels, areas, or spaces owned in common by the owners of the separately owned lots, parcels, areas, or spaces

 

(b)    Mutual, common, or reciprocal interests in or restrictions upon all or a portion of these separately owned lots, parcels, areas, or spaces or both and in which the owners of the separately owned lots, parcels, areas, or spaces have rights, directly or indirectly, to the beneficial use and enjoyment of all or a portion of such lots, parcels, areas, or spaces

 

The estate in a separately or commonly owned lot, parcel, area, or space may be an estate of inheritance or perpetual estate, an estate for life, an estate for years, or any combination of the foregoing.

 

Either common ownership of the additional contiguous or noncontiguous lots, parcels, or areas or the enjoyment of the mutual, common, or reciprocal interests in or restrictions upon the separately owned lots, parcels, areas, or spaces or both may be through ownership of shares of stock or membership in an association or otherwise. Shares of stock, if any exist, shall be deemed to be interests in a common interest development and real estate development for purposes of subdivision (f) of Section 25100 of the California Corporations Code.

 

812.03105 Compliance Investigation.
“Compliance Investigation”: Any building permit inspection, mobilehome setdown inspection, Code compliance investigation, or any review by any City Agency, Department or office, or their designee to determine compliance with rules, regulations, standards, and conditions of approval established either by or to implement the provisions of the Yucaipa City Code.

 

812.03110 Composite Development Plan.
“Composite Development Plan”: A composite development plan is a map or plan on file with the City Engineer which reflects additional information related to the development of lots created by a Final or Parcel Map recorded after March 1, 1986. Notes on this plan or map are for informational purposes and indicate conditions and criteria that exist on the property that were known and identified as of the date of the recordation of the Final or Parcel Map. Authority for this plan is derived from California Government Code Section 66434.2.

 

812.03115 Compressed Gas.
“Compressed Gas”: Any mixture or material having in the container either an absolute pressure exceeding 40 pounds per square inch at 70 degrees F., or an absolute pressure exceeding 104 pounds per square inch at 130 degrees F., or both; or any liquid flammable material having a vapor pressure as defined in Section 9.124 exceeding 40 pounds per square inch at 100 degrees F.

 

812.03117 Commercial Marijuana Activity.
“Commercial Marijuana Activity”: The cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of marijuana and marijuana products. Commercial marijuana activity includes the activities of any business licensed by the State or other government entity under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, as they may be amended from time to time.

 

However, the planting, growing, cultivating, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming or processing of no more than six marijuana plants consistent with Section 11362.1 et seq., of the Health and Safety Code shall not be considered Commercial Marijuana Activity provided it meets the following requirements:

 

1.     The marijuana cultivation cannot occur outdoors.

 

2.     The marijuana cultivation may only occur at a private residence (which is defined as a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling), or inside a “fully enclosed and secure accessory structure” located upon the grounds of a private residence. A “fully enclosed and secure accessory structure” means any building, greenhouse or other structure which has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, which is secure against unauthorized entry, provides complete visual screening, and which is accessible only through one or more lockable doors and inaccessible to minors. (Added by Ord. 354 § 3, 2017)

 

812.03120 Community Apartment Project.
“Community Apartment Project”: A community apartment project is a common interest development in which an undivided interest in land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon. This use includes apartment complexes that were converted to allow for individual ownership of units that were not constructed to condominium building standards.

 

812.03125 Community Noise Equivalency Level (CNEL).
“Community Noise Equivalency Level (CNEL)”: The CNEL is a measure of the cumulative noise exposure level in the community. It results from a summation of average noise levels based on the average energy level of the sound over a 24-hour period, with an increased weighing factor applied to the evening and night time period.

 

812.03130 Condominium.
“Condominium”: A condominium is an estate in real property. Such estate may, with respect to the duration of its enjoyment, be either an estate of inheritance or perpetual estate, an estate for life, an estate for years, such as a leasehold or subleasehold, or any combination of the foregoing.

812.03135 Condominium Plan.
“Condominium Plan”: A condominium plan is a plan consisting of a description or survey map of a condominium project which shall refer to or show monumentation on the ground; a three-dimensional description of a condominium project, one or more dimensions of which may extend for an indefinite distance upwards or downwards, in sufficient detail to identify the common areas and each separate interest; and a certificate consenting to the recordation of the condominium plan pursuant to this title signed and acknowledged by the record owner of fee title to that property included in the condominium project. In the case of a condominium project which will terminate upon the termination of an estate for years, the certificate shall be signed and acknowledged by all lessors and lessees of the estate for years and, in the case of a condominium project subject to a life estate, the certificate shall be signed and acknowledged by all life tenants and remainder interests. The certificate shall also be signed and acknowledged by either the trustee or the beneficiary of each recorded deed of trust, and the mortgagee of each recorded mortgage encumbering the property. Owners of mineral rights, easements, rights-of-way, and other nonpossessory interests do not need to sign the condominium plan. A condominium plan may be amended or revoked by a subsequently acknowledged recorded instrument executed by all the persons whose signatures would be required to record a condominium plan pursuant to this subdivision.

 

812.03140 Condominium Project.
“Condominium Project”: A condominium project is a common interest development consisting of condominiums. A condominium consists of an undivided interest in common in a portion of real property, coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded condominium plan in sufficient detail to locate all boundaries thereof. The area within these boundaries may be filled with air, earth, or water or any combination thereof, and need not be physically attached to land except by easements for access and, if necessary, support. The description of the unit may refer to boundaries described in the recorded condominium plan, physical boundaries, either in existence or to be constructed such as walls, floors, and ceilings of a structure or any portion thereof, an entire structure containing one or more units, or any combination thereof. The portion or portions of the real property held in undivided interest may be all of the real property, except for the separate interests, or may include a particular three-dimensional portion thereof, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan. The area within these boundaries may be filled with air, earth, or water or any combination thereof, and need not be physically attached to land except by easements for access and, if necessary, support. An individual condominium within a condominium project may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of the real property.

 

812.03145 Conservation.
“Conservation”: The term conservation refers to the planned management, protection, and use of natural resources in order to prevent the wasteful exploitation, destruction or neglect of these resources. Implicit in the term conservation is the concept of wise use as distinguished from nonuse or preservation.

 

812.03150 Consistency.
“Consistency”: A review to ensure that all plans and actions conform to guidelines set forth in the General Plan and any applicable or Specific Plans

 

812.03155 Construction Projects.
“Construction Projects”: A construction activity that is subject to approval of either a City-ministered permit or approval of a discretionary decision on a land use application

 

812.03160 Contiguous or Contiguous Property.
“Contiguous”: Contiguous means in actual close contact, touching, bounded or traversed by. “Contiguous property” shall be those properties which touch property lines of any parcel including those properties which touch said property lines of a subject parcel when such lines are projected across public or private rights-of-way, easements, roads, streets, or railroad rights-of-way.

 

812.03165 Cooling Opportunities, Passive or Natural.
“Passive or Natural Cooling Opportunities”: The ability to orient or site a structure, including a dwelling, on its lot in order to take optimum advantage of prevailing breezes for cooling purposes.

 

812.03170 Court.
“Court”: An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, which is bounded on two or more sides by such building or buildings and is created by the required separation of such buildings.

 

812.03175 Cultural Resource Damage.
“Cultural Resource Damage”: Any destruction or harm done to or inflicted upon any such paleontologic, archaeologic, or historic remains which could contribute to the study and interpretation of biological and cultural development.

 

812.03180 Curb Cut.
“Curb Cut”: The lowering of a curb to permit access by vehicles, wheelchairs, carts, and pedestrians.

 

 

CHAPTER 4 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “D”
812.04005 Dairy.
“Dairy”: Any premises where milk is produced for sale or distribution and where 10 or more cows or goats are in lactation.

 

812.04010 Days.
“Days”: Any reference to day or days shall mean calendar days, unless otherwise specified.

812.04015 Days, Business.
“Business Days”: A business day is any day a specified Office, Department, or other agency is open to the public for normal business. This term shall normally exclude all Saturdays, Sundays, and any holiday that is recognized and observed by the specified Office, Department, or other agency.

 

812.04020 Day Care Facility.
“Day Care Facility”: A day care facility is a facility which provides nonmedical care to children under eighteen years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a twenty-four (24) hour basis. Day care facilities includes family day care homes, infant centers, preschools, and extended day care facilities. A “family day care home” is a day care facility located in a residence which regularly provides care, protection, and supervision of twelve (12) or fewer children from more than one other family in the provider’s own home for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day while the parents or guardians are away and includes the following.

 

(a)    A “large family day care home” may provide care for more than twelve (12) children and up to and including fourteen (14) children, if all of the following conditions are met:

 

(1)    At least two of the children are at least six years of age.

 

(2)    No more than three infants are cared for during any time when more than twelve (12) children are being cared for.

 

(3)    The licensee notifies a parent that the facility is caring for two additional schoolage children and that they may be up to thirteen (13) or fourteen (14) children in the home at one time.

 

(4)    The licensee obtains the written consent of the property owner when the family day care home is operated on property that is leased or rented.

 

(b)    A “small family day care home” is one which may provide care for more than six and up to eight children, if all of the following conditions are met:

 

(1)    At least two of the children are at least six years of age.

 

(2)    No more than two infants are cared for during any time when more than six children are cared for.

 

 

(3)    The licensee notified each parent that the facility is caring for two additional schoolage children and that there may be up to seven or eight children in the home at one time.

 

 

 

(4)    The licensee obtains the written consent of the property owner when the family day care home is operated on property that is leased or rented. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 29, 2001)

 

812.04025 Decibel (dBA).
“Decibel (dBA)”: A measure of sound pressure on a logarithmic scale with respect to a standard reference value.

 

812.04035 Design.
“Design”: Includes the planning and engineering of the following: street alignments, grades, and widths; drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignment and grades thereof; location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way; fire roads and firebreaks; lot size and configuration; traffic access; grading; land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; location of proposed and existing structures and improvements; and such other specific physical requirements in the plan and/or configuration of a subdivision as may be necessary to ensure consistency with, and implementation of this code, the General Plan, and any applicable Specific Plan.

 

812.04040 Developer.
“Developer”: A developer is any person, association, firm, corporation, partnership, and other business entity or public agency installing or constructing a development. For the purposes of Chapter 10 of Division 7, this includes any person, business entity, or public agency seeking to perform earthwork grading on any project or development for which the conditions of approval require any specific or general features to be incorporated in the earthwork or which restrict or limit the earthwork grading in any way, other than in compliance with the grading provisions as prescribed in the Uniform Building Code.

 

812.04045 Development.
“Development”: The use to which land shall be put, the buildings to be constructed on it, and all alteration of the land and construction incident thereto.

 

812.04050 Development Application.
“Development Application”: Any application, review, and/or process acted upon by the Office of Planning or County Surveyor; a land use application.

 

812.04055 Development Code.
“Development Code”: The Development Code is a set of land use regulations adopted by the City of Yucaipa in conformance with the General Plan. All actions and undertakings necessary for project planning, land acquisition, demolition, or construction of a project must conform with the City Code prior to approval. The Development Code is Title 8 of the Yucaipa City Code.

 

812.04060 Development Moratorium.
“Development Moratorium”: A development moratorium shall include a water or sewer moratorium, as well as other actions of public agencies which regulate land use, development, or the provision of services to the land, other than the authority of the City to approve or conditionally approve the tentative map, which thereafter prevents, prohibits, or delays, the approval of a final or parcel map. A development moratorium is also deemed to exist for any period of time during which a condition imposed by the City could not be satisfied because the condition was one which, by its nature, necessitated action by the City, and the City either did not take the necessary action or by its own action or inaction was prevented or delayed in taking the necessary action prior to expiration of the tentative map.

 

812.04065 Development Perimeter.
“Development Perimeter”: The development perimeter is a line which indicates the outer perimeter of structural development or proposed structural development of one structure or a group of structures within a development project. For the purposes of this section, structures within 100 feet of another structure shall be considered as part of the same group of structures. The development perimeter may be derived from one of the following methods.

 

(a)    A line formed by interlinking the exterior walls or exterior building envelope boundaries of a series of proposed or existing structures that form the perimeter of a development project

 

(b)    Where a development project indicates the location of buildings or building envelopes on a site plan, a composite development plan, or a final development plan, the development perimeter may be delineated by the outer limit of the location of each building. The development perimeter between the planned location of each building shall be delineated by the shortest line between the outer faces of adjacent buildings or building envelopes.

 

(c)    The development perimeter may be derived through alternate means, provided they meet or exceed the limitations described in subsections 812.04065 (a) and (b) above.

 

812.04070 Development Permit.
“Development Permit”: A permit issued by the building official or the city of Yucaipa’s director of community development for construction or land disturbance, including, but not limited to, building permits, mobilehome setdown permits, and grading permits. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 30, 2001)

 

812.04075 Development Plan (PUD).
“Development Plan”: A development plan is a detailed, comprehensive plan of development for a Planned Development. This development plan applies limits and parameters for development derived from a development suitability analysis to a specific development scheme. Development Plans shall include a detailed description of the proposed development and its effects including, but not limited to, a written text, diagrams or maps describing the program for development and the functional arrangement of structures and uses, the effect of such arrangement upon the physical characteristics of the site, available public services, the capacity of the existing circulation system, and the existing and planned land use of adjacent properties. It includes a dimensioned site plan showing the location of all structures and lots in sufficient detail to permit recordation and the preparation of construction drawings.

 

812.04080 Development Project.
“Development Project”: Any one or a series of related development applications that constitute a single development proposal.

 

812.04085 Development Restrictions.
“Development Restrictions” include, but are not limited to, any of the following restrictions on property.

 

(a)    Open space easements.

 

(b)    Transfer of development rights.

 

(c)    Conveyance of development rights to the City.

 

(d)    Land Use District restrictions on development.

 

812.04090 Development Review Committee.
“Development Review Committee”: A committee consisting of representatives from various public agencies whose functions are to review and make recommendations on development proposals.

 

812.04095 Development Suitability Analysis.
“Development Suitability Analysis”: A comprehensive examination of the opportunities and constraints affecting development of a given site.

 

812.04100 Deviations.
“Deviations”: Authorized variances from required distances, setbacks, areas, or physical improvements.

 

812.04130 Drainage Course.
“Drainage course”: A natural or man-made water course which could convey runoff either year around or intermittently.          

 

812.04140 Dripline.
“Dripline”: A line which may be drawn on the ground around a tree directly under its outermost branch tips which is projected vertically down to the ground and which identifies that area where rainwater tends to drop from the tree.

 

812.04145 Dwelling, Multiple.
“Multiple Dwelling”: A building or portion thereof used and/or designed as a residence for two or more families living independently of each other in separate dwelling units.

 

812.04150 Dwelling, Single.
“Single Dwelling”: A detached dwelling unit designed and/or used to house not more than one family, including all domestic employees of such family.

 

812.04155 Dwelling Unit.
“Dwelling Unit”: Any building or portion thereof, affixed to a permanent foundation, including a manufactured home or portion thereof, which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation as required by the Uniform Building Code, for not more than one family, including domestic employees of such facility. Guestrooms located within hotels or motels are not dwelling units. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 31, 2001)

 

812.04158 Dwelling Unit, Secondary.
“Secondary Dwelling Unit”: A secondary dwelling unit is an additional single-family residence that is allowed on a lot where there is an existing legal single-family residence, provided that the lot area of the subject property is at least two times the minimum lot size specified by the land use district for the subject property. A secondary dwelling unit is subject to the standards set forth in Section 84.0510, and does not have the same size restrictions as an accessory dwelling unit. (Amended by Ord. 359 § 6, 2017)

 

CHAPTER 5 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “E”
812.05005 Earth Material.
“Earth Material”: Rock, natural soil, or combination thereof

 

812.05010 Educational Institutions.
“Educational Institutions”: Colleges or universities supported wholly or in part by public funds, and other colleges and universities giving general academic instruction as prescribed by the California State Board of Education.

 

812.05011 Emergency Shelter.
“Emergency Shelter”: A residential facility, other than a community care facility, operated by a provider that provides temporary accommodations to homeless persons with low income. The term “temporary accommodations” means that a person will be allowed to reside at the shelter for a time period not to exceed six months. For purposes of this definition, a “provider” shall mean a government agency or private non-profit organization which provides or contracts with recognized community organizations to provide emergency or temporary shelter, and which may also provide meals, counseling and other services, as well as common areas for residents of the facility. Such a facility may have individual rooms, but it is not developed with individual dwelling units, with the exception of the manager’s unit. (Added by Ord. 296 § 9, 2010)

 

812.05012 Employee.
“Employee” is a person who works in and/or performs for a Sexually-Oriented Business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the operator or owner of said business, or is an independent contractor. (Ord. 151 § 4, 1996; amended by Ord. 296 § 9, 2010)

 

812.05015 Environmental Constraints.
“Environmental Constraints”: Environmental factors which limit or inhibit the potential for land development, including, but not limited to, flood hazards, seismic hazards, air quality, and water supply.

 

812.05020 Environmental Impact.
“Environmental Impact”: Projected long- or short-term effects (adverse or beneficial) which a development project or plan may have on the natural and built environment if the project is carried out.

 

812.05025 Environmental Impact Report (EIR).
“Environmental Impact Report (EIR)”: An EIR is the public document used by a governmental agency to analyze the significant environmental effects of a proposed project, to identify alternatives, and to disclose possible ways to reduce or avoid possible environmental damage.

 

812.05035 Environmental Review Guidelines.
“Environmental Review Guidelines”: Written procedures adopted by the City Council for the purpose of implementing the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

 

812.05040 Erosion.
“Erosion”: The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind or water or machine.

 

812.05045 Erosion, Accelerated.
“Accelerated Erosion”: Accelerated erosion is erosion caused by a human-induced alteration of the vegetation, land surface, topography, or runoff pattern. Evidence of accelerated erosion is often indicated by exposed soils, gullies, rills, sediment deposits, or slope failures caused by human activities.

 

812.05050 Erosion Hazard.
“Erosion Hazard”: The term erosion hazard refers to the susceptibility of a site to erode, based on condition of slope, rock type, soil, and other site factors. Hazard may be determined based on a site-specific investigation, and such soil disturbance may be caused by wind, water, or machine.

 

812.05051 Escort.
“Escort” is any person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a “striptease” for another person. Escort shall not include any person hired by a State licensed school for purposes of modeling in any art education class while such person acts in that capacity. (Ord. 151 § 4, 1996)

 

812.05052 Establishment.
“Establishment” shall include any of the following:

 

(a)    The opening or commencement of any Sexually-Oriented Business as a new business; or

 

(b)    The conversion of an existing business, whether or not it is a Sexually-Oriented Business, to any Sexually-Oriented Business; or

 

(c)    The addition of any Sexually-Oriented Business to any other existing Sexually-Oriented Business; or to another existing non-Sexually-Oriented Business, with or without expansion of floor area; or

 

(d)    The relocation of any Sexually-Oriented Business; or

 

(e)    The expansion or enlargement of the premises by ten (10) percent or more of the existing floor area as originally approved by the City’s Building Official. (Ord. 151 § 4, 1996)

 

812.05055 Exotic Animal.
“Exotic Animal”: Any warm or cold-blooded animal of the biological kingdom Animalia generally considered as wild, exotic, dangerous, venomous, or not normally domesticated.

 

812.05060 Exploration or Prospecting.
“Exploration or Prospecting”: These terms refer to the search for minerals by geological, geophysical, geochemical, or other techniques. These include, but are not limited to, sampling, assaying, drilling, or any surface or underground works needed to determine the type, extent, or quantity of mineral present.

 

CHAPTER 6 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “F”
812.06003 FAA.
“FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2(part), 2001)

 

812.06005 Family.
“Family”: A person or persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.

 

812.06008 FCC.
“FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2(part), 2001)

 

812.06010 Final Map.
“Final Map”: See the California Government Code, Title 7, Division 2 definition.

 

812.06015 Findings.
“Findings”: A set of conclusions which are required before specified permits, land use applications, deviations, ordinance changes, or other entitlements may be granted.

 

812.06020 Fire Authority.
“Fire Authority”: ‘The San Bernardino County Fire Warden, State Forest Ranger in charge of the California Department of Forestry, or U.S. Forest Supervisor.

 

812.06025 Fire Authority, Local.
The “Local Fire Authority” is the fire department or agency serving a subject area as specified by City Code subsection 23.015 (h).

 

812.06030 Fire-Resistive or Fire-Resistive Construction.
The terms “Fire-Resistive or Fire-Resistive Construction” refer to construction to resist the spread of fire, details of which may be specified in the Building Code of the jurisdiction.

 

812.06035 Fire-Resistive Rating.
“Fire-Resistive Rating”: The time that the material or construction will withstand the standard fire exposure as determined by a fire test made in conformity with the standard methods of fire tests of buildings, construction, and materials in the U.B.C. Standards.

 

812.06040 Flammable Liquid.
“Flammable Liquid”: A flammable liquid is any liquid having a flash point below 100 degrees F and having a vapor pressure not exceeding 40 pounds per square inch (absolute) at 100 degrees F. Class I liquids shall include those having flash points below 100 degrees F and may be subdivided as follows.

 

(a)    Shall include those having flash points below 73 degrees F and having a boiling point below 100 degrees F

 

(b)    Shall include those having flash points below 73 degrees F and having a boiling point at or above 100 degrees F

 

(c)    Shall include those having flash points at or above 73 degrees F and below 100 degrees F

 

812.06045 Flammable Solid.
“Flammable Solid”: A solid substance, other than one classified as an explosive, which is liable to cause fires through friction, through absorption of moisture, through spontaneous chemical changes, or as a result of retained heat from manufacturing or processing.

 

812.06050 Flood Control District.
“Flood Control District”: The San Bernardino County Flood Control District.

 

812.06055 Flood Control Engineer.
“Flood Control Engineer”: The Engineer of the San Bernardino County Flood Control District appointed by the Board of Supervisors, or an authorized designee.

 

812.06060 Flood Hazard.
“Flood Hazard”: A substantial possibility of damage to life or property by overflow water, ponded water, or other water on the surface of the land or by debris or silt carried in such water. The following flood-related terms are defined as follows.

 

(a)    “Alluvial Fan”: A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.

 

(b)    “Apex”: The point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major steam that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front.

 

(c)    “Base Flood”: Base Flood means the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”).

 

(d)    “Certify”: To authenticate or vouch for in writing, and signed by the certifying party, that the submitted data is true, as represented, or that the requirements of the regulations have been satisfied.

 

(e)    “Design Flood”: A design flood is that flood against which protection is provided, or eventually will be provided, by means of flood protective or control works. When a Federal flood control project survey has been authorized, the design flood will be that established by the cognizant Federal agency and in all other cases will be determined by the City Engineer.

 

(f)    “First Habitable Floor”: The lowest floor in a structure usable for living purposes, which may include working, sleeping, eating, cooking, recreation, or a combination thereof.

 

(g)    “Flood”: A flood is any temporary rise in stream flow or water surface level that results in significant adverse effects in the floodplain. Adverse effects of floods may include damages from overflow of land areas, effects of temporary backwater or sewers and local drainage channels, bank erosion or channel shifts, unsanitary conditions or other unfavorable conditions resulting from deposition of materials in stream channels during flood recessions, rise of ground water coincident with increased stream flow, and interruption of traffic at bridge crossings.

 

(h)    “Flood Boundary and Flooding Map”: The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.

 

(i)     “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)”: The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

 

(j)     “Floodplain”: The relatively flat area or lowlands adjoining the channel of a stream or watercourse and subject to overflow by flood waters.

 

(k)    “Floodplain Overlay District”

 

(1)    “FP1 Overlay District” (100-Year Flood Area): Areas of 100-year flood as defined by the Federal Flood Insurance Regulations.

 

(2)    “FP2 Overlay District”: Areas between limits of the 100-year flood and 500-year flood; or certain areas subject to 100-year flooding with average depths less than one foot or where the contributing drainage area is less than one square mile; or areas protected by levees from the base flood.

 

(3)    “FP3 Overlay District”: Areas of shallow flooding with undetermined, but possible, flood hazards as determined by the City, the Flood Control District, or other governmental agency.

 

(l)     “Floodway”: The channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot; also referred to as “Regulatory Floodway”.

 

(m)   “Functionally Dependent Use”: A functionally dependent use is a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

 

(n)    “Highest Adjacent Grade”: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

 

(o)    “Historic Structure”

 

(1)    Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register.

 

(2)    Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.

 

(3)    Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or

 

(4)    Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:

 

(A)   By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or

 

(B)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved programs

 

(p)    “Lowest Floor”: For floodplain management purposes, the term “lowest floor” refers to the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.

 

(q)    “Manufactured Home”: For floodplain management purposes, the terms refers to structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a per Ganent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.

 

(r)    “Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision”: For flood-plain management purposes, this terms refers to a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.

 

(s)    “New Construction”: For the purposes of determining insurance rates, “new construction” refers to structures for which “the start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, including any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term also applies to structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a flood plain management regulation adopted by a community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

 

(t)     “Regulatory Floodway”: The channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.

 

(u)    “Start of Construction”: The terms “start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the state of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.

 

(v)    “Substantial Damage”: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

 

(w)   “Substantial Improvement”: The term “substantial improvement” refers to any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent 50% of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct an existing violation of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specification which has been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or any alteration of an “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an “historic structure”.

 

(x)    “San Bernardino County Flood Control District”: A district established by act of the State Legislature, empowered to protect the watercourses of said District and governed by the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino acting as ex officio Governing Board of the District.

 

(y)    “Selected Flood”: A flood of a recurrence interval determined by the Planning Commission or City Council after a recommendation of the City Engineer.

 

(z)    “Standard Project Flood”: A standard project flood is a flood that would result from a storm that is considered reasonably characteristic of the region in which the drainage area is located, giving consideration to the runoff characteristics of the drainage area and excluding rare combinations of meteorologic and hydrologic conditions. Such a flood provides a reasonable upper limit to be considered in designing flood control improvements and floodplain limits.

 

812.06065 Freeway.
“Freeway”: A freeway is any dedicated or deeded public right-of-way to which the owners of abutting lands have no right or easement of access to or from their abutting lands. In addition, freeways shall include those rights-of-way designated by official action as freeways by the California State Highway Commission or the City Council.

 

812.06070 Front Wall.
“Front Wall”: The nearest wall of a building or other structure to the street upon which the building faces, but excluding cornices, canopies, eaves, or any other architectural embellishments that may extend beyond said front wall, not to exceed a distance of four feet.

 

812.06075 Frontage Road.
“Frontage Road”: A minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street or freeway and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through and fast traffic.

 

812.06080 Fuelbreak.
“Fuelbreak”: The term “fuelbreak” refers to areas also known as greenbelts which separate communities or clusters of structures from native vegetation. Within the fuelbreak boundaries, the vegetation is thinned out, pruned, modified, or landscaped to effectively reduce the volume and flammability of fuel, thereby substantially reducing or preventing the rate of spread and intensity of wildland fires.

 

812.06085 Fuel Modified Area.
“Fuel Modified Area”: An area where living and dead vegetation is managed regularly, usually by trimming, removal, or substitution of natural vegetation in order to reduce fire hazards, by use of mechanical, chemical, and biological means and/or prescribed burning.

 

812.06090 Future Right-of-Way.
“Future Right-of-Way”: Future right-of-way of streets shown in the Transportation Element of the General Plan shall be based upon the adopted City Road Standards assuming an equal dedication of right-of-way on both sides of the existing centerline, or shall otherwise be determined as shown on any adopted Specific Plan.

 

CHAPTER 7 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “G”
812.07005 Garage, Private.
“Private Garage”: An accessory building or an accessory portion of the main building designed and/or used for the shelter or storage of motor vehicles belonging to the occupants of the main building.

 

812.07010 Garage, Public.
“Public Garage”: Any building, other than a private or storage garage, used for the storage, care, or repair of motor vehicles and where any such vehicles are equipped for operation or kept for hire or sale.

 

812.07015 Garage, Storage.
“Storage Garage”: Any building, other than a public or private garage, used exclusively for the storage of motor vehicles.

 

812.07020 General Plan.
“General Plan”: An official or adopted General Plan, or any element thereof, as defined in California Government Code, Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 3.

 

 

812.07025 General Plan, City or Update.
“City General Plan or Comprehensive General Plan or Consolidated General Plan”: These terms refer to an official public document consisting of maps and text adopted by the City as a policy guide to decisions pertaining to the physical development of the City. It is the City’s statement of goals, policies, and action steps necessary for orderly development and growth, and thereby serves as a guide for many public decisions, especially land use changes, preparation of capital improvement programs, and the enactment of growth management legislation.

 

812.07030 Goals.
“Goals”: General statements that describe a desired end state toward which effort should be directed.

 

812.07035 Government Code.
“Government Code”: The State of California Government Code.

 

812.07040 Grading.
“Grading”: Grading means excavating, filling, leveling, or smoothing, or a combination thereof, for which a grading permit is required by the Uniform Building Code. “Major grading” refers to grading in excess of 100 cubic yards, whereas “minor grading” is 100 cubic yards or less.

 

812.07045 Grading Provisions.
“Grading Provisions”: One or more standards contained in the grading ordinance.

 

812.07047 Ground-mounted.
“Ground-mounted” means equipment mounted to a pole, monopole, tower, or other freestanding structure specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting an antenna. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2, 2001)

 

812.07050 Ground-Shaking Levels.
“Ground-Shaking Levels”: The terms refers to the physical movement of the land surface due to earthquakes, the extent of which is dependent upon the magnitude of the tremor, the subsurface material of the area, and the proximity to the epicenter of the quake. Ground-shaking levels may be measured on the Modified Mercali Intensity Scale.

 

812.07055 Growth Monitoring.
“Growth Monitoring”: Growth monitoring is a process which follows the amount and rate of population growth within a City or other specified area. It normally involves some estimation of population growth for small areas through the analysis of development applications (zone changes, subdivisions, etc.) from submittal, through review, to final approval and issuance of building permits.

 

812.07060 Guest Housing.
“Guest Housing”: Guest housing is the residential occupancy of a living unit, with bathroom plumbing only, located on the same parcel as the primary dwelling unit, but separated from it by at least 10 feet. This housing is for use by the occupants or temporary guests of the occupants of the premises and is not to be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling, except as provided by Section 84.0510.

 

812.07065 Guest Room.
“Guest Room”: A room which is designed for or used by one or more guests for sleeping purposes, but in which no provision is made for cooking.

 

812.07068 Guest Quarters.
“Guest Quarters”: Guest quarters are living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same parcel with the principal building or a contiguous parcel with the same common owner, for use by the occupants or by temporary guests of the occupants of the premises. Such quarters have no kitchen facilities and are not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. An example of guest quarters is a room in a detached garage with bathroom facilities only.

 

 

CHAPTER 8 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “H”
812.08003 Habitable Space (Room).
“Habitable Space (Room)”: This terms refers to space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space, and similar areas, are not considered habitable space.

 

812.08005 Hazardous Areas.
“Hazardous Areas”: Hazardous areas are those areas subject to or containing elements which pose a potential threat to life or property. Floodplains, earthquake fault zones, nuclear or chemical waste disposal sites, or areas of inherently unsafe soil conditions are examples of hazardous areas.

 

812.08010 Hazardous Excavation, Mining.
“Hazardous Excavation, Mining”: An unattended pit, shaft, portal, or other surface opening which, if not secured by covering, fencing, or having its access restricted by gates, doors, or other reasonable means, presents a threat to the physical safety of the public.

 

812.08015 Hazardous Fire Area.
“Hazardous Fire Area”: This terms shall mean any land which is covered with grass, grain, brush, or forest, whether privately or publicly owned, which is so situated or is of such inaccessible location that a fire originating upon such land would present an abnormally difficult job of suppression or would result in great and unusual damage through fire or resulting erosion.

 

812.08020 Hazardous Material.
“Hazardous Material”: A material or waste or combination of materials and wastes which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may either:

 

(a)    Cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality, serious irreversible illness, or incapacitating reversible illness; or

 

(b)    Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.

 

812.08022 Hazardous Waste.
“Hazardous Waste”: The terms means any of the following:

 

(a)    A waste or combination of wastes which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may either:

 

(1)    Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness.

 

(2)    Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed.

 

(b)    A waste which meets any of the criteria for the identification of a hazardous waste adopted by the State Department of Health Services pursuant to Section 25141 of the State Health and Safety Code.

 

(c)    “Hazardous waste” includes, but is not limited to, RCRA (Resource Conservation and Recovery Act) hazardous waste.

 

(d)    Unless expressly provided otherwise, the term “hazardous waste” shall be understood to also include extremely hazardous waste and acutely hazardous waste.

 

812.08023 Hazardous Waste Facility.
(a)    “Specified Hazardous Waste Facilities”: These facilities are off-site facilities that accept wastes from more than one generator. A facility must have carefully engineered and designed means for acceptance, storage, and treatment of the wastes, as well as trained personnel operating the site.

 

(b)    “Transfer and Storage Facilities”: Facilities that collect small quantities of hazardous waste and store them until it is economical to transfer the wastes to a treatment or disposal site.

 

(c)    “Treatment Facilities”: These are facilities that alter the chemical form, toxicity, or volume of a waste. They do this generally through the use of one of the following processes.

 

(1)    Destruction or detoxification to transform a hazardous waste into a material safe for disposal

 

(2)    Concentration or volume reduction to facilitate the safe handling and disposal of hazardous components

 

(3)    Immobilization to isolate the hazardous components from the environment

 

(d)    “Transportable Treatment Units (TTUs)”: Temporary mobile facilities that treat hazardous waste at the site of generation.

 

(e)    “Incineration Facilities”: These are facilities that burn some wastes such as organic liquids and solids which cannot be reclaimed economically or are technically difficult to treat. Incinerators destroy the waste, leaving a small hazardous waste residue. They can be developed as on-site or off-site facilities and are often used in hospitals to burn infectious wastes.

 

(f)    “Solidification and Stabilization”: These are the two most common methods of immobilizing hazardous wastes. Solidification and stabilization involve changing a liquid to a solid or altering the characteristics of a solid to immobilize the contaminants. A variety of materials are used, including cement, lime, and polymeric materials. This method is used for wastes that cannot be recycled, treated, or destroyed. Often, wastes undergo several treatment methods; solidification or stabilization is usually the last method applied in a treatment train.

 

(g)    “Recycling Facilities”: Facilities that process wastes so that they may be reclaimed, used or reused.

 

(h)    “Residuals Repository”: A residuals repository is a hazardous waste facility or part of a facility that is permitted to accept for land disposal only non-liquid, treated hazardous waste (as de-          fined in Section 25179.3 (1), State Health and Safety Code). Non-liquid means non-liquid and containing less than 50% moisture by weight as determined in accordance with Section 67425 of Title 22, California Code of Regulations.

 

(i)     “Land Disposal”

 

(1)    Disposal of hazardous wastes on or into the land, including, but not limited to, landfill, surface impoundment, waste piles, deep-well injection, land spreading, and co-burial with municipal garbage

 

(2)    Treatment of hazardous wastes on or in the land, such as neutralization and evaporation ponds and land farming, where the treatment residues are hazardous wastes and are not removed for subsequent processing or disposal within one year

 

(3)    Storage of hazardous wastes on or in the land, such as waste piles and surface impoundments, other than neutralization and evaporation ponds, for longer than one year

 

812.08025 Heating Opportunities, Passive or Natural.
“Heating Opportunities, Passive or Natural”: This term refers to the ability to orient or site any structure, including a dwelling, on its lot in order to take optimum advantage of natural solar heating capabilities. Structures should, wherever possible, orient their longest/largest axis from east to west and include special treatment of the south-facing wall.

 

812.08027 Height.
“Height” means, when referring to a tower or other related structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2(part), 2001)

 

812.08030 Hog Ranch or Raising.
“Hog Ranch or Raising”: Any premises used for the raising or keeping of 10 or more weaned hogs.

 

812.08035 Home Occupation.
“Home Occupation”: Any occupation customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling by its inhabitants, the purpose being incidental to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and provided that no article is sold or offered for sale except that produced by said inhabitants, as stipulated in Division 4 of the City Code.

812.08040 Hotel.
“Hotel”: Any building or portion thereof containing guest rooms for compensation on a daily basis, to be occupied on a transient basis, and with no provision for cooking in any individual room or suite. A hotel does not include a bed and breakfast lodge or boarding house. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 32, 2001; Ord. 345 § 3, 2016)

 

812.08045 Hotel, Residential.
“Residential Hotels”: A hotel in which 75% or more of the available rooms are occupied by or reserved for permanent guests for compensation on a monthly or longer basis.

 

812.08050 Housing, Caretaker.
“Caretaker Housing”: Residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by the owner, operator, or caretaker employed to guard part or all of the property on which the caretaker dwelling is located as an accessory use.

 

812.08055 Housing, Dependent.
“Dependent Housing”: The term “dependent housing” refers to the residential occupancy of an accessory dwelling unit located on the same parcel as the principal dwelling unit which is occupied by one or two adults, who have reached the age of 60, and are dependents of the residents of the primary unit, or are court-appointed conservatees of a resident of the principal unit, or are members of a very low income household as specified in Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code and are related to the residents of the principal unit by birth, marriage, or adoption. For the purposes of this section, “dependent” means a related individual who is dependent upon the resident of the principal unit for financial support or health care. An individual will be determined to be a financial dependent if claimed by the resident of the primary unit as a dependent on his or her Federal or State income tax return. An individual will be determined to be a dependent for health care reasons if he or she is considered blind or disabled as defined in Section 1614(a) of Part A of Title XVI of the Social Security Act.

 

812.08060 Housing, Group.
“Group Housing”: Residential occupancy of a building or set of buildings each of which contains group quarters in permanently fixed building or a portions thereof with shared or no kitchen privileges.

 

 

CHAPTER 9 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “I”
812.09010 Improvement, Subdivision.
“Subdivision Improvement”: The term “subdivision improvement” refers to any street work and utilities to be installed or agreed to be installed by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways, and easements as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic, drainage, and flood control needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof. “Improvement” also refers to any other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by the City, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the City or by a combination thereof, is necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the General Plan, or any applicable Specific Plan.

 

812.09015 Incompatible Land Uses.
“Incompatible Land Uses”: An incompatible land use is the contiguous occurrence of an unlike land use which may have an adverse effect on an adjacent land use. A residential use adjacent to a general industrial use is an example of an incompatible land use.

 

812.09020 Incompatible Land Use Characteristic.
“Incompatible Land Use Characteristic”: An incompatible land use characteristic refers to an attribute of a land use which is detrimental to the character of another land use. An unpleasant odor from an area would be representative of an incompatible land use characteristic.

 

812.09025 Infrastructure.
“Infrastructure”: The basic utilities and services necessary to support development, e.g., sewer, water, and roads.

 

812.09030 Institutional Use.
“Institutional Use”: An institutional use is an organizational use of a public character including governmental, educational, religious, medical, scientific research, cultural, social, and sometimes, recreational or entertainment uses. Such organizations often utilize large structures and/or large grounds for public assembly purposes to educate, treat, train, help, or entertain groups of people on a regular or periodic basis.

 

812.09035 Interim Land Uses.
“Interim Land Uses”: A provisional or temporary land use often used while studies are being conducted to evaluate the long-term use.

 

CHAPTER 10 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “J”
812.10005 Junk and Salvage Facility.
“Junk and Salvage Facility”: This terms refers to the primary or accessory use of a parcel of land for open storage, dismantling, and/or selling of old cast-off, unused, scrap, or salvage material of any sort. Such materials shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following.

 

(a)    Copper, aluminum, brass, ferrous, or nonferrous metals, whether fabricated or not

 

(b)    Rope, rags, paper, glass, rubber, plastic, or other polymer material.

 

(c)    Scrap lumber or other construction material

 

(d)    Appliances, batteries, or junk, dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles or parts thereof.

 

(e)    Trash, debris (organic and inorganic), or other waste material

 

CHAPTER 11 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “K”
812.11005 Kennel.
“Kennel”: Any parcel or premises on which five or more dogs over four months old are kept for boarding, breeding, training, and/or marketing.

 

812.11010 Kitchen.
“Kitchen”: Any room, all or any part of which is designed or used for cooking and the preparation of food.

 

 

CHAPTER 12 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “L”
812.12005 Labor Camp.
“Labor Camp”: Premises used for residential purposes for temporary or seasonal periods by five or more persons employed to perform agricultural or industrial labor.

 

812.12010 Labor Quarters.
“Labor Quarters”: Residential occupancy of single or multiple dwelling units with individual, shared, or no kitchen facilities which provide housing for the employees and their families of agricultural, mining, logging, construction, or other remote land uses.

 

812.12015 Lake.
“Lake”: A naturally occurring or artificially created body of water (impounded above or below surface level) with a surface coverage of at least one acre and a depth of one foot or more (one acre/foot).

 

812.12020 Land Clearing.
“Land Clearing”: Removal of vegetation down to duff or bare soil, by any method.

 

812.12025 Land Disturbance.
“Land Disturbance”: Clearing, excavating, grading, or other manipulation of the terrain.

 

812.12030 Land Project.
“Land Project”: A subdivision or subdivided lands within California which satisfy all of the following conditions.

 

(a)    The subdivision or subdivided lands contain 50 or more parcels or lots, of which any 50 are both:

 

(1)    Not improved with residential, industrial, commercial, or institutional buildings; and

 

(2)    Offered for sale, lease, or financing for purposes other than industrial, commercial, institutional, or commercial agricultural uses.

 

(b)    The subdivision or subdivided lands are located in an area in which fewer than 1,500 registered voters reside within the subdivision or within two miles of the boundaries to the property described in the final public report.

 

(c)    Not constituting a community apartment project as defined in Section 11004 or a stock cooperative as defined in Section 11003.2 of the California Business and Professions Code, or a project consisting of condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the California Civil Code.

 

For purposes of Subsection 812.12030 (a) above, lands owned or beneficially controlled by substantially the same entities or interests shall be deemed to be part of the subdivided lands or subdivision.

 

812.12035 Land Use.
“Land Use”: The term land use refers to the manner in which land is developed and used. The general categories of land use include residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, agricultural, recreational, and planned development.

 

812.12040 Land Use Application.
“Land Use Application”: A land use application is an applicant-initiated request for City approval of a discretionary permit that is subject to one of the review processes specified by the City Code in Division 3. Ministerial permit actions such as building permits and mobilehome setdown permits are not land use applications.

 

812.12050 Land Use Decision.
“Land Use Decision”: Any decision to approve, deny, or modify, or to recommend approval, denial, or modification of a request to develop, divide, or otherwise utilize land or to alter or establish land use regulations.

 

812.12055 Land Use District.
“Land Use District”: A land use regulatory district adopted in accordance with the provisions of Division 4 of the Development Code and the General Plan, establishing all necessary rules and regulations necessary to guide development within the area affected by the district.

 

812.12060 Land Use Intensity.
“Land Use Intensity”: Land use intensity refers to the density of development versus open space of an area or property. For example, a Multiple-Dwelling land use is a higher land use intensity than a Single-Dwelling land use.

 

812.12065 Land Use Types.
“Land Use Types”: A list of land use activities which are grouped together by their common performance characteristics

 

812.12070 Landslides.
“Landslides”: The perceptible downward sliding of a mass of earth and/or rock.

 

812.12080 Leaching.
“Leaching”: The washing or draining of dissolved minerals or pollutants from the soil surface to the subsurface.

 

812.12085 Lead Agency, Mining and Reclamation.
“Mining and Reclamation, Lead Agency”: For the purposes of mining and reclamation, a lead agency is a City or County which has the principal responsibility for approving a surface mining operation, pursuant to the California Public Resources Code.

 

812.12088 Legal Access.
“Legal Access”: Legal access is defined as a dedicated right-of-way or a dedication to the City of Yucaipa and to the public in general, an easement for public road, City highway and public utility purposes of a width as established by the Transportation Element of the General Plan. The easement or road constructed thereon shall not become a City highway until and unless the City Council, by appropriate resolution, has caused said road to be accepted into the City-Maintained Road System, or an existing travelled way that is substantially in compliance with City road standards, where a prescriptive right by the user has been established for public use by court decree. These provisions shall apply to divisions of land resulting in lots of less than 20 acres.

 

812.12090 Liquefaction.
“Liquefaction”: Liquefaction is a temporary fluid condition in water-saturated, loose, sandy soil caused by shock, such as an earthquake. It can cause serious soil settlement, slumping, or failure of structure foundations.

 

812.12095 Loading Space.
“Loading Space”: An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, which abuts upon a street, alley, or other appropriate means of access.

 

812.12100 Local Agency.
“Local Agency”: The City of Yucaipa.

 

812.12105 Local Ordinance.
“Local Ordinance”: A local ordinance which implements State Planning, Zoning, and Development Laws, enacted by the City Council of the City of Yucaipa.

 

812.12110 Locational Standards.
“Locational Standards”: Criteria utilized to establish the circumstances under which a particular base district would be appropriate or desirable for a given area or site.

 

812.12115 Lot.
“Lot”: An area shown on and created by a final map, official map, or parcel map recorded with the City Surveyor, City Engineer, or County Recorder.

 

812.12120 Lot Area.
“Lot Area”: The total horizontal area included within the perimeter of a described area.

 

812.12125 Lot, Corner.
“Corner Lot”: A lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets, or bounded on two or more adjacent sides by street lines, provided that the angle of intersection does not exceed 135 degrees.

 

812.12130 Lot Coverage.
“Lot Coverage”: Lot coverage refers to the percentage of a lot that has been altered to create a surface area that is either impervious or is covered by a structure. “Building coverage” shall mean the percentage of lot surface area occupied by any building, but does not include roadways, swimming pools, tennis courts, or solar collection devices which are on top of, enclosed, or covered by a building.

 

812.12135 Lot Depth.
“Lot Depth”: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.

 

812.12140 Lot Dimension Ratio.
“Lot Dimension Ratio”: A land area ratio of width to depth which determines the shape of a lot.

 

812.12145 Lot, Frontage.
“Frontage Lot”: The dimension of a lot or portion of a lot which abuts a street or an approved road easement, except the side of a corner lot.

 

812.12150 Lot, Interior.
“Interior Lot”: An interior lot is a lot other than a corner lot.

 

812.12155 Lot, Key.
“Key Lot”: A key lot is the first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot, the front line of which is a continuation of the side line of the reversed corner lot, exclusive of the width of an alley, and fronting on the street which intersects or intercepts the street upon which the corner lot fronts.

 

812.12160 Lot Width.
“Lot Width”: The following methods which yield the smallest dimension shall be chosen to measure lot width: the distance measured at the building setback line (BSL) along a line or arc which is parallel to concentric to the right-of-way, or the average horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth.

 

812.12165 Lot Line Adjustment.
“Lot Line Adjustment”: The adjustment of a lot line between two or more adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where no additional parcels are thereby created or the number of parcels reduced.

 

812.12170 Lot Line, Front.
“Front Lot Line”: In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street; and in the case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street, except in those cases where the latest tract deed restrictions or the recorded map specify another line as the front lot line.

 

812.12175 Lot Line, Rear.
“Rear Lot Line”: A line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line, and in the case of a triangular or other irregularly shaped lot, a line within the lot 10 feet in length, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.

 

812.12180 Lot Line, Side.
“Side Lot Line”: Any lot line other than the front or rear lot lines.

 

812.12185 Lot Merger.
“Lot Merger”: A lot merger is a process by which contiguous lots are merged into one land holding. In order to be merged, such lots must be held by the same owner, and the lots must have a common lot line. This process is subject to all of the requirements of the City Code and may be initiated by either the owner(s) of the lots or the City.

 

812.12190 Lot, Mobilehome Park.
“Mobilehome Park Lot”: A portion of a mobilehome park designated or used for the occupancy of one trailer coach or camping party.

 

812.12195 Lot, Reversed Corner.
“Reversed Corner Lot”: A reversed corner lot is a corner lot which rears upon the side of another lot, whether or not across an alley.

 

812.12200 Lot, Through.
“Through Lot”: A lot having frontage on two parallel, or approximately parallel, streets.

 

 

CHAPTER 13 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “M”
812.13005 Maintained Public Street.
“Maintained Public Street”: Any roadway maintained by a public agency for public use.

 

812.13006 Major Wireless Telecommunication Facility.
“Major Wireless Telecommunication Facility”: A wireless telecommunication facility that is ground- or roof-mounted or mounted in or on any public property including the public right-of-way as described in Section 88.01040 of Division 8. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2, 2001)

 

812.13008 Manufactured Home.
“Manufactured Home”: A factory-built or manufactured home, including mobilehomes, as permitted by California State laws.

 

812.13009 Marijuana.
“Marijuana”: All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Marijuana” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana, and any product containing marijuana. “Marijuana” shall be construed to include, but not be limited to, “cannabis” as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5(f) as may be amended from time to time. “Marijuana” does not include:

 

1.     Industrial hemp, as defined in Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code; or

 

2.     The weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product. (Added by Ord. 341 § 1, 2016); (Amended by Ord. 354 § 1, 2017)

 

812.13009.2 Marijuana Cultivation.
“Marijuana Cultivation”: Any activity involving the planting, growing, cultivating, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming, or processing of marijuana. (Added by Ord. 341 § 2, 2016); (Amended by Ord. 354 § 2, 2017)

 

812.13010 May.
“May”: A permissive or optional provision, regulation, or specification.

 

812.13012 Mechanical Play Device.
“Mechanical Play Device” or “Electronic Play Device” (referred to generally herein as “devices”): Any machine, device or apparatus whether mechanically or electronically operated, including pool and billiard tables, the operation of which is made possible by the deposit or placement of any coin, slug, disk, card, key or any other article or device, into any slot, crevice, or opening, or by the payment of any fee or consideration for its use or operation, and which involves the manipulation of hand levers, electronic releases or other buttons or levers in the conduct of the game. “Mechanical rocking horses” or other simulated animals or vehicles upon which young children are seated or which are ridden are not “mechanical play devices” or “electronic play devices” for the purposes of this section. (Ord. 142 § 2 (B), 1995)

 

812.13015 Menagerie.
“Menagerie”: A private collection of three or more wild, exotic, or dangerous animals which are raised, bred, trained, and/or maintained without any public display or exhibition on the site.

 

812.13020 Mined Lands.
“Mined Lands”: Mined lands include the surface, subsurface, and groundwater of an area where surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted. This includes private ways and roads appurtenant to any such land excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas where structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which result from, or are used in, surface mining operations are located.

 

812.13025 Mineral Resources.
“Mineral Resources”: A collective term for all mineral deposits of a particular kind, or for mineral deposits in general.

 

812.13030 Minerals.
“Minerals”: The term minerals refers to any naturally occurring chemical element or compound or groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances. These include, but are not limited to, coal, peat, and bituminous rock, and exclude geothermal resources, natural gas, and petroleum.

 

812.13040 Minimum Parcel Size.
“Minimum Parcel Size”: The smallest unit of land permitted through subdivision within a specific land use district, specified as minimum lot area in each land use district.

 

812.13045 Mining and Reclamation Plan
“Mining and Reclamation Plan”: A plan required by the City for all surface mining operations. The plan requires measures to be taken which provide for reclamation of mined lands to a usable condition that is readily adaptable for alternative land use and creates no danger to public health or safety.

 

812.13050 Mining Waste.
“Mining Waste”: Includes the residual of soil, rock, mineral, liquid, vegetation, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property directly resulting from, or displaced by, surface mining operations.

 

812.13055 Minor Subdivision Plot Plan.
“Minor Subdivision Plot Plan”: A Minor Subdivision Plot Plan is any application plot plan requesting the subdivision of any parcel or parcels of land shown as a unit or contiguous units under one or a common ownership, and which is proposed for subdivision for the purpose of sale, lease, financing, or other conveyance, including gift, either immediate or in the future, into two, three or four lots, parts or parcels and a remainder parcel. For the purposes of this definition, a Minor Subdivision Plot Plan shall also mean a Tentative Parcel Map.

 

812.13058 Minor Wireless Telecommunication Facility.
“Minor wireless telecommunication facility” means a wireless telecommunication facility described in Section 88.01035 of Division 8. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2, 2001)

 

812.13060 Mitigation Measures.
“Mitigation Measures”: Necessary steps taken to lessen potential impacts of development or actions on the environment.

 

 

812.13065 Mixed Land Use.
“Mixed Land Use”: The unspecified mixture of compatible land uses within one building or within a section or sections of a community.

 

812.13070 Mobilehome, Dependent.
“Dependent Mobilehome”: A mobilehome or travel trailer coach not equipped with a toilet for sewage disposal.

 

812.13075 Mobilehome, Independent.
“Independent Mobilehome”: A residential dwelling structure, especially of the traditional mobilehome variety, which contains either a dwelling unit or a rooming unit in vehicular facilities which accommodate or are intended to accommodate residential activities on individual lots.

 

812.13080 Mobilehome Park.
“Mobilehome Park”: An area or tract of land designed as a single unit where spaces for two or more mobilehomes used for human habitation are rented or leased on a monthly or longer basis, or owned separately.

 

812.13090 Mobilehome, Self-Contained.
“Self-Contained Mobilehome”: A mobilehome or trailer equipped with a toilet, water storage tank for potable water, and a sewage holding tank.

 

812.13092 Monopole.
“Monopole” means a structure composed of a single spire, pole or tower used to support antennas or related equipment. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2, 2001)

 

812.13095 Motel.
“Motel”: A building or group of two or more detached, semi-detached, or attached buildings containing guest rooms for compensation on a daily basis, where each guest room contains a food preparation area (kitchenette). Included are lodging establishments designated as cabins, motor courts, and similar designations. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 33, 2001; Ord. 345 § 5, 2016)

 

812.13100 Motor Vehicle.
“Motor Vehicle”: A self-propelled device by which persons or property may be moved upon a highway, excepting a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

 

812.13105 Motor Vehicle Dismantling Facility.
“Motor Vehicle Dismantling Facility”: A motor vehicle dismantling facility is any premises used for the dismantling or wrecking of vehicles required to be registered under the Vehicle Code of the State of California. Activities may include the buying, selling, or dealing in such vehicles, their integral parts, or component materials thereof, and the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, wrecked, or inoperative vehicles.

 

812.13110 Motor Vehicle Storage/Impound Facility.
“Motor Vehicle Storage/Impound Facility”: Any lot, lot area, or parcel of land used, designed, or maintained for the specific purpose of storing, impounding, or keeping motor vehicles, but not including dismantling or wrecking activities.

 

812.13115 Mounted.
“Mounted” means to be attached or supported. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2(part), 2001)

 

812.13120 Mudslide.
“Mudslide”: The term mudslide refers to the flow of mud and debris in a downslope direction due to slope failure, caused by poor structural and water retention properties of the soil. Mudslides are generally experienced after heavy precipitation, fast snowpack melt, an earthquake, or any combination thereof.

 

812.13125 Multi-Use Centers.
“Multi-Use Centers”: Areas of service, retail, or publicly oriented facilities that are centrally located along collector streets or major arterials and serve the local residents.

 

CHAPTER 14 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “N”
812.14005 National Forest Lands.
“National Forest Lands”: Lands under the jurisdiction of U.S. Forest Service and within the boundaries of the San Bernardino and Angeles National Forests.

 

812.14010 Native Vegetative Species.
“Native Vegetative Species:” All plant species indigenous to the State of California and compatible to the climate and elevation of the area to be landscaped.

 

812.14015 Natural Hazards.
“Natural Hazards” Any one or a combination of naturally occurring phenomena such as earthquakes, forest and brush fires, landslides, mudslides, etc. that pose a potential threat to the man-made environment.

 

812.14020 Noise Contour.
“Noise Contour”: A noise contour is a mapped line connecting points where the same sound pressure level prevails. Contours form bands of width emanating from a noise source and approximate true ambient noise levels.

 

812.14025 Non-Access.
“Non-Access”: Access rights that have been relinquished by appropriate dedication certificate and labeled on a recorded final map and/or parcel map.

 

812.14030 Non-Vehicular Access.
“Non-Vehicular Access”: Vehicular access rights to abutting lots or rights-of-way which have been relinquished by appropriate dedication certificate and labeled on a recorded Final Map and/or Parcel Map.

 

812.14035 Nonconforming or Nonconforming Use.
“Nonconforming”: Any building, structure, or portion thereof, tree, or use of building or land which does not conform to the regulations of the City Code or applicable Specific Plan and which lawfully existed at the time the regulations, or an amendment thereto, with which it does not conform became effective.

 

812.14040 Notice.
“Notice”: A method of conveying information pertaining to a pending land use decision which may affect members of the public.

 

812.14041 Nudity or a State of Nudity.
“Nudity” or a “State of Nudity” means the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areolae or nipple of the female breast. (Ord. 151 § 5, 1996)

 

CHAPTER 15 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “O”
812.15005 Official Map.
“Official Map”: An Official Map is a map prepared in accordance with this Title and shall be substituted for a final map when it is certified, filed, and bound, but not before.

 

812.15010 On-Site Detention.
“On-Site Detention”: Temporary storage of runoff on the site.

 

812.15015 On-Site Retention.
“On-Site Retention”: Permanent holding of runoff on the site through percolation to the ground.

 

812.15020 Open Space.
“Open Space”: The term open space refers to land where basic natural values have been retained. Open space can include wilderness areas, a small park in the middle of a City, pastures, forested areas, agricultural groves, vineyards, golf courses, floodwashes, etc. The function of open space may differ, depending upon the location. It may have a protective function, as in the case of open space in floodplain areas, where it serves to protect health and safety. It can have a structural or buffer function to space and separate conflicting land uses. It may serve a recreational function or a scenic function to provide aesthetic views of forests or mountains.

 

812.15025 Open Space, Common.
“Common Open Space”: Common open space is open space within a single, unified development which is owned, designed, and set aside for all occupants of the development or by occupants of a designated portion of the development. Common open space is not dedicated to the public and is owned and maintained by a private organization made up of the open space users.

 

812.15030 Open Space, Private.
“Private Open Space”: Private open space is open space directly adjoining the living areas of dwelling units which is intended for all private enjoyment of the residents of the dwelling unit. Private open space shall in some manner be defined such that its boundaries are evident.

 

812.15031 Operator.
“Operator” includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator, or person in charge of any permitted or licensed business. (Ord. 151 § 6, 1996)

 

812.15035 Operator, Mining and Reclamation.
“Mining and Reclamation Operator”: A mining and reclamation operator is any person who is engaged in surface mining operations himself or who contracts with others to conduct operations on his behalf. This does not include a person who is engaged in surface mining operations as an employee with wages as his sole compensation.

 

812.15040 Outdoor Advertising.
“Outdoor Advertising”: A structure, of any kind or character, erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any poster, bill, printing, painting, or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed, including statuary, for advertising purposes.

 

812.15045 Overburden.
“Overburden”: Soil, rock, or other materials that lie above a natural mineral deposit or in between deposits, before or after their removal by surface mining operations.

 

812.15050 Overlay Districts.
“Overlay Districts”: An overlay district is an area within which a set of standards and requirements are employed to deal with special physical characteristics such as floodplains or geologically hazardous areas. Overlay Districts are described in the City Code and are mapped and imposed in conjunction with and in addition to the underlying land use district.

 

812.15060 Owner.
“Owner”: A person or persons shown by the most current legally prepared document that has been recorded by the City Engineer, City Surveyor, or County Recorder’s Office that transfers, grants, or imports total or partial ownership of a parcel.

 

 

CHAPTER 16 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “P”
812.16070 Parcel.
“Parcel”: A parcel is any real property described or created by map or deed. The term parcel shall also refer to a legally defined lot or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or under single control and considered a unit for purposes of development.

 

812.16075 Parcel Map.
“Parcel Map”: A parcel map as defined in California Government Code, Title 7, Division 2, Chapter 2, Article 3.

 

812.16080 Parcel, Original.
“Original Parcel”: Any improved or unimproved land shown on the latest City equalized assessment roll as a unit or contiguous units.

 

812.16085 Parcel, Remainder.
“Remainder Parcel”: A remainder parcel is that portion of an original lot or parcel which is not a part of the subdivision but, after recordation of the final or parcel map, may be sold, subject to the recordation of a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance. The designated remainder shall not be counted as a parcel for the purposes of determining whether a parcel map or final map is required.

 

812.16090 Parcel, Reserve.
“Reserve Parcel”: Refers to that strip of land not less than one foot wide for the purpose of regulating access to part width and dead-end streets until such time as the streets may be completed or extended.

 

812.16095 Park and Ride.
“Park and Ride”: A voluntary system where participants drive to a central location in order to carpool or gain access to public transportation to another location.

 

812.16100 Parking Area, Public.
“Public Parking Area”: An open area, other than a street, used for the temporary parking of automobiles and available for public use, whether free, for compensation, or as an accommodation for clients, customers, or employees.

 

812.16105 Parking Space, Automobile.
“Automobile Parking Space”: Space within a public or private parking area or a building for the temporary parking or storage of one automobile.

 

812.16106 Parolee, Federal.
“Federal Parolee”: An individual convicted of a federal crime, sentenced to a United States federal prison, and who received conditional and revocable release in the community under the supervision of a Federal parole officer. (Added by Ord. 247 § 13, 2005)

 

812.16107 Parolee Home.
“Parolee Home”: Any residential structure or unit, whether owned and/or operated by an individual or for-profit or non-profit entity, which houses between two (2) to six (6) parolees (either Federal, State Adult, or Youth Authority), unrelated by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, in exchange for monetary or non-monetary consideration given and/or paid by the parolee and/or any individual or public or private entity on behalf of the parolee. (Added by Ord. 247 § 14, 2005)

 

812.16108 Parolee, State Adult.
“State Adult Parolee”: An individual who is serving a period of supervised community custody, as defined in Penal Code Section 3000, following a term of imprisonment in a state prison, and who is under the jurisdiction of the California Department of Corrections, Parole and Community Services Division. (Added by Ord. 247 § 15, 2005)

 

812.16109 Parolee, Youth Authority.
“Youth Authority Parolee”: An adult or juvenile individual sentenced to a term in the California Youth Authority and who received conditional and revocable release in the community under the supervision of a Youth Authority parole officer. (Added by Ord. 247 § 16, 2005)

 

812.16110 Permittee.
“Permittee”: Any person undertaking development activities upon a site pursuant to a permit granted by the City.

 

812.16115 Person.
“Person”: Any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, company, joint stock association, corporation, estate, trust, organization, business, business trust, public agency, school district, the State of California and its political subdivisions or instrumentalities, receiver, syndicate, or any group or combination thereof, acting as a unit, including any trustee, receiver, or assignee.

 

812.16117 Personal Communication Service.
“Personal communication service” means digital low-power, high frequency commercial wireless radio communication technology that has the capacity for multiple communication services and the routing of calls to individuals, regardless of location. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2(part), 2001)

 

812.16120 Phase.
“Phase”: Any contiguous part or portion of a single unified development project which is developed as a unit in the same time period.

 

812.16125 Planning Agency.
“Planning Agency”: The Planning Agency is a reviewing authority with the powers to and charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on land use application and to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove land use applications. The Planning Agency of the City of Yucaipa may be the City Council, the Planning Commission, the City Planner or designee, and, in some instances, the City Engineer, the Building Official, or other City Department Head designated by the Community Development Director as specified in Division 2 of this Code. The Planning Agency of the City of Yucaipa shall act as and have the powers, privileges, responsibilities, authority, and limitations either imposed or granted by State law and/or this Code for implementation of the provisions of the City Code, when such are granted to one of the following reference terms: Advisory Agency, Reviewing Authority, Approving Agency, Responsible Agency, Responsible Authority, Enforcement Agency, Reviewing Agency, Lead Agency, and decision-making body.

 

812.16130 Planning Officer.
“Planning Officer”: The Planning Officer is the City Planner, Director of Planning, Community Development Director, or an authorized designee. For the purposes of the Government Code, the Planning Officer is the City Planner.

 

812.16135 Planned Development.
“Planned Development”: A large, integrated development consisting of residential, commercial, or industrial uses or a mixture of such uses and associated ancillary uses and structures that is situated on one or more contiguous parcels or noncontiguous parcels separated solely by a road or other right-of-way or easement, and that is planned and developed as a unified project within a single develop-

 

 

ment operation or series of development operations in accordance with a detailed comprehensive development plan.

 

812.16140 Plant, Native.
“Native Plan”: A native plant is any tree, shrub, bulb or plant or part thereof, except its fruit, indigenous to the State of California which is growing wild. These plants do not include commercial nursery stock or planted landscaping, including those trees planted and/or growing outside their normal habitat, except where such plants have been transplanted in accordance with the provisions of Title 8, Division 11.

 

812.16145 Plant Expert, Native.
“Native Plant Expert”: A biologist, an arborist certified by the Western Chapter of the International Society of Arborists, or a person certified by the City Planner.

 

812.16150 Policies.
“Policies”: Statements, more specific than goals, which are guides for decision-making, imply commitments to goals, and define directions for action toward fulfillment of these goals.

 

812.16155 Pond or Reservoir.
“Pond or Reservoir”: A naturally occurring or artificially created body of water (impounded above or below surface level) with a surface coverage of less than one acre and a depth of one foot or more.

 

812.16157 Pre-existing Towers and Pre-existing Antenna.
“Pre-existing towers and pre-existing antenna” means any tower or antenna for which a building permit or conditional use permit has been properly issues prior to the effective date of this ordinance, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2(part), 2001)

 

812.16160 Pre-Zone.
“Pre-Zone”: The process by which a City or County determines the actual future land use districts for specified parcels of land before these parcels are annexed to the City.

 

812.16165 Premature Development.
“Premature Development”: The building or construction of new projects in areas usually outside City limit boundaries or in areas where necessary public facilities cannot economically be provided by City or County jurisdictions.

 

812.16168 Primary Use.
“Primary Use”: A primary, principal, or main use is the use that occupies the majority of the subject property, for example, a single family dwelling located in a residential tract.

 

812.16169 Private Viewing Area.
“Private Viewing Area” means an area or areas in a Sexually-Oriented Business designed to accommodate no more than five (5) or less patrons or customers for purposes of viewing or watching a performance, picture, show, film, videotape, slide, movie, or other presentation. No private viewing areas shall be established, maintained, or authorized, and there shall be no doors, curtains, stalls, or other enclosures creating a private viewing area. (Amended by Ord. 151 § 7, 1996)

 

812.16170 Property Owners’ Association.
“Property Owners’ Association”: A private organization composed of property owners of a single unified project which may own common property and shall be responsible for the maintenance and management of commonly-owned property.

 

812.16175 Public Building.
“Public Building”: A structure used for public assembly purposes in conjunction with an institutional use.

 

812.16180 Public Facilities.
“Public Facilities”: Any civic or service-oriented facility available to the general public such as schools, fire protection, water and sewering, rapid or mass transit routes, public golf courses, libraries, public health centers, etc.

 

812.16185 Public Improvements.
“Public Improvements”: Includes traffic controls, streets, roads, highways, freeways, bridges, overcrossings, street interchanges, flood control or storm drain facilities, sewer facilities, water facilities, lighting facilities, and any other service and/or infrastructure improvement that is publicly maintained and operated by a public agency and/or quasi-public agency, excepting utilities and common carriers.

 

812.16190 Public Way.
“Public Way”: Includes streets, highway, avenue, boulevard, parkway, road, lane, walk, alley, channel, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, public easement, public right-of-way, and other ways in which a public agency has a proprietary right.

 

 

CHAPTER 17 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “Q”
812.17005 Quality Control Engineer.
“Quality Control Engineer”: A quality control engineer is a registered civil engineer working under a contract with the City who is responsible to the City to assure compliance by the developer with the conditions of approval adopted by the City. This definition does not include the civil engineer responsible for professional inspection as required by the Uniform Building Code.

 

 

CHAPTER 18 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “R”
812.18005 Rare or Endangered Species.
“Rare or Endangered Species”: As used in the Development Code shall be as defined as in Section 15380 of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines.

 

812.18010 Reclamation, Mining.
“Mining Reclamation”: The term mining reclamation refers to the combined process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion, and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines. Mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and creates no danger to public health or safety. The process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other measures.

 

812.18015 Recreational Use.
“Recreational Use”: Public use of land for walking, hiking, skiing, riding, driving, picnicking, camping, swimming, boating, fishing, hunting or other outdoor games, or sports for which land or facilities are provided for public participation.

 

812.18020 Recreational Vehicle.
“Recreational Vehicle”: A recreational vehicle is a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer, with or without self-propelled motive power, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupation, and which may be moved upon a public highway without a special permit or chauffeur’s license or both without violating any provision of the California Vehicle Code. A “self-contained recreational vehicle” shall be a recreational vehicle with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance, refrigeration facilities, and a separate bathroom containing a water closet with a flush toilet, lavatory, and bath tub or shower. A self-contained recreational vehicle shall have adequate provisions for the sleeping, bathing, sanitation, food preparation, and eating by the number of people occupying such a self-contained recreational vehicle.

 

812.18025 Recreational Vehicle Park (R.V.P.).
“Recreational Vehicle Park”: Any area or tract of land, within an area where the land use district allows recreational uses and where one or more lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to owners or users of recreational vehicles for temporary occupancy.

 

812.18030 Recyclable Material.
“Recyclable Material”: Recyclable material is reusable material including, but not limited to, metals, glass, plastic, and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous material. Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Sections 25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4) of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

812.18035 Recycling Facility.
“Recycling Facility”: A recycling center is a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A “certified recycling facility” or “certified processor” is a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial, or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer. Recycling facilities may include the following:

 

(a)    Collection Facility

A “collection facility” is a center for the acceptance, by donation, redemption, or purchase, of recyclable materials from the public. Such a facility does not use power-driven processing equipment except as provided by this Title. Collection facilities may include the following:

 

(1)    Reverse vending machine(s).

 

(2)    A “small collection facility” which occupies an area of not more than 500 square feet and may include:

 

(A)   A mobile unit.

 

(B)   Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than 50 square feet.

 

(C)   Kiosk-type units, which may include permanent structures.

 

(D)   Unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials.

 

(3)    A “large collection facility” which may occupy an area of more than 500 square feet and may include permanent structures.

 

(b)    Processing Facility

 

(1)    A “processing facility” is a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable material. Processing means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user’s specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Processing facilities include the following:

 

(A)   A “light processing facility” occupies an area of under 45,000 square feet of gross collection, processing, and storage area and has up to an average of two outbound truck shipments per day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding, and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers.

 

(B)   A “heavy processing facility” is any processing facility other than a light processing facility.

 

(c)    Reverse Vending Machine(s)

 

(1)    A “reverse vending machine” is an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to, aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and cartons, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container’s redemption value as determined by the State. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically, provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all three container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary.

 

        A “bulk reverse vending machine” is a reverse vending machine that is larger than 50 square feet, is designed to accept more than one container at a time, and will pay by weight instead of by container.

 

(d)    Mobile Recycling Unit

        A “mobile recycling unit” is an automobile, truck, trailer, or van licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. The term “mobile recycling center” also refers to the bins, boxes, or containers transported by trucks, vans, or trailers and used for the collection of recyclable materials.

 

812.18040 Rehabilitation.
“Rehabilitation”: Rehabilitation means the restoration of deteriorated structures, neighborhoods, and public facilities. It may involve repair, renovation, conversion, expansion, remodeling, reconstruction, or any combination thereof.

 

812.18045 Related Land Use.
“Related Land Use”: A related land use is a land use that is supportive of the predominant land use of an area. For example, a neighborhood commercial center is a supportive use in the residential land use category.

 

812.18050 Residential Care Facility, Large.
“Large Residential Care Facility”: Any State-licensed facility, place, site, or building, that provides care, services, or treatment in a community residential setting for seven or more individuals, who are not living together as a single housekeeping unit. (Added by Ord. 345 § 7, 2016)

 

812.18053 Residential Care Facility, Small.
“Small Residential Care Facility”: Any State-licensed facility that provides care, services, or treatment in a community residential setting for six or fewer persons, not including the licensee or facility staff, and which is required by State law to be treated as a single housekeeping unit for zoning purposes. (Added by Ord. 345 § 8, 2016)

 

812.18055 Residential Development.
“Residential Development”: A project containing one or more residential dwelling units, including mobilehomes, or a subdivision of land for the purpose of constructing one or more residential dwelling units.

 

812.18057 Responsible Person.
“Responsible Person”: For the purposes of Erosion Control, a responsible person is any person who creates a condition which may lead to accelerated erosion. If a specific person cannot be identified, the owner of the land where such a condition exists shall be considered the responsible person. (Amended by Ord. 345 § 6, 2016)

 

812.18060 Retail Sale.
“Retail Sale”: A retail sale is a sale of commodities or goods for personal household or farm consumption directly to the ultimate consumer. Such sales are normally in small quantities and may include the rendering of services incidental to and supportive of the sale of such merchandise. (Amended by Ord. 345 § 6, 2016)

 

812.18065 Reversion to Acreage.
“Reversion to Acreage”: The process by which subdivided real property may be reverted to acreage.

 

812.18070 Reviewing Authority.
“Reviewing Authority”: Person, body, or agency authorized to render land use decisions or provide technical recommendations to the Planning Agency.

 

812.18075 Road or Roadway.
“Road or Roadway”: An open way for vehicular traffic.

 

812.18080 Road Easement.
“Road Easement”: Any property which is reserved or in general use for road purposes to provide access for the public to otherwise inaccessible parcels of land, provided that such easements are not included in the definition herein of “street.”

812.18085 Road System.
“Road System”: The term road system refers to the classification of streets and highways by their diverse functions and design. The following is the commonly used hierarchy of streets and highways for planning purposes.

 

(a)    Local Street: A roadway allowing access to abutting land, serving local traffic only.

 

(b)    Collector: A street used by traffic to travel from local streets to secondary or major highways; it usually allows direct access to abutting properties.

 

(c)    Emergency Access Route: A two-lane street of high standards, designed, constructed, and specifically identified as an emergency access route to serve as a collector or distributor of neighborhood traffic and as an alternative access route in an emergency situation.

 

(d)    Major Arterial: A road or thoroughfare which serves through traffic movement across urban areas, subject to controlled access from properties fronting on the right-of-way; intersecting streets are subject to appropriate spacing.

 

(e)    Secondary Highway: A street serving traffic from collector streets and major highways which provides for traffic movement to and from traffic generators and attractors; the street is subject to controlled access from the properties fronting on the right-of-way; intersecting streets are subject to appropriate spacing.

 

(f)    Major Highway: A street or thoroughfare which serves through traffic movement across urban areas or to major traffic generators and attractors; it is subject to controlled access from properties fronting on the right-of-way; intersecting streets are subject to appropriate spacing.

 

(g)    Mountain Secondary Highway: A controlled access, moderate speed, two-lane highway, designed and constructed to accommodate high volumes of intercommunity traffic.

 

(h)    Mountain Expressway: A limited access, high speed, four-lane highway, designed and constructed to accommodate large volumes of intercommunity traffic; it connects intensely developed areas and points of interest.

 

(i)     Freeway: A multilane highway with full grade separation (i.e., intersections are separated by under or overpasses), median strips, and fencing or landscaping strips along the sides; it basically services inter-City and interstate traffic.

 

812.18090 Roof-Mounted.
“Roof-Mounted” means to be mounted above the eave line of a building. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2, 2001)

 

812.18095 Rumpus or Recreation Room.
“Rumpus or Recreation Room”: A single room in a main building or in any accessory building, designed or used exclusively for recreational purposes by the occupants or guests of the occupants of the premises.

 

812.18100 Runoff.
“Runoff”: The movement of water over the ground surface.

 

 

CHAPTER 19 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “S”
812.19005 Schools, Elementary and High.
“Elementary and High Schools”: Elementary schools and high schools are institutions of learning which offer instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools by the Education Code of the State of California. High schools include Junior and Senior High Schools.

 

812.19010 Screening.
“Screening”: The use of landscaping, earth, fences, walls, trees, shrubs, or other materials for visual, background, noise, or sun exposure control.

 

812.19015 Scrap Metal Processing Facility.
“Scrap Metal Processing Facility”: Any establishment or place of business which is maintained, used, or operated solely for the processing and preparing of scrap metals for remelting by steel mills and foundries.

 

812.19020 Section.
(a)    “Section”: The term “section” refers to a section of the City Code, unless in reference to some other statute, ordinance, chapter, division, or title which is specified. City Code section numbers are established as follows: the first digit refers to the Title, the second digit refers to the Division, then a decimal point, the next two digits refers to the chapter, the next two digits refer to the article (if any), all subsequent digits are unique and refer to an individual section (e.g., this Section 812.19020 refers to Title 8, Division 12, Chapter 19, and 020 is the unique individual section number). Further subdivisions of a City Code Section are identified by the following hierarchical outline of parenthetically enclosed symbols.

 

(a)    First Level - lower case letters or double lower case letters if more than 26 entries [e.g., (aa)]

 

(1)    Second Level - lower case numbers

 

(A)   Third Level - uppercase letters or double upper case letters if more than 26 entries [e.g., (AA)]

 

(I)    Fourth Level - upper case Roman Numerals

 

(i)     Fifth Level - lower case Roman Numerals

 

(b)    “Section” may also refer to the survey term regarding the subdivision of a Township into 36 equal parts, each of which is approximately 640 acres.

 

812.19025 Security Quarters.
“Security Quarters”: The term security quarters refers to the temporary residential occupancy of a dwelling unit, commercial coach, or travel trailer utilized to provide temporary quarters to security personnel hired to guard part or all of the property on which the security quarters are located as an accessory use. Security quarters are always temporary uses and not always in a dwelling unit, whereas Caretaker Housing is always in a permanent dwelling unit. Both such uses are subject to appropriate City permits.

 

812.19030 Sediment.
“Sediment”: Eroded earth material that is carried by run-off and/or deposited in a stream, drainage course, natural water course, lake, or other area.

 

812.19031 Semi-Nude.
“Semi-Nude”: A state of dress in which clothing, including supporting straps or devices, covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast. (Ord. 151 § 9, 1996)

 

812.19035 Seismic Safety Hazard Areas
“Seismic Safety Hazard Areas”: A seismic safety hazard are is an area where a potential hazard exists due to ground rupture from earthquakes. Seismic safety hazard areas encompass active or potentially active faults within the City, including Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones. Hazard area boundaries extend approximately 660 feet on each side of known active or potentially active faults.

 

812.19040 Service Station.
“Service Station”: Any building, structure, premises, or other place used primarily for the retail sale and dispensing of motor fuels or oils, the retail sale of lubricants, tires, batteries, and other automobile accessories, and the installation and servicing of such lubricants, tires, batteries, and other automobile accessories.

 

812.19045 Setback, Street.
“Street Setback”: See “Yard, Front” and “Yard, Side Street.”

 

812.19050 Setback Line, Street.
“Setback Line, Street”: A street setback line is a line which defines the depth of the required street setback, front yard, or side yard, or side street where said yard or yards abut a street. Said street setback line shall be parallel or concentric with the street right-of-way line.

 

812.19055 Sewage Disposal Area.
“Sewage Disposal Area”: An area utilized for the holding, leaching, and percolation of sewage wastes, including an area that would provide a 100% expansion of such a leaching and percolation field for future use.

 

812.19060 Sexual Activities, Specified.
“Specified Sexual Activities” shall include the following:

 

(a)    The fondling or other intentional touching of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts.

 

(b)    Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.

 

(c)    Masturbation, actual or simulated.

 

(d)    Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence.

 

(e)    Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (a) through (d) above.

(Ord. 151 § 9, 1996)

 

812.19061 Sexually-Oriented Business.
“Sexually-Oriented Business”: Any business where employees or patrons expose “specified anatomical areas” or engage in or simulate “specified sexual activities,” or any business which offers to its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”

 

(Ord. 151 § 9, 1996)

 

812.19065 Shall.
“Shall”: A mandatory provision, regulation, or specification.

 

812.19070 Shopping Center.
“Shopping Center”: A shopping center is two or more business establishments under a single ownership, unified control, or designated as a unit located on a single parcel or combination of contiguous parcels having a minimum frontage of 150 feet.

 

812.19075 Shrub.
“Shrub”: Any woody, perennial plant having multiple stems and bearing foliage from the ground up, commonly maintained at less than eight and more than two feet in height when fully grown, adaptable to trimming, shaping, and pruning without injury to the plant itself.

 

812.19080 Sign.
“Sign”: A sign is any words, letters, numerals, emblems, designs, or other marks shown on any flag, card, cloth, paper, metal, painted surface, glass, wood, plaster, stone, or other device of any kind or character by which anything is made known and used to attract attention. Signs are subdivided into four basic categories (i.e., primary, accessory, directional, and temporary) and may take many forms (e.g., freestanding, monument, wall, roof, projecting walkway, display, etc.). Also, signs are located individually or in clusters (e.g., shopping center complex). The following definitions clarify the differences between these categories and types.

 

(a)    “Primary Sign”: A primary sign is a sign which is allowed only in certain specified land use districts as an independent use of the property not dependent upon the location of another structure or use. Such signs often advertise or identify a business, function, establishment, or product at a location other than the property on which such business is located or such product is manufactured or sold. Such signs may advertise political viewpoints, political campaigns, and other noncommercial messages.

 

(b)    “Accessory Sign”: An accessory sign is a sign which is allowed only in conjunction with another use as an accessory use. Such signs often advertise or identify a commodity, service, business, or profession which is sold, produced, conducted, or offered as one of the major functions of the primary use on the same site. Such signs may advertise political viewpoints, political campaigns, and other noncommercial messages. Such signs may also advertise any commercial message.

 

(c)    “Directional Signs”: Signs which provide directional or traffic flow information:

 

(1)    “Public Directional Signs”: A public directional sign is a sign containing directional information about public places owned or operated by Federal, State, or local governments or their agencies. Also included are historic, cultural, scientific, and educational signs, signs relating to publicly owned natural phenomena, publicly owned or operated areas of natural scenic beauty, and areas naturally suited for outdoor recreation, deemed to be in the interest of the traveling public.

 

(d)    “Temporary Signs”: Signs which provide temporary information and/or directions; such signs often are subject to the issuance of a Temporary Use Permit and often provide information regarding residential developments, political candidates, or issues and real estate signs.

 

(e)    “Free-Standing Signs”: A free-standing sign is a single or multi-faced sign that is not attached to any building or structure. Said sign may be located no closer than one foot from any interior property line and from the ultimate right-of-way of any street or highway adjoining the lot on which the sign is located; provided, however, that when a free-standing sign is within a front or street side yard setback, the sign shall be constructed in such a manner so as to provide an open space of at least eight feet in height from grade.

 

(f)    “Monument Signs”: A monument sign is a single- or double-faced sign which is designed and constructed as part of and placed on a monument base. Monument signs shall be positioned so that the sign will not interfere with a driver’s line of sight and shall be no closer than one foot away from the ultimate right-of-way line and shall have a height no greater than that allowed for a wall or fence, unless otherwise specified in an applicable land use district.

 

(g)    “Wall Signs”: A wall sign is a single-faced sign which is in any manner affixed to any exterior wall of a building or structure, the exposed face of which is in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall and which projects not more than 18 inches from the building or structure wall.

 

(h)    “Roof Signs”: A roof sign is a single-faced sign which is affixed to any roof of a building or structure. Roof signs shall not project above any ridge line or top of the parapet, whichever is greater, or project beyond the end of the building wall or edge of the roof.

 

(i)     “Projecting Signs”: A projecting sign is a single or double-faced sign attached to a building which extends in a perpendicular plane from the wall to which it is attached. Projecting signs shall maintain a clearance of eight feet from any underlying walkway or thoroughfare.

 

(j)     “Pedestrian Walkway Signs”: An accessory sign hung from or on a canopy and being oriented to pedestrian traffic.

(k)    “Display Signs”: A display sign is an accessory single-faced sign which is affixed to any type of display window or is adjacent to a display window. Display signs shall not exceed 25% of the window area on which the sign is placed.

 

(l)     “Complex Signs”: A complex sign is an accessory sign which is allowed in conjunction with a shopping center, business, or other complex which is under a single ownership or unified control having two or more establishments located on a single parcel or combination of contiguous parcels. A complex shall have a minimum street frontage of 150 feet.

 

(m)   “Complex Occupant Signs”: A complex occupant sign is an accessory sign which is allowed in conjunction with individual occupants within a shopping enter, business, or other complex. The complex occupant sign accessory use type shall also include the use of one five square foot pedestrian walkway sign for each occupant within the complex in addition to other sign configurations and sign area permitted by the land use district.

 

(n)    “Individual Signs” or “Accessory Business Signs”: Accessory signs which are allowed in conjunction with a nonresidential use not located within a complex (e.g., a shopping center).

 

812.19083 Single Housekeeping Unit.
“Single Housekeeping Unit”: The functional equivalent of a traditional family, whose members are an interactive group of persons jointly occupying a single dwelling unit, including the joint use of and responsibility for common areas, and sharing household activities and responsibilities (e.g., meals, chores, household maintenance, expenses, etc.) and where, if the unit is rented, all adult residents have chosen to jointly occupy and be responsible for the entire premises of the dwelling unit under a single written rental agreement or lease, and the makeup of the household occupying the unit is determined by the residents of the unit rather than the landlord or property manager. (Added by Ord. 345 § 9, 2016)

 

812.19085 Singular-Plural.
“Singular-Plural”: Words used in the singular number include the plural and words used in the plural number include the singular.

 

812.19090 Site.
“Site”: A parcel of land or contiguous parcels where land alterations, including grading, clearing, or construction are performed or proposed.

 

812.19093 Site Plan, Detailed.
“Detailed Site Plan”: A drawing, to scale, on one sheet of paper of the entire land parcel showing buildings, improvements, other physical features, and all dimensions.

 

812.19095 Site Planning.
“Site Planning”: A process to develop a plan that shows how a parcel of land may be developed, taking into consideration the natural and man-made characteristics of the parcel.

 

812.19097 Small Wireless Facility.
“Small Wireless Facility”: any small wireless facility as defined by the Federal Communications Commission in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6002(l), as such regulation may be amended or superseded. (Added by Ord. 388 § 2, 2020)

 

812.19110 Soil.
“Soil”: The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the immediate surface of the earth.

 

812.19115 Solar Energy System.
“Solar Energy System”: A solar energy system is any solar collector, solar device, or structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling; for domestic, recreational, therapeutic, or service water hearing; for the generation of electricity; for the production of process heat; and for the production of mechanical work. The term “solar energy system” shall include, but is not limited to, passive thermal systems, semipassive thermal systems, active thermal systems, and photovoltaic systems. This category does not include parabolic mirror and devices of a similar nature.

 

812.19120 Solid Wastes.
“Solid Wastes”: Any variety of waste, including household garbage, metal, glass, shattered concrete, bricks from demolished houses, radioactive wastes, and mining talus.

 

812.19125 Special District.
“Special District”: A Special District is a governmental entity created in a given area to provide services within that area. Special Districts can provide services such as water, sewers, fire protection, and parks and recreation.

 

812.19130 Stable, Private.
“Private Stable”: A detached accessory building for the keeping of horses, burros, or mules owned by the occupants of the premises and not for remuneration, hire, or sale.

 

812.19135 Stable, Public.
“Public Stable”: A stable other than a private stable for the keeping of horses, burros, or mules.

 

812.19140 State Geologist.
“State Geologist”: Individual holding office as provided in the California Pubic Resources Code, Section 677, Article 3, Chapter 2, Division 1.

 

812.19143 Stealth Facility.
“Stealth facility” means any wire telecommunication facility which is designed to blend into the surrounding environment, typically one that is located architecturally within a building or other concealing structure, and shall include any concealed antenna. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2, 2001)

 

812.19145 Stock Cooperative.
“Stock Cooperative”: A stock cooperative is a common interest development in which a corporation is formed or availed of primarily for the purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of years, improved real property, and all or substantially all of the shareholders of the corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the real property, title to which is held by the corporation. The owner’s interest in the corporation, whether evidenced by a share of stock, a certificate of membership, or otherwise, shall be deemed to be an interest in a common interest development and a real estate development for purposes of Subdivision (f), Section 25100 of the California Corporations Code. In a stock cooperative, both the separate interest, as defined in paragraph (4) of Subdivision (1) of Section 1351 of Title 6 of Part 4 of Division 2 of the California Civil Code, and the correlative interest in the stock cooperative corporation, however designated, are interests in real property.

 

A “stock cooperative” includes a limited equity housing cooperative which is a stock cooperative that meets the criteria of Section 33007.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

812.19150 Story.
“Story”: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor immediately above it, or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and ceiling immediately above it.

 

812.19155 Story, Half.
“Half Story”: A story with at least two of its opposite sides meeting a sloping roof, no more than two feet above the floor of such story.

 

812.19160 Stream.
“Stream”: Any watercourse designated by a solid line or dash and three dots symbol on the largest scale of the United States Geological Survey map most recently published, or as indicated in the development permit when it has been field determined that a watercourse either:

 

 

(a)    Supports fish at any time of the year; or

 

(b)    Has a significant water flow after any rainstorm; or

 

 

 

(c)    Has a well-defined channel

 

812.19165 Street.
“Street”: Any public or private thoroughfare with a width of 20 feet or more, which affords a primary means of access to abutting property.

 

812.19170 Street Line.
“Street Line”: The boundary line between a street and abutting property.

 

812.19175 Structural Alterations.
“Structural Alterations”: Any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as the bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders.

 

812.19180 Structure.
“Structure”: Anything constructed, built, or installed by man, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, including, but not limited to, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead lines.

 

812.19185 Structure, Approved.
“Approved Structure”: A structure, paved area of impervious substance, or sewage disposal area which has been approved by the Building Official or the City Planner as an improvement of the site, and which complies with all codes, ordinances and regulations of the City of Yucaipa.

 

812.19190 Structure, Business or Industrial.
“Business or Industrial Structure”: An occupied, permanent building, attached to a permanent foundation, approved for such use under the Uniform Building Code, where one or more persons are employed on an eight-hour shift, at least five days per week.

 

812.19195 Structure Height.
“Structure Height”: Structure height is the altitude, measured in feet, of a structure from a line perpendicular to the base of the structure at ground level to the apex of the structure. This applies to those structures described in 87.0405(c). For all other buildings see “Building Height.”

 

812.19200 Subdivider.
“Subdivider”: A person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who proposes to divide, divides, or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for himself or for others, except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not “subdividers.”

 

812.19205 Subdivision.
“Subdivision”: The term subdivision shall refer to the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion of land thereof, shown on the latest equalized City assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing, whether immediate or future, except for leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property shall be considered as contiguous units even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements, or railroad rights-of-way. The term subdivision shall also include a condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, or a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the California Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units into a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the California Business and Professions Code. Any conveyance of land to or from a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, common carrier, or subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility or rights-of-way shall not be considered a division of land for the purpose of computing the number of parcels. As used in this section, “agricultural purposes” means the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock.

 

812.19210 Subsidence.
“Subsidence”: The sinking of the earth’s surface, usually due to mining, groundwater extraction, oil and gas withdrawal, earthquakes or other physical forces.

 

812.19215 Substandard Lot.
“Substandard Lot”: A unit of land, the area, width, or other characteristic of which fails to meet the requirements of the land use district in which it is located.

 

812.19220 Substandard Housing Unit.
“Substandard Housing Unit”: A dwelling unit which is either dilapidated or unsafe, thus endangering the health or safety of the occupant, or does not have adequate plumbing or heating facilities.

 

812.19221 Substantial or Significant Portion.
“Substantial” or “Significant Portion”: A percentage of its activities, space allocation, revenues, advertising targeting, stock in trade, floor or display space, business receipts, revenues, or other business undertakings as to indicate to a reasonable person that the sexually-oriented portion of the business is one of its important activities, though not necessarily its only or even primary activity; for this purpose, evidence that 33% or more of its revenues are derived from such sexually-oriented activities or materials, or that 33% or more if its interior floor space or display space is devoted to such sexually-oriented activities or materials, or that 33% or more of its actual stock in trade regularly displayed and immediately available for use, rental, purchase, viewing or perusal is comprised of such sexually-oriented materials, all as defined in Subsections (1) and (2) of Section 812.01040(b) of Division 12 of this Code, shall be evidence that a substantial or significant portion of the business is devoted to such uses. (Ord. 151 § 9, 1996)

812.19223 Supportive Housing.
“Supportive Housing” and “Supportive Housing Development”: Housing with no limit on length of stay, occupied by a person or persons with low incomes having one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided under the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the California Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated youth, families, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people, and that is linked to onsite or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. (Added by Ord. 296 § 11, 2010)

 

812.19225 Surface Mining Operations.
“Surface Mining Operations”: Surface mining operations are all, or any part of, the process involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or surface work incidental to an underground mine. Surface mining operations shall include, but are not limited to the following.

 

(a)    In-place distillation, retorting, or leaching

 

(b)    Production and disposal of mining waste

 

(c)    Prospecting and exploratory activities

 

 

 

CHAPTER 20 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “T”
812.20003 Temporary Wireless Communication Facility.
“Temporary wireless communication facility” means a wireless telecommunication facility that is kept portable or mobile and deployed while a permanent facility is under construction. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2(part), 2001)

 

812.20005 Tentative Map.
“Tentative Map”: A tentative map is a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvements of the proposed subdivision to include the street pattern, lot layout, easements which are to remain, and existing and proposed subdivision. The Tentative Map need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey of the property.

 

812.20010 Ten-Year Storm.
“Ten-Year Storm”: A ten-year storm is a storm of an intensity that would be exceeded on the average only once every ten years. The intensity of the storm shall be determined according to San Bernardino County Hydrology Manual. The duration of the storm used in runoff calculation shall be equivalent to the concentration time for the area which drains through the project.

 

812.20015 Thermal System, Active.
“Active Thermal System”: A system which utilizes solar devices thermally isolated from the living space to provide for collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for heating or cooling.

 

812.20020 Thermal System, Passive.
“Passive Thermal System”: A system which utilizes the structural elements of the building, and is not augmented by mechanical components, to provide for collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for heating or cooling.

 

812.20025 Thermal System, Semipassive.
“Semipassive Thermal System”: A system which utilizes the structure of a building and is augmented by mechanical components to provide for collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for heating or cooling.

 

812.20028 Tower.
“Tower” means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communications purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television towers, alternative towers structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and any support thereof. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2(part), 2001)

 

812.20030 Trailer Camp or Park.
“Trailer Camp or Park”: Any area or premises where space for house trailers is rented for compensation on a daily basis, or where free occupancy or camping is permitted to house-trailer owners or users, but not including automobile or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied house trailers are parked for inspection and sales.

 

812.20035 Trailer Coach.
“Trailer Coach”: A mobilehome, trailer, recreation trailer, travel trailer, camp car, or other vehicle with or without motive power, designed and constructed to travel on the public thoroughfare in accordance with the provisions of the California Motor Vehicle Code and designed or used for human habitation.

 

812.20040 Trailer, Travel.
“Travel Trailer”: A vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, which is designed or used for human habitation and for travel or recreational purposes, which does not exceed eight feet in width and 40 feet in length, and which may be moved upon a public highway without a special permit and/or chauffeur’s license without violating any provisions of the California Vehicle Code.

 

812.20041 Transfer of Ownership or Control of Sexually-Oriented Business.
“Transfer of Ownership or Control of Sexually-Oriented Business” shall include any of the following:

 

(a)    The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; or

 

(b)    The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or

 

(c)    The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. (Amended by Ord. 151 § 10, 1996)

 

812.20042 Transient Basis.
“Transient Basis”: A continuous period of four weeks or less. (Amended by Ord. 210 § 34, 2001)

 

812.20043 Transitional Housing.
“Transitional Housing” and “Transitional Housing Development”: Buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. (Added by Ord. 296 § 10, 2010)

 

812.20044 Transportable Treatment Unit.
“Transportable Treatment Unit”: Hazardous waste or groundwater contamination treatment works which are designed to be moved either intact or in modules and which are intended to be operated at a given location for a limited period of time. (Amended by Ord. 296 § 10, 2010)

 

812.20045 Transportation Facilities.
“Transportation Facilities”: Roads or bridges and the appurtenant improvements necessary for the safe and efficient movement of vehicular traffic including, but not limited to, the following: storm drains, culverts, drainage channels, and other drainage facilities necessary to drain roads; acquisition of right-of-way; signalization and other traffic controls; sidewalks; bikeways when they are within the ultimate right-of-way of a road or bridge.

 

812.20050 Transportation Facilities Plan, Local Area.
“Transportation Facilities Plan”: A Transportation Facilities Plan is a transportation plan adopted by the City Council for a particular transportation facilities area. Such a plan shall include a map of the area showing its boundaries, the location of the proposed Transportation Facilities, and an accompanying text which contains a description of all proposed Transportation Facilities which will be needed to serve new development within the boundaries of the Plan and the cost of constructing each proposed transportation facility within the boundaries of the plan. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, engineering studies, acquisition of rights-of-way, and construction of bridges, tunnels, roadways, traffic signals, and any other appurtenant Transportation Facilities. The plan shall also include a schedule of fees, a detailed description of the methods that will be utilized to finance the proposed Transportation Facilities, including any fee calculations needed, and a construction priority listing of the proposed Transportation Facilities.

 

812.20055 Transportation Right-of-Way.
“Transportation Right-of-Way”: The acquired right which an agency possesses to pass across and improve the lands of another for access purposes.

 

812.20060 Tree.
“Tree”: A tree is any woody perennial plant, normally having a single, elongated main stem or trunk bearing the foliage or crown, a formed crown, and generally with few or no branches on its lower part. For tree removal purposes, the term shall refer to a tree attaining somewhere in its natural or planted range a height of at least six feet and a diameter of not less than two inches, measured at average ground level.

 

812.20065 Tree, Damaged.
“Damaged Tree”: Any tree certified by a tree expert, as defined in this Code, which is damaged by insects, smog, fire, disease, or other natural or man-made causes (including, but not limited to, any artificial attachments such as wires or signs).

 

812.20070 Tree Expert.
“Tree Expert”: A California Registered Professional Forester, a County Agricultural Commissioner Biologist, an arborist certified by the Western Chapter of the International Society of Arborists, or a person certified by the City Planner for practice in the City of Yucaipa.

 

812.20075 Tree, Native.
“Native Tree”: Native trees are trees which grow or live naturally in the City of Yucaipa and surrounding area, including smog-resistant trees introduced as part of a reforestation program. This shall not be construed to mean orchards, commercial nursery stock, or planted landscaping. Trees planted and/or growing outside their normal habitat, except where such trees have been transplanted in accordance with the provisions of Title 8, Division 11, shall not be considered to be native trees.

 

 

812.20080 Tree Removal.
“Tree Removal”: Any intentional act which will cause a tree to die, including, but not limited to, acts which inflict damage upon root systems, bark, or other parts of the tree by fire, application of toxic substances, operation of equipment or machinery, changing the natural grade of land by excavation or filling the drip line area around the trunk, or to cut down, fell, push over, dig up, poison, burn, or severely prune, trim, or top, such that death of the tree results, or such that the tree is severely damaged and/or is destroyed in any manner, by any cause.

 

812.20085 Tree, Specimen.
“Specimen Tree”: Any tree with a root ball greater than a 20 gallon container.

 

812.20090 Truck Terminal.
“Truck Terminal”: A lot, lot area, or parcel of land used, designed, or maintained for the purpose of storing, parking, refueling, repairing, dispatching, servicing, or keeping motor trucks and associated equipment, together with those facilities necessary to service, dispatch, store, or maintain aforementioned vehicles and their cargos and crews.

 

 

CHAPTER 21 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “U”
812.21005 Unincorporated Communities.
“Unincorporated Communities”: The term unincorporated community refers to a definable urban area which is not legally a City, but has the physical characteristics of one. An unincorporated community does not have independent jurisdiction for land use planning within its boundaries.

 

812.21030 Uniform Building Code.
“Uniform Building Code”: The currently adopted edition of the Uniform Building Code as published by the International Conference of Building Officials which regulates grading on private property.

 

812.21040 Urban Services.
“Urban Services”: The provision of water, gas, electricity, schools, recreational facilities, fire and police protection, waste disposal, circulation, and other services which are necessary for high intensity uses.

 

812.21050 Use.
“Use”: The terms use refers to the purpose for which the land or a building is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied or maintained. A primary, principal, or main use is the use that occupies the majority of the subject land, a building, business production, or activity as opposed to an accessory use. See Accessory Use.

 

812.21060 Utility Pole.
“Utility Pole”: A wood or metal pole that is located within the public right-of-way or a private utility easement that supports overhead utility lines, including, but not limited to, electric, telephone, communication, street lighting, and cable television. Anchor poles that are used to stabilize “utility poles,” and that contain only support cables, are not considered to be “utility poles” for the purposes of undergrounding utility lines. (Added by Ord. 253 § 3, 2006)

 

 

CHAPTER 22 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “V”
812.22010 Vehicular-Access Rights.
“Vehicular-Access Rights”: The right of access of owners or occupants of abutting lands to a public road or way, other than as pedestrians.

 

812.22015 Vehicles, Operative.
“Operative Vehicles”: A new or used vehicle which is self-propelled or capable of being self-propelled with the installation of minor parts (e.g., batteries, tires, plugs).

 

812.22020 Vested Right (Mining and Reclamation).
“Vested Right”: For the purpose of mining and reclamation, a person shall be deemed to have such vested rights, if, prior to January 1, 1976, he or she has, in good faith and in reliance upon a permit (if such permit or other authorization was required and was in compliance with City regulations), diligently commenced surface mining operations and incurred substantial liabilities for work and materials necessary therefore. Expenses incurred in obtaining the enactment of an ordinance in relation to a particular operation or the issuance of a permit shall not be deemed liabilities for work or materials.

 

812.22025 Vesting Tentative Map.
“Vesting Tentative Map”: A “tentative map” for a residential subdivision, as defined in the City Code, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map”.

 

 

CHAPTER 23 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “W”
812.23005 Watercourse.
“Watercourse”: Any natural or man-made channel where water is concentrated or collected from a tributary drainage area.

 

812.23010 Wildland.
“Wildland”: Timber, range, watershed, and brush lands not under cultivation and in which development is essentially nonexistent; usually rugged open space terrain.

 

812.23015 Wind Energy System.
“Wind Energy System”: A system which utilizes wind energy to pump a fluid or gas, or to drive a mechanical work, or to generate electricity.

 

812.23017 Wireless Telecommunication Facility.
“Wireless telecommunication facility” means a facility consisting of any commercial antenna, monopole, microwave dish and or other related equipment necessary to the transmission and or reception of cellular, personal communication service, and/or data radio communications, and which has been granted a certificate of public convenience and necessity, or a wireless registration number by the California Public Utilities Commission, or otherwise provides wireless communication services to the public. (Amended by Ord. 204 § 2(part), 2001)

 

812.23020 Wholesale.
“Wholesale”: The term wholesale refers to the sale of commodities or goods to others for resale and not normally to the ultimate consumer. Such sales can normally employ warehouses, open enclosures, and office space for the assembly, storage, distribution, and display of merchandise for large quantity sales to community or regional retailers, manufacturers, and agricultural, institutional and professional uses. Such sales may include the rendering of services incidental to and supportive of the sale of such merchandise.

 

CHAPTER 24 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “X”
CHAPTER 25 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “Y”
812.25005 Yard.
“Yard”: An open space on a lot or parcel of land, other than a court, unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground upward.

 

812.25010 Yard, Front.
“Front Yard”: An area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line or the existing or future street right-of-way and a street setback line parallel thereto.

 

812.25015 Yard, Side Street.
“Side Street Yard”: An area extending from the required front yard or, where there is no required front yard, from the front lot line to the rear lot line, and from the side street lot line, or the existing or future side street right-of-way (whichever is greater) to a street setback line parallel thereto.

 

812.25020 Yard, Interior Side.
“Interior Side Yard”: An area extending from the required front yard or, where there is no required front yard, from the front lot line to the required rear yard or, where there is no required rear yard, to the rear lot line and from the interior side lot line to a setback line parallel thereto.

 

812.25025 Yard, Rear.
“Rear Yard”: An area extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and a setback line parallel thereto.

 

CHAPTER 26 DEFINITIONS BEGINNING WITH “Z”
812.26005 Zone District.
“Zone District”: See Land Use District

 

812.26015 Zoo.
“Zoo”: A zoological garden or other collection of wild, exotic, or dangerous animals which are raised, bred, trained, and/or maintained for regular public display and exhibition on the site.

