YUBA CITY MUNICIPAL CODE - COUNTY OF SUTTER STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
____________ 
Adopted January 6, 1964 
Republished in 2016 
____________ 
  
> 
OFFICIALS AT REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
John Dukes 
Mayor 
____________ 
John Buckland 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Stanley Cleveland, Jr. 
Preet Didbal 
Kash Gill 
City Council 
____________ 
Steven Kroeger 
City Manager 
____________ 
Timothy Hayes 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Terrel Locke 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
____________ 
John Buckland 
Mayor 
____________ 
Stanley Cleveland, Jr. 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Preet Didbal 
John Dukes 
Kash Gill 
City Council 
____________ 
Steven Kroeger 
City Manager 
____________ 
Timothy Hayes 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Terrel Locke 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Yuba City, California. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1964 Code, as adopted January 6, 1964, and supplemented by Coded Systems LLC through March 18, 2014, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System and Construction 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code has been retained as established by California Code Service at codification, as set forth below. As the Code style has been modified, provisions governing grammar, punctuation and underlining have been omitted, but those pertaining to capitalization, definitions, and form have also been reproduced below: 
SUGGESTED GUIDELINES FOR CODE AMENDMENTS 
The following rules of construction were used in the preparation of this Code and are suggested for use when setting forth provisions amending the Code in amendatory ordinances: 
Numbering sections, using Section 9-3.411 as an example: 
"9" is the number of the title; 
"3" is the number of the chapter; 
"4" is the number of the article; and 
"11" indicates the 11th section in the article. 
Where the provisions are set forth in chapter form and no articles are used, the "4" is omitted, and the section number would be 9-3.11. 
Numbering subsections: 
(a)    
(1)    
(i)    
(ii)    
(iii)    
(aa)    
(ab)    
(ac)  through (az); (ba) through (bz), etc. 
(iv)    
(v)    
(2)    
(3)    
(b)    
(c)    
Capitalization : 
1.  Capitalize only the first word in a section heading unless it contains the word "City," "County," "Council," "Board," "State," or the title of a document or officer or employee. 
2.  The same words in the text provisions should be capitalized. 
3.  Capitalize the words "title," "chapter," "article," and "section" only where they refer to a specific title, chapter, article, or section. Example: "… set forth in Section 9-3.411 of Article 4 of Chapter 3 of Title 9 of this Code." 
4.  Capitalize the word "Code" wherever it appears, whether it refers to the Plumbing Code, Building Code, or Municipal Code. Also capitalize the word "Appendix." 
5.  Capitalize the words "ordinance" and "resolution" only where they refer to specific ordinances or resolutions, such as Resolution No. 341. 
Definitions: 
An important aspect of ordinance preparation and Code standardization and conformity is the use of standard definitions at the beginning of the chapter or article where they will be used. Refer to the general definitions set forth in Section 1-3.13 of Chapter 3 of Title 1 of this Code before inserting definitions in an ordinance amending the Code. There is no legal necessity to define a word or term in such ordinance if the definition of the word or term is contained in the general definitions and the definition is substantially the same as the one being considered for inclusion in new provisions. 
The words "shall" and "may" are defined in Section 1-3.13 of Chapter 3 of Title 1 of this Code. These words should be used m place of "must" and "should" which are not defined. 
Form: 
1.  The amendatory language of ordinances amending this Code will be printed in the Code as the language appears in the amending ordinance except for typographical errors and editing to coordinate the language to these rules of construction. 
2.  When preparing amendments to the Code it is helpful to think of the Code as one long ordinance, a portion of which is to be amended. 
3.  Be sure that new article and chapter numbers being added have not been used for recently adopted provisions not yet reprinted. Pending the receipt of reprinted pages, ink notations should be made in the Code showing the sections amended, added, and repealed and new article and chapter provisions adopted, with their respective effective dates. 
4.  Sections setting forth penalties and violations do not need to be included in chapter or article provisions if the penalties and violations desired are standard as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. If special violation provisions are necessary for new provisions being added to the Code, the punishment provisions may refer to the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 by using the language "set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code." 
5.  New sections may be added in logical order to an article or chapter by using the previous section number with a .1 added to the new section. Example: When a new section is to follow Section 9-3.411, the new section would be numbered Section 9-3.411.1. New articles may be added in logical order in a chapter by using the previous article number with a .5 added to the new article. Example: When a new article is to follow Article 4, the new article would be numbered Article 4.5. The section numbers within a new article added to Chapter 3 of Title 9 would be Sections 9-3.451, 9-3.452, and so forth. Subsequently, if necessary, other articles, such as Article 4.3, with Sections 9-3.431, 9-3.432, or Article 4.6, with Sections 9-3.461, 9-3.462, can be added. 
Note that the first sections in articles and chapters are numbered with .01 or .101, rather than .00 or .100. 
6.  Following are examples of lead paragraphs of ordinances to accomplish the following purposes: 
(a)  To amend a section: "Section 9-3.411 of Article 4 of Chapter 3 of Title 9 of the … Code is hereby amended to read as follows:" 
(b)  To add a section: "Article 4 of Chapter 3 of Title 9 of the … Code is hereby amended by adding Section 9-3.411.1 thereto to read as follows:" 
(c)  To amend and add sections: Use the two previous examples in two separate sections of the ordinance. 
(d)  To amend a subsection: "Subsection (c) of Section 9-3.411 of Article 4 of Chapter 3 of Title 9 of the … Code is hereby amended to read as follows:" 
(e)  To add a chapter: "Title 9 of the … Code is hereby amended by adding Chapter 4 thereto to read as follows:" 
(f)  To add an article: "Chapter 3 of Title 9 of the … Code is hereby amended by adding Article 4.5 thereto to read as follows:" 
(g)  To repeal provisions: 
(i)  "Subsection (c) of Section 9-3.411 of Article 4 of Chapter 3 of Title 9 of the … Code is hereby repealed." 
ii)  "Section 9-3.411 of Article 4 of Chapter 3 of Title 9 of the … Code is hereby repealed." 
(iii)  "Article 4.5 of Chapter 3 of Title 9 of the … Code is hereby repealed." 
(iv)  "Chapter 4 of Title 9 of the … Code is hereby repealed." 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Dennis Sinnett, Vice President, and Stephanie Benesh and April McDermid, Editors, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Terrel Locke for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Yuba City, California. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Yuba City, California. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Yuba City, California. 2016. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE NO. 496 
An Ordinance of the City of Yuba City, California, Adopting the Yuba City Municipal Code, Together with the Following Secondary Codes Therein Adopted by Reference, To Wit: That Certain Code Entitled "Fire Prevention Code", Edition of 1956, Recommended by the National Board of Fire Underwriters, Save and Except Such Portions Thereof as Are Deleted, Modified, or Amended by the Provisions of Said Yuba City Municipal Code; That Certain Code Entitled "Uniform Building Code", Edition of 1961, and That Certain Code Entitled "Uniform Building Code Standards", Edition of 1961, and That Certain Code Entitled "Uniform Housing Code", Edition of 1958, as Adopted by the Pacific Coast Building Officials Conference, Save and Except Such Portions Thereof as Are Deleted, Modified, or Amended by the Provisions of Said Yuba City Municipal Code; That Certain Code Entitled "National Electric Code", Edition of 1959, Published by the National Board of Fire Underwriters, Save and Except Such Portions Thereof as Are Deleted, Modified, or Amended by the Provisions of Said Yuba City Municipal Code; and That Certain Code Entitled "Uniform Plumbing Code", Edition of 1955, Including Appendix A through Appendix F, Published by the Western Plumbing Officials Association, Save and Except Such Portions Thereof as Are Deleted, Modified, or Amended by the Provisions of Said Yuba City Municipal Code; Prescribing Certain Penalties for the Violation of the Provisions Thereof; and Repealing Certain Ordinances as Specified Therein. 
The Council of the City of Yuba City does ordain as follows: 
 
Sec. 1. - Adoption of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
That certain document entitled "Yuba City Municipal Code", including the Appendix thereto, three (3) copies of which have been filed and are on file in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection, together with the secondary codes therein adopted by reference, is hereby adopted by reference as a comprehensive ordinance Code for the City of Yuba City pursuant to the provisions of Article 2 of Chapter 1 of Part 1 of Division 1 of Title 5 of the Government Code of the State of California. Each and all of the provisions, terms, and penalties of said Code on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, incorporated herein, and made a part of this ordinance as if fully set forth in this ordinance.  
Sec. 2. - Repeals. 
Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance and in the Yuba City Municipal Code, all ordinances of the City of Yuba City in force upon the effective date of this ordinance are hereby repealed.  
Sec. 3. - Certain ordinances to remain in effect. 
Those certain ordinances of the City of Yuba City which are listed in Tables 2, 3, and 4 of the Appendix to the Yuba City Municipal Code shall not be repealed by this ordinance but shall remain in full force and effect. In addition to the foregoing, Ordinance Nos. 479 through 495 shall remain in full force and effect pending their codification and incorporation into the Yuba City Municipal Code following its adoption as modifications thereto, the incorporation and codification of said ordinances into said Code being hereby authorized and approved.  
Sec. 4. - Exceptions to repeals. 
No rights, obligations, duties, privileges, or encumbrances arising from any ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance relating to any of the following matters shall be affected by the repealing provisions of this ordinance or of the Yuba City Municipal Code: 
(a)  The public debt or the public credit; 
(b)  The establishment, naming, width, grade, construction, improvement, or vacation of a public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public property or facility; 
(c)  The acquisition or disposition of any interest in real or personal property; 
(d)  The annexation of territory; 
(e)  Any contract to which the City of Yuba City is a party or any contract inuring to the City's benefit; 
(f)  A municipal election; 
(g)  Any appropriation or expenditure of public funds; 
(h)  The levy or imposition of property taxes or fixing the tax rate; 
(i)  The levy of a special benefit assessment or the creation of a lien or debt against the owner of any property or said property; or 
(j)  The grant of any franchise, license, or right by the City, which franchise, license, grant, or power is legally in force and effect upon the effective date of this ordinance. Every such franchise, license, grant, or power shall expire as originally provided.  
Sec. 5. - Savings provisions. 
The repealing provisions of this ordinance or of the Yuba City Municipal Code shall not affect or impair any act done or right vested or approved, or any proceeding, suit, or prosecution had or commenced in any cause before such repeal shall take effect; but every such act done, or right vested or accrued, or proceeding, suit, or prosecution had or commenced shall remain in full force and effect to all intents and purposes as if the applicable provisions of the ordinance, or part thereof, so repealed had remained in force and effect. No offense committed and no liability, penalty, or forfeiture, either civilly or criminally incurred prior to the time when any such ordinance, or part thereof, shall be repealed or altered by said Code, shall be discharged or affected by such repeal or alteration; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties, or forfeitures shall be instituted and proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance, or part thereof, had not been repealed or altered.  
Sec. 6. - Violation of Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any requirement of the Yuba City Municipal Code. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of said Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of said Code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars, or by imprisonment in the City Jail or the County Jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of said Code is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. 
In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of said Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by this City, summarily abated, and each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.  
Sec. 7. - Publication and effective date. 
This ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days after its passage and adoption but before taking effect shall be published once in the Independent-Herald, a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the City of Yuba City and in the County of Sutter, within fifteen (15) days after the passage and adoption of said ordinance. 
Introduced and read at a regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Yuba City on the 16th day of December, 1963, and passed and adopted at a regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Yuba City on the 6th day of January, 1964, by the following vote: 
AYES: Councilmen: Rhodes, Tiner, Rose, McCune, and Mayor Hopper 
NOES: Councilmen: None 
ABSENT: Councilmen: None 
/s/   
      Kenneth H. Hopper, Mayor 	
 	 
ATTEST: s/Lewis A. Duncan, City Clerk 
(SEAL)  
TITLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
CHAPTER 1. - ADOPTION OF CODE 
 
Sec. 1-1.01. - Title; reference to Code. 
This Code shall be known as the "Yuba City Municipal Code." It shall be sufficient to refer to this Code as the Yuba City Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, or repealing this Code, or portions thereof, as an addition or amendment to, or a repeal of, the Yuba City Municipal Code, or a portion thereof.  
Sec. 1-1.02. - Authority. 
Except as otherwise herein or hereafter provided, this Code consists of all the regulatory, penal, and administrative laws of general application of the City of Yuba City, codified pursuant to the authority contained in Government Code tit. 5, div. 1, pt. 1, ch. 1, art. 2.  
Sec. 1-1.03. - Effective date. 
This Code shall take effect upon the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Code by reference.  
Sec. 1-1.04. - Effect of Code on past actions and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance of the City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of this Code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all vested rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.  
Sec. 1-1.05. - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within this Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code.  
Sec. 1-1.06. - Validity of Code. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional.  
Sec. 1-1.07. - Repeal of ordinances. 
All ordinances or portions of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Code are hereby repealed.  
Sec. 1-1.08. - Maintenance of Code. 
Not less than three copies of this Code shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk. At least three additional copies, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be maintained on file in his or her office as the official copies of the Code. Additional copies of the Code shall be distributed to the departments and divisions of the City as shall be prescribed by the City Manager. 
Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to this Code, or upon the repeal of any of its provisions, the City Clerk shall certify thereto and shall make an appropriate notation in the official volumes of this Code of the taking of such action, noting thereon the number and date of the ordinance pursuant to which such action is taken. 
Duly certified copies of each ordinance making changes in the Code shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk in books for such purpose, duly indexed for ready reference. 
At least quarterly the City Clerk shall cause the loose leaf pages of this Code in which changes have been made to be reproduced, including the notation as to the ordinance number and date pursuant to which such change is adopted, and distributed in order that the loose leaf copies of the Code, prepared for the use and convenience of the officers and employees of the City and the general public, may be brought up to date.  
Sec. 1-1.09. - Exclusions from Code. 
Ordinances relating to matters of a special or temporary nature only are excluded from this Code and are unaffected by the provisions of this Code.  
CHAPTER 2. - PENALTY PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-2.01. - Enforcement policy. 
The Council hereby states that the goal of enactment of any ordinance is to protect people and property. Therefore, the prime objective of Code enforcement is not to punish violators but rather to prevent violations and to insure the corrections of dangerous conditions before they can cause widespread damage to people and property. City officials shall strive to obtain willing compliance; therefore, education and guidance will be the prime services which are performed. The mechanism of penalty exists, but is to be used with reason and restraint. The amount of time allowed for compliance will depend upon the severity of the situation created by the violation as judged by the City official charged with enforcement. Compliance with the provisions of this Code shall be sought in an expeditious manner. 
(§ 2, Ord. 697, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-2.02. - Violations infractions. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful and constitute an infraction for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this Code or the provisions of any Code adopted by reference by this Code. Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this Code shall be punishable by: 
(a)  A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation; 
(b)  A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation of the same Code provisions within one year; and 
(c)  A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of the same Code provision within one year. 
Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Code, or the provisions of any Code adopted by reference by this Code, is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. 
In addition to the penalties provided by this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of any Code adopted by reference by this Code, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(§ 2; Ord. 697, eff. April 16, 1975; § 1, Ord. 26-92, eff. November 5, 1992)  
Sec. 1-2.03. - Certain violations misdemeanors. 
A violation of any of the following provisions shall constitute a misdemeanor and not an infraction: 
(a)  Section 1-5.09 of Chapter 5 of this title relating to a person violating his or her written promise to appear in court; and 
(b)  Section 4-11.01 of Chapter 11 of Title 4 relating to the discharge of firearms. 
Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Code shall be punishable by a fund of not more than $1,000, or be imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(§ 2, Ord. 697, eff. April 16, 1975; § 1, Ord. 26-92, eff. November 5, 1992)  
Sec. 1-2.04. - Prohibited acts. 
Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(§ 2, Ord. 697, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-2.05. - Imposition of penalty. 
The provisions of this Code which declare certain crimes to be punishable as therein mentioned devolve a duty upon the court authorized to pass sentence to determine and impose the punishment described. 
(§ 2, Ord. 697, eff. April 16, 1975.  
Sec. 1-2.06. - Determination of punishment. 
Whenever in this Code the punishment for a crime is left undetermined between certain limits, the punishment to be inflicted in a particular case shall be determined by the court authorized to pass sentence, within such limits as may be prescribed by this Code. 
(§2, Ord. 697, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-2.07. - Place of confinement. 
Every person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this Code determined to be a misdemeanor pursuant to the provisions of Section 1-2.03 of this chapter and sentenced to imprisonment shall  
Sec. 1-2.08. - Fees, charges, and taxes made a civil debt. 
The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax of any nature whatsoever imposed by any provision of this Code shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the City. An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any such delinquent or unpaid fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax, together with any penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by this Code. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be cumulative, and the use of an action to collect such an amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this Code or by law for the purpose of enforcing the provisions thereof. 
(§ 2, Ord. 697, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-2.09. - Use of prisoners for public works. 
Persons imprisoned for the violation of the provisions of this Code may be caused to perform work upon the public grounds, roads, streets, alleys, highways, firebreaks, fire roads, riding or hiking trails, or public buildings, or in such other places as are deemed advisable, for the benefit of the public. 
(§ 2, Ord. 697, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-2.10. - Supervision of prisoners during such work. 
Prisoners working on any such public works of the City shall be under the custody of the Police Chief and the supervision of the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director is hereby authorized and empowered to perform any and all acts necessary to carry out the provisions of Section 1-2.09 of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 697, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-2.11. - Repeal of existing penalty provisions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, or the provisions of any Code adopted by reference by this Code, the violation of any provisions of this Code shall be as set forth in Section 1-2.02 and Section 1-2.03 of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 697, eff. April 16, 1975)  
CHAPTER 3. - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 1-3.01. - Scope of chapter. 
Unless the provisions of the context otherwise specify, the general provisions, rules of construction, and definitions set forth in this chapter shall govern the construction of this Code. The provisions of this Code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice.  
Sec. 1-3.02. - Provisions construed as restatements and continuations. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing ordinances relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-3.03. - Tenure of officers preserved. 
All persons who, at the time this Code takes effect, hold office under any of the ordinances repealed by this Code, which offices are continued by this Code, shall continue to hold them according to their former tenure.  
Sec. 1-3.04. - Effect of headings. 
Title, chapter, article, and section headings contained in this Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, article, or section of this Code.  
Sec. 1-3.05. - Meaning of section and subsection. 
"Section" shall mean a section of this Code, unless some other source is specifically mentioned. "Subsection" shall mean a subsection of the section in which the term occurs, unless some other section is expressly mentioned.  
Sec. 1-3.06. - Reference to acts or omissions within the City. 
This Code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the City and to that territory outside the City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution of the State of California or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property.  
Sec. 1-3.07. - Acts by deputies. 
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise.  
Sec. 1-3.08. - Writing. 
Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement, or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.  
Sec. 1-3.09. - References to ordinances: application to amendments. 
Whenever any reference is made to an ordinance, the reference shall apply to such ordinance of the City unless otherwise specifically provided. Whenever any reference is made to any portion of this Code, or to any ordinances of the City, the reference shall apply to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made.  
Sec. 1-3.10. - Service of notices. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this Code, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically made in the Code, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at his or her last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the City or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the Post Office.  
Sec. 1-3.11. - Service of notices: proof. 
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the City or by affidavit of any person over the age of 18 years, which affidavit shows service in conformity with this Code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned.  
Sec. 1-3.12. - Statute of limitations. 
When a limitation or period of time prescribed in any existing ordinance or statute for acquiring a right or barring a remedy, or for any other purpose, has begun to run before this Code goes into effect, the time which has already runs shall be deemed a part of the time prescribed as such limitation.  
Sec. 1-3.13. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Calendar year" shall mean from January 1 through December 31 of any given year; 
(b)  "City" shall mean the City of Yuba City; 
(c)  "Council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Yuba City; 
(d)  "County" shall mean the County of Sutter; 
(e)  "Fiscal year" shall mean from July 1 of any given year through June 30 of the following year; 
(f)  "Gender." The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders; 
(g)  "May" shall be permissive; 
(h)  "Month" shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise expressed; 
(i)  "Number." The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural number shall include the singular; 
(j)  "Oath" shall include affirmation; 
(k)  "Office." The use of the title of any officer, employee, office, or ordinance shall mean such officer, employee, office, or ordinance of this City, unless otherwise specified; 
(l)  "Owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land; 
(m)  "Person" shall include any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, any public corporation, political subdivision, city (excepting the City of Yuba City), County of Sutter, district in the County of Sutter, the State of California, or the United States of America, or any department or agency of any thereof, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise; 
(n)  "Personal property" shall include money, goods, chattels, things in action, and evidences of debt; 
(o)  "Property" shall include both real and personal property; 
(p)  "Quarterly," when used to designate a period of time, shall mean the first three calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of three calendar months; 
(q)  "Real property" shall include lands, tenements, and hereditaments; 
(r)  "Shall" shall be mandatory; 
(s)  "State" shall mean the State of California; 
(t)  "Street" shall include all streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, alleys, courts, places, squares, or other public ways in the City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this State; 
(u)  "Tenant or occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others; and 
(v)  "Tenses." The present tense shall include the past and future tenses, and the future tense shall include the present tense.  
CHAPTER 4. - APPEALS AND SUBSEQUENT JUDICIAL REVIEWS 
 
Sec. 1-4.01. - Right to appeal. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, any person excepting to the denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit applied for or held by him or her pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code, or to any administrative decision made by any official of the City pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code, may appeal in writing to the Council by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of such appeal setting forth the specific grounds thereof. 
(Amended by § 1, Ord. 791, eff. October 5, 1978)  
Sec. 1-4.02. - Time within which appeals shall be filed. 
The written notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within 14 days after the receipt of written notice of such action appealed from, but in no event later than 30 days after the date of such action. 
(Amended by § 1, Ord. 791, eff. October 5, 1978)  
Sec. 1-4.03. - Hearings; notices. 
The City Clerk shall forthwith set such matter for a hearing before the Council at a subsequent regular meeting and shall cause notice thereof to be given to the applicant not less than five days prior to such hearing, unless such notice is waived in writing by the applicant. At such hearing the appellant shall show cause on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal why the action excepted to should not be approved. The Council may continue the hearing from time to time, and its findings on the appeal shall be final and conclusive in the matter. 
(Amended by § 1, Ord. 791, eff. October 5, 1978)  
Sec. 1-4.04. - Judicial reviews of adjudicatory or administrative decisions made by the council. 
Adjudicatory and administrative decisions, as used in this chapter, shall have the meaning subscribed thereto under Civil Procedure Code § 1094.6, including administrative decisions made after hearing, suspending, demoting, or dismissing an officer or employee or any action taken by the Council in revoking or denying an application for a permit or license or denying an application for any retirement benefit or allowance. Administrative decisions, as used in this chapter, shall include all land use decisions made by the Council, including applications for land use permits, applications for variances, building permits, applications for rezoning, and applications for any other license issued under the terms of this Code. 
(§ 1, Ord. 791, eff. October 5, 1978)  
Sec. 1-4.05. - Time within which judicial reviews shall be sought. 
Pursuant to Civil Procedure Code § 1094.6, there is hereby established a 90-day statute of limitations for the judicial review of any such administrative and/or adjudicatory decision as defined in Section 1-4.04 of this chapter. The judicial review of such decisions shall be sought within 90 days following the day on which such decision becomes final. The failure to do so shall subject such judicial review to the bar of the statute of limitations. 
(§ 1, Ord. 791, eff. October 5, 1978)  
Sec. 1-4.06. - Notices. 
The City Clerk and/or other administrative officer shall comply with the provisions of Civil Procedure Code § 1094.6 and provide notice to the party that the time within which judicial review shall be sought is governed by Section 1-4.05 of this chapter. As used in this section, "party" shall mean an officer or employee who has been suspended, demoted, or dismissed; a person whose permit or license has been revoked or whose application for a permit or license has been denied; or a person whose application for a retirement benefit or allowance has been denied. 
(§ 1, Ord. 791, eff. October 5, 1978)  
Sec. 1-4.07. - Provisions of chapter to prevail. 
The provisions of this chapter with reference to judicial reviews shall prevail over any conflicting provision in any otherwise applicable law relating to the subject matter and shall prevail over any conflicting provision of this Code relating to the subject matter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 791, eff. October 5, 1978)  
CHAPTER 5. - CITATION PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 1-5.01. - Notices to appear. 
Whenever a person is arrested for any violation of this Code which is punishable as a misdemeanor or an infraction, and he or she is not immediately taken before a magistrate, as is more fully set forth in the Penal Code of the State, the arresting officer shall prepare, in triplicate, a written notice to appear in court, or before a person authorized to receive a deposit of bail, containing the name and address of the person cited, the offense charged, and the time and place when and where he or she shall appear. 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-5.02. - Time to appear. 
The time specified in the notice to appear shall be at least ten days after such arrest. 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-5.03. - Place to appear. 
The place specified in the notice to appear shall be the court of the magistrate before whom the person would be taken if the requirement of taking an arrested person before a magistrate were complied with, or shall be an officer authorized by such court to receive a deposit of bail. 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-5.04. - Arresting officer. 
The arresting officer shall include all law enforcement officers and any City official authorized by ordinance or resolution of the Council to enforce any provision of this Code. 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-5.05. - Delivery of notice. 
(a)  The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person, and the arrested person, in order to secure release, shall give his or her written promise to appear in court or before a person authorized to receive a deposit of bail by signing two copies of the notice which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon, the arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. 
(b)  Any person who signs a written promise to appear with a false or fictitious name shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he or she was originally arrested. 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-5.06. - Copies of notices to appear. 
Whenever the arresting officer delivers a notice to appear charging an offense under this Code to any person, the notice shall include all the information set forth upon the copy of the notice filed with a magistrate, and no arresting officer shall set forth on any notice filed with a magistrate, or attach thereto or accompany the notice with, any written statement giving information or containing allegations which have not been delivered to the person receiving the notice to appear. 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-5.07. - Filing copies of notices to appear. 
The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file a copy of the notice with the magistrate or before a person authorized by the magistrate or judge to receive a deposit of bail specified therein. 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-5.08. - Appearances by counsel. 
A written promise to appear may be complied with by an appearance by counsel. 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-5.09. - Violations of promises to appear. 
(a)  Any person wilfully violating his or her written promise to appear in court or before a person authorized to receive a deposit of bail shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he or she was originally arrested. 
(b)  Any person wilfully failing to pay a lawfully imposed fine for a violation of any provision of this Code within the time authorized by the court and without lawful excuse having been presented to the court on or before the date the fine is due shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the full payment of the fine after such time. 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-5.10. - Deposits of bail. 
The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he or she promised to appear, deposit bail with the magistrate or the person authorized to receive a deposit of bail. Such deposit of bail may be by the personal check of the person who has signed a written promise to appear if he or she furnishes to the person authorized to receive a deposit of bail satisfactory evidence of residence in the State and if such personal check is drawn on a banking institution located in the State. 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-5.11. - Fixing bail. 
If bail has not been previously fixed and approved by the judges of the court in accordance with a schedule of bail, the magistrate shall fix the amount of bail which, in his or her judgment, in accordance with the provisions of Penal Code § 1275, will be reasonable and sufficient for the appearance of the defendant and shall endorse upon the notice a statement signed by him or her in the form set forth in said Penal Code § 815(a). 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-5.12. - Forfeiture of bail. 
If, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, the defendant does not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited and may, in his or her discretion, order that no further proceedings be had in the case. Upon the making of the order that no further proceedings be had, all sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid into the City or County Treasury, as the case may be. 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-5.13. - Optional bail forfeiture. 
If, at the time when the case is called for trial, the defendant does not appear, either in person or by counsel, and has not requested in writing that the trial proceed in his or her absence, the court may declare the bail forfeited and may, in its discretion, order that no further proceeding be had in the case, or the court may act pursuant to the provisions of Penal Code § 1043(e). 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-5.14. - Filing of complaints. 
(a)  Whenever a written notice to appear has been prepared, delivered, and filed with the court, it shall constitute a complaint to which the defendant may plead "guilty" or "nolo contendere." If, however, the defendant violates his or her promise to appear in court, or does not deposit lawful bail, or pleads other than "guilty" or "nolo contendere" to the offense charged, a complaint shall be filed which shall conform to the provisions of Penal Code tit. 5, pt 2, ch. 2 (§ 948 et seq.), and which shall be deemed to be an original complaint; and thereafter proceedings shall be had as provided by law, except that a defendant may, by an agreement in writing, subscribed by him or her and filed with the court, waive the filing of a verified complaint and elect that the prosecution may proceed upon a written notice to appear. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, whenever the written notice to appear has been prepared on a form approved by the Judicial Council, an exact and legible duplicate copy of the notice, when filed with the magistrate, shall constitute a complaint to which the defendant may enter a plea and, if the notice to appear is verified, upon which a warrant may be issued. If the notice to appear is not verified, the defendant may, at the time of arraignment, request that a verified complaint be filed. 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-5.15. - Issuance of warrants. 
No warrant shall issue on the charge for the arrest of a person who has given his or her written promise to appear in court or before a person authorized to receive bail, to appear for arraignment, trial, or judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment, as required by law. 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-5.16. - Issuance of warrants for violations of promises to appear. 
(a)  When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail, the magistrate may issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for the arrest of such person within 20 days after his or her failure to appear before the magistrate; or, if the person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date on which he or she promised to appear, then, within 20 days after the delivery of the written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense. 
(b)  When a person violates his or her promise to appear before an officer authorized to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer. 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
Sec. 1-5.17. - Written pleas in lieu of personal appearances. 
(a)  Any person who has received a written notice to appear for an alleged violation of an infraction in a court may, prior to the time at which he or she is required to appear, plead not guilty in writing in lieu of appearing in person. The written plea shall be directed to the court named in the notice to appear and, if mailed, shall be sent by certified or registered mail postmarked not later than five days prior to the day upon which appearance is required. Such written plea and request to the court shall be accompanied by a deposit of $25, which amount shall be used for the purpose of guaranteeing the appearance of the defendant at the time and place set by the court for trial and to apply toward the payment of the fine, if any, prescribed by the court upon conviction. Thereafter, the case shall be conducted in the same manner as if the defendant had appeared in person, had made his or her plea in open court, and had deposited such sum of $25 as bail. The court or the clerk of the court shall notify the accused of the time and place of trial by first class mail postmarked at least ten days prior to the time set for the trial. Any person using this procedure shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to be tried within the statutory period. 
(b)  Any person using the procedure set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed to have given his or her written promise to appear at the time designated by the court for trial, and failure to appear at the trial shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(§ 2, Ord. 698, eff. April 16, 1975)  
CHAPTER 6. - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
 
Sec. 1-6.010. - Legislative findings and statement of purpose. 
(a)  The City Council hereby finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for minor violations of the Municipal Code and applicable Uniform Codes. The City Council further finds that an appropriate method of enforcement for minor violations is an Administrative Citation Program as authorized by Government Code § 53069.4. 
(b)  The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal or any other legal remedy established by law which may be pursued to address violations of the Municipal Code or applicable Uniform Codes. 
(c)  The City Council hereby finds and determines that enforcement of the Yuba City Municipal Code, other ordinances adopted by the City, conditions on entitlements and terms and conditions of City agreements are matters of local concern and serve important public purposes. Consistent with its powers as a general law city, the City of Yuba City adopts this Administrative Citation Program in order to achieve the following goals: 
(1)  To protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Yuba City; 
(2)  To gain compliance with the Municipal Code and uniform codes, ordinances and regulations in a timely and efficient manner; 
(3)  To provide for an administrative process to appeal the imposition of administrative citations and fines; 
(4)  To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of the Municipal Code, ordinances, agreements or terms and conditions on entitlements in the City of Yuba City; 
(5)  To minimize the expense and delay where the sole remedy is to pursue responsible parties in the civil or criminal justice system. 
(d)  Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the City. 
(§ 1, Ord. 006-09, eff. May 2, 2009)  
Sec. 1-6.020. - Definitions. 
(a)  "Responsible person" shall mean any individual who is the owner or occupant of real property, owner or authorized agent of any business, company, or entity, or the parent or the legal guardian of any person under the age of 18 years, who causes or maintains a violation of the Municipal Code, ordinances, agreements or terms and conditions on entitlements in the City of Yuba City. 
(b)  "Enforcement officer" shall mean any City officer, employee, or agent of the City designated by the Municipal Code or the City Manager to enforce particular provisions of the Municipal Code or any Code adopted by the City, and includes the City's Fire Chief, Building Official, Director of Community Development, enforcement officer, and their respective designees. 
(c)  "Correction date" shall mean the date by which a violation must be corrected in order to avoid imposition of an administrative fine. 
(d)  "City Manager" shall mean the City of Yuba City's City Manager, or duly authorized designee of the City Manager. 
(e)  "Hearing Officer" shall mean any individual designated by the City Manager and assigned to conduct hearings under this chapter. The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer(s), if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative citation fines upheld by the hearing officer(s). 
(§ 1, Ord. 006-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 1-6.030. - Entry and inspection. 
For the purposes of this chapter, any enforcement officer shall have the power to enter onto any public or private property within the City of Yuba City in order to determine the existence of a violation of any provision of the Municipal Code and to make any inspection, examination, or survey as may be necessary to perform enforcement duties. All entries, inspection, examination, and surveys shall be done in a reasonable manner. If an owner, occupant, or agent refuses permission to enter or inspect, the enforcement officer shall seek an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to Civil Procedure Code §§ 1822.50 through 1822.59, as may be amended from time to time. 
(§ 1, Ord. 006-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 1-6.040. - Authority and fines. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of the Yuba City Municipal Code may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided in this chapter. A violation includes, but is not limited to, all violations of the Municipal Code, the Uniform Codes adopted by the City Council, the failure to comply with any condition imposed by any entitlement, permit, agreement or environmental document issued or approved pursuant to this Code. 
(b)  Each and every day a violation of the Municipal Code exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense. 
(c)  A civil fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the enforcement officer and shall be payable directly to the Yuba City Finance Department. 
(d)  Fines shall be assessed in the amounts specified by resolution of the City Council, or where no amount is specified: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation; 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation of the same ordinance or permit within one year from the date of the first violation: 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of the same ordinance or permit within one year from the date of the first violation. 
(e)  All funds collected under the proceedings in this chapter shall be paid to the City Treasurer who shall credit the same to the abatement, repair and demolition fund. 
(§ 1, Ord. 006-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 1-6.050. - Service procedures. 
All written notices required by this chapter, including, but not limited to an administrative citation shall be served in the following manner: 
(a)  Personal service. In any case where an administrative citation is issued: 
(1)  The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person and obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative citation. 
(2)  If the responsible person served refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings. 
(b)  Service of citation by mail. If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible person, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested return receipt. Simultaneously, the citation may be sent by first class mail. If the citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, provided the citation sent by first class mail is not returned. 
(c)  Service of citation by posting notice. If the enforcement officer does not succeed in personally serving the responsible person, or by certified mail or regular mail, the enforcement officer shall post the administrative citation on any real property within the City in which the City has knowledge that the responsible person has a legal interest, and such posting shall be deemed effective service. 
(§ 1, Ord. 006-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 1-6.060. - Contents of administrative citation. 
Each administrative citation shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed; 
(b)  The Code sections or conditions violated and a description of the violation(s); 
(c)  An order to the responsible person to correct the violations by the correction date, and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s); 
(d)  The amount of the fine for the violation(s); 
(e)  An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by which it shall be paid; 
(f)  Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation; and 
(g)  The name and signature of the enforcement officer and if possible the signature of the responsible person. 
(§ 1, Ord. 006-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 1-6.070. - Satisfaction of administrative citation. 
Upon receipt of an administrative citation, the responsible person must do the following: 
(a)  Pay the fine to the City within 15 days from the correction date of the administrative citation. All fines assessed shall be payable to the Yuba City Finance Department. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the City. 
(b)  Remedy the violation(s), if the violation(s) is of such a nature that it can be remedied. If the violation(s) is corrected before the correction date provided on the citation, no fine shall be imposed. If the responsible person fails to correct the violation(s) by the correction date, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s). The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation shall increase at a rate specified in this chapter or by ordinance. 
(§ 1, Ord. 006-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 1-6.080. - Appeal of administrative citation. 
Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of the Yuba City Municipal Code or that he or she is the responsible person by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the City within 15 days from the correction date of the administration citation, together with an advanced deposit of the fine. Any administrative citation fine which has been deposited shall be refunded if after a hearing it is determined that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation(s) or that there was no violation(s) as charged in the administrative citation. 
(§ 1, Ord. 006-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 1-6.090. - Hearing procedure. 
(a)  No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a Hearing Officer(s) shall be held unless and until a request for hearing form has been completed and submitted and the fine has been deposited in advance. 
(b)  A hearing before the Hearing Officer(s) shall be set for a date that is not less than 15 and not more than 60 days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  The Hearing Officer(s) shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred and whether the responsible person has caused or maintained the violation(s) of the Municipal Code on the date(s) specified in the administrative citation. 
(d)  The responsible person contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the administrative citation. 
(e)  The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies. 
(f)  The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
(g)  At least ten (days prior to the hearing, the recipient of an administrative citation shall be provided with copies of the citations, reports and other documents submitted or relied upon by the enforcement officer. No other discovery is permitted. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. 
(h)  If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the Hearing Officer(s) for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall be served by mail on the person requesting the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(i)  The Hearing Officer(s) may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. 
(§ 1, Ord. 006-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 1-6.100. - Hearing officer's decision. 
(a)  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the Hearing Officer(s) shall issue a written decision within ten days of the hearing to uphold or deny the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the Hearing Officer(s) shall be final. 
(b)  If the Hearing Officer(s) determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the City shall be retained by the City. 
(c)  If the Hearing Officer(s) determines that the administrative citation should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the City, then the City shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine. 
(d)  The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the Hearing Officer(s)'s written decision in the manner prescribed by this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 006-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 1-6.110. - Failure to pay fines. 
The failure of any person to pay the civil fines assessed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in the matter being referred to the City's authorized agent to file a claim with the Small Claims Court. Alternatively, the City may pursue any other legal remedy to collect the civil fines. The City may also recover its collections costs according to proof. 
(§ 1, Ord. 006-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 1-6.120. - Right to judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a Hearing Officer(s) on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition for review with the Sutter County Superior Court in accordance with the timelines and provisions as set forth in Government Code § 53069.4. 
(§ 1, Ord. 006-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 1-6.130 - Notices. 
(a)  The administration citation and all notices to be given by this chapter shall be served on the responsible person in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Failure to receive any notice specified in this chapter does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder. 
(§ 1, Ord. 006-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
TITLE 2. - ADMINISTRATION  
CHAPTER 1. - RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE CONDUCT OF COUNCIL MEETINGS, PROCEEDINGS AND BUSINESS 
 
Sec. 2-1.01. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Council shall be held without notice on the first and third Tuesdays of each month. The meetings shall be held in the Council Chambers in the City Hall of the City of Yuba City, California or at such other place as the Council may, from time to time, prescribe. In the event a Tuesday falls upon a legal holiday, the regular meeting which otherwise would have occurred on that date shall be held on the first business day thereafter. In the event that Christmas Eve and/or New Year's Eve falls on a Tuesday the regular meeting, which otherwise would have occurred on that day, shall be held on the first business day which is not a holiday thereafter. Meeting commencement times shall be set by a resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  Special meetings. Special meetings of the Council may be called at any time by the Mayor or by a majority of the members of the Council by delivering personally or by mail written notice to each member of the Council and to each local newspaper of general circulation and to any radio or television that has submitted a written request of the City Clerk for such notification. Such notice must be delivered personally or by mail at least 24 hours before the time of such meeting specified in the notice. The call and notice shall specify the time and place of the special meeting and the business to be transacted. No other business shall be considered at the meeting. Written notice may be dispensed with for any member who at or prior to the time the meeting convenes files with the City Clerk a written waiver of notice. The waiver may be given by telegram or fax. Written notice shall be dispensed with for any member who is actually present at the meeting at the time it convenes. 
(c)  Adjournment/adjourned meetings. The Council may adjourn any regular, adjourned regular, special or adjourned special meeting to a time and place specified in the order of adjournment. If a quorum is not present, less than a quorum may so adjourn. If all members are absent from any regular or adjourned regular meeting, the City Clerk may declare the meeting adjourned to a stated time and place and shall cause a written notice of the adjournment to be delivered personally to each Council member at least three hours before the adjourned meeting. A copy of the order or notice of adjournment shall be conspicuously posted on or near the door of the place where the regular, adjourned regular, special or adjourned special meeting was held within 24 hours after the time of adjournment. When a regular or adjourned regular meeting is adjourned as provided in this section the resulting adjourned regular meeting is a regular meeting for all purposes. When an order of adjournment of any meeting fails to state the hour at which the adjourned meeting is to be held, it shall be held at the hour specified for regular meetings. 
(d)  Emergency meetings. The notice requirement for a special meeting may be dispensed with under the following emergency conditions: 
(1)  Work stoppage or other activity which severely impairs public health, safety, or both, as determined by a majority of the Council. 
(2)  A crippling disaster which impairs public health, safety, or both, as determined by a majority of the Council. 
(e)  Closed sessions. The Council may hold closed sessions during a regular or special meeting, or at any time otherwise authorized by law, to consider or hear any matter which it is authorized by State law to hear or consider in closed session, and may exclude from any such closed session any person or persons which it is authorized by State law to exclude from such closed sessions. 
(f)  Cancellation. Any meeting of the Council may be cancelled in advance by a majority vote of the Council. The Mayor may cancel a meeting in the case of an emergency or when a majority of members have confirmed in writing their unavailability to attend a meeting. 
(g)  Chair. The Mayor shall preside over all Council meetings. In his, her absence, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall serve as presiding officer. The Council shall choose one of its members to serve as Mayor and one of its members to serve as Vice-Mayor. The Mayor and Vice-Mayor shall be selected and seated in the manner following: 
In an election year in which Council members are elected, the Mayor and Vice-Mayor shall be selected and seated at such time as the election results for Council members so elected have been canvassed and certified to the Council and those results so declared by the Council. The Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore so selected and seated at that time shall hold their respective offices until the first regular City Council meeting following the first Tuesday of the month in the year following the year in which they were selected and seated. The Mayor shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the Council. The Mayor shall state every question coming before the Council, announce the decision of the Council on all subjects and decide all questions of order subject, however, to an appeal to the Council in which event a majority vote of the Council shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. The Mayor shall vote on all questions, his or her name being called last. 
(h)  Attendance by the public. Except as specifically provided by law for closed sessions, all meetings of the Council shall be open and public. All persons desiring to attend shall be permitted to attend any meeting. In the event any meeting is willfully interrupted by a group or groups of persons so as to render the orderly conduct of the meeting unfeasible and order cannot be restored by removal of the offending individual or individuals, the Council may order the meeting room cleared and continue in session. Only matters appearing on the agenda may be considered during such session. Representatives of the press, unless participants in the disturbance, shall be allowed to attend such session, and nothing shall prohibit the Council from readmitting individuals not responsible for the disturbance. 
(Ord. 06-91, eff. July 2, 1991; § 1, Ord. 03-95, eff. February 16, 1995; § 1, Ord. 001-13, eff. April 18, 2013)  
Sec. 2-1.02. - Order of business. 
The business of the Council, at its meetings, shall be conducted in accordance with the following order of business. 
(a)  Call to order and roll call; 
(b)  Pledge of allegiance/invocation; 
(c)  Presentations/proclamations; 
(d)  Written communication; 
(e)  Public hearings; 
(f)  Bid opening; 
(g)  Ordinances: Introduction and adoption; 
(h)  Appearance of interested citizens and/or requests by the public; 
(i)  Consent calendar: The consent calendar groups together with those matters which are considered to be noncontroversial and which require only routine action by the Council. Adoption of the consent calendar may be made by one motion only and by the roll call vote of the Council; provided, however, the chair shall first advise the persons in attendance that the consent calendar matters will be adopted in toto by one action of the Council unless any Council member, any member, any individual or organization interested in one or more consent calendar matters has any question or wishes to make a statement. In that event, the chair may defer action on the particular matter or matters, and the Council shall consider those matters separately; 
(j)  Reports and miscellaneous; 
(k)  Business from the council; and 
(l)  Adjournment. 
(Ord. 06-91, eff. July 2, 1991)  
Sec. 2-1.03. - Agenda/posting—Action on other matters. 
The City Manager shall cause to be prepared an agenda of the Council meeting which agenda shall be prepared in accordance with the order of business as provided for in Section 2-1.02 above. A copy of said agenda shall be furnished to each member of the Council, the City Clerk and the City Attorney at least 24 hours prior to the Council meeting. 
At least 72 hours before a regular meeting the City Manager or his or her designee shall post the agenda which shall contain a brief general description of each item of business to be transacted or discussed at the meeting. The agenda shall specify the time and location of the regular meeting and shall be posted in a location that is freely accessible to members of the public. No action shall be taken on any item not appearing on the posted agenda. 
Notwithstanding the above, the Council may take action on items of business not appearing on the posted agenda under any of the following conditions: 
(a)  Upon a determination by a majority vote of the Council that an emergency situation exists as defined in the public meeting law (Government Code § 54956.2(b)(1)); 
(b)  Upon a determination by a two-thirds vote of the Council or if less than two-thirds of the Council members are present, a unanimous vote of those members present that the need to take action arose subsequent to the agenda being posted; and 
(c)  The item was posted as hereinbefore required for a prior meeting of the Council occurring not more than five calendar days prior to the date action is taken on the item and at the prior meeting the item was continued to the meeting at which action is being taken. 
(Ord. 06-91, eff. July 2, 1991) 
Sec.  2-1.04. Rules of conduct. 
Business shall be brought before the Council by motion in accordance with the following standards of conduct: 
(a)  Obtaining the floor. Any member of the Council wishing to speak must first obtain the floor by being recognized by the chair. The chair must recognize any Council member who seeks the floor when appropriately entitled to do so. 
(b)  Motions. The Mayor or any member of the Council may bring a matter of business before the Council by making a motion. Before the matter can be considered or debated it must be seconded. Once the motion has been properly made and seconded, the chair shall open the matter for debate offering the first opportunity to debate to the moving party and, thereafter, to any Council member properly recognized by the chair. Once the matter has been fully debated and the chair calls for a vote, no further debate will be allowed; provided however, Council members may be allowed to explain their vote. 
(c)  Voting. All Council members present at a meeting when a question comes up for a vote, shall vote for or against the measure unless he/she is disqualified from voting and abstains because of such disqualification. If the vote is a voice vote, the chair shall declare the result and note for the record all "aye" votes and all "no" votes. The Council may also vote by roll call vote, ballot or voting machine. Regardless of the manner of voting, the results reflecting all "ayes" and "noes" must be clearly set forth for the record. 
(d)  Procedural rules of order. Once the main motion is properly placed on the floor, several related motions may be employed in addressing the main motion. These motions take precedence over the main motion, and if properly made and seconded, must be disposed of before the main motion can be acted upon. The following motions are appropriate and may be made by the Mayor or any Council member at any appropriate time during the discussion of the main motion. They are listed in order of precedence. The first three subsidiary motions are non-debatable; the last four are debatable. All subsidiary motions require a simple majority vote for passage. 
(1)  Subsidiary motions. 
(i)  Lay on the table. Any Council members, including the Mayor, may move to lay the matter under discussion on the table. This motion temporarily suspends any further discussion of the pending motion without setting a time certain to resume debate. It must be moved and seconded and passed by a majority vote. In order to bring the matter before the Council, a member must move that the matter be taken from the table, seconded and passed. A motion to take from the table must be made at the same meeting at which it was placed on the table or at the next regular meeting of the Council. Otherwise, the motion that was tabled dies, although it can be raised later as a new motion. 
(ii)  Move the previous question. Any Council member may move to immediately bring the question being debated by the Council to a vote, suspending any further debate. 
(iii)  Limit or extend limits of debate. Any Council member may move to put limits on the length of debate. 
(iv)  Postpone to a time certain. Any Council member may move to postpone the pending question to a time certain. This motion continues the pending main motion to a future date as determined by the Council at the time the motion is passed. 
(v)  Commit or refer. Any Council member may move that the matter being discussed should be referred to a committee or commission for further study. The motion may contain directions for the committee or commission, as well as, a date upon which the matter will be returned to the Council's agenda. If no date is set for returning the item to the Council agenda, any Council member may move, at any time, to require the time be returned to the agenda. 
(vi)  Amend. Any Council member may amend the main motion or any amendment made to the main motion. Before the main motion may be acted upon, all amendments and amendments to amendments must first be acted upon. An amendment must be related to the main motion or amendment to which it is directed. Any amendment which substitutes a new motion rather than amending the existing motion is out of order and may be so declared by the chair. 
(vii)  Postpone indefinitely. Any Council member may move to postpone indefinitely the motion on the floor, thus avoiding a direct vote on the pending motion and suspending any further action on the matter. 
(2)  Motions of privilege, order and convenience. The following actions by the Council are to insure orderly conduct of meetings and for the convenience of the Mayor and Council members. These motions take precedence over any pending main or subsidiary motion and may or may not be debated as noted. 
(i)  Call for orders of the day. Any Council member may demand that the agenda be followed in the order stated therein. No second is required and the chair must comply unless the Council, by vote, sets aside the orders of the day. 
(ii)  Question of privilege. Any Council member, at any time during the meeting, may make a request of the chair to accommodate the needs of the Council or his or her personal needs for such things as reducing noise, adjusting air conditioning, ventilation, lighting, etc. Admissibility of question is ruled on by the chair. 
(iii)  Recess. Any Council member may move for a recess. The motion must be seconded and a majority vote is required for passage. The motion is debatable. 
(iv)  Adjourn. Any Council member may move to adjourn at any time, even if there is business pending. The motion must be seconded and a majority vote is required for passage. The motion is not debatable. 
(v)  Point of order. Any Council member may require the chair to enforce the rules of the Council by raising a point of order. The point of order shall be ruled upon by the chair. 
(vi)  Appeal. Should any Council member be dissatisfied with a ruling from the chair, he or she may move to appeal the ruling to the full Council. The motion must be seconded to put it before the Council. A majority vote in the negative or a tie vote sustains the ruling of the chair. The motion is debatable and the chair may participate in the debate. 
(vii)  Suspend the rules. Any Council member may move to suspend the rules if necessary to accomplish a matter that would otherwise violate the rules. The motion requires a second and a majority vote for passage. 
(viii)  Division of question. Any Council member may move to divide the subject matter of a motion which is made up of several parts in order to vote separately on each part. The motion requires a second and a majority vote for passage. This motion may also be applied to complex ordinances or resolutions. 
(ix)  Reconsider. Except for votes regarding matters which are quasi-judicial in nature or matters which require a noticed public hearing, the Council may reconsider any vote taken at the same session, but no later than the same or next calendar day, to correct inadvertent or precipitant errors, or consider new information not available at the time of the vote. The motion to reconsider must be seconded and requires a majority vote for passage, regardless of the vote required to adopt the motion being reconsidered. If the motion to reconsider is successful, the matter to be reconsidered takes no special precedence over other pending matters and any special voting requirements related thereto still apply. Except pursuant to a motion to reconsider, once a matter has been determined and voted upon, the same matter cannot be brought up again at the same meeting. 
(x)  Rescind, repeal or annul. The Council may rescind, repeal or annul any prior action taken with reference to any legislative matter so long as the action to rescind, repeal or annul complies with all the rules applicable to the initial adoption, including any special voting or notice requirements or unless otherwise specified by law. 
(e)  Authority of the chair. Subject to appeal, the chair shall have the authority to prevent the misuse of the legitimate form of motions, or the abuse of privilege of renewing certain motions, to obstruct the business of the Council by ruling such motions out of order. In so ruling, the chair shall be courteous and fair and should presume that the moving party is making the motion in good faith. 
(f)  Public hearings. Matters which are required to be heard at a noticed public hearing shall be conducted in the following manner. 
(1)  Time for consideration. Matters noticed to be heard by the Council shall be heard at the meeting specified and shall commence at the time specified in the notice of hearing, or as soon thereafter as is reasonably possible, and shall continue until the same has been completed or until other disposition of the matter has been made. 
(2)  Continuance of hearings. Any hearing being held or noticed or ordered to be held by the Council at any meeting of the Council may, by order or notice of continuance, be continued or recontinued to any subsequent meeting in the manner provided herein for adjourned meetings; provided, that if the hearing is continued to a time less than 24 hours after the time specified in the order or notice of hearing, a copy of the order or notice of continuance of hearing shall be posted immediately following the meeting at which the order or notice of continuance was adopted or made. 
(3)  Public discussion at hearings. When a matter for public hearing comes before the Council, the Mayor shall open the public hearing. Upon opening the public hearing and before any motion is adopted related to the merits of the issue to be heard, the Mayor shall inquire if there are any persons present who desire to speak on the matter which is to be heard or to present evidence respecting the matter. Any person desiring to speak or present evidence shall make his/her presence known to the Mayor and upon being recognized by the Mayor, the person may speak or present evidence relevant to the matter being heard. No person may speak without first being recognized by the Mayor. Members of the Council who wish to ask questions of the speakers or each other, during the public hearing portion may do so but only after first being recognized by the Mayor. The Mayor shall conduct the meeting in such a manner as to afford due process. 
All persons interested in the matter being heard by Council shall be entitled to submit written evidence or remarks, as well as other graphic evidence. All such evidence presented shall be retained by the City Clerk and made a part of the Clerk's record. Time limits may be established by the Council, limiting the duration of presentations as set forth herein. No person shall be permitted during the hearing to speak about matters or present evidence which are not germane to the matter being considered. A determination of relevance of such matters shall be made by the Mayor but may be appealed as set forth here and before. 
(4)  Consideration of question by Council. After all members of the public desiring to speak upon the subject of the hearing have been given an opportunity to do so, the public hearing shall be closed by the Mayor and the Council may consider what disposition they wish to make of the question or questions presented at the hearing. No member of the public shall be allowed, without consent of the Mayor, to speak further on the question during this period of deliberation, although the Council members may ask questions of the speakers if so desired. At the conclusion of the Council discussion, an appropriate motion having been made and seconded, the Council shall vote on the matter. 
(5)  Reports and resolutions. All committee reports together with all resolutions shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be entered in the minutes. Minutes of prior Council meetings need not be read nor a synopsis of said minutes provided the City Clerk has previously furnished to each Councilmember a complete copy of said minutes. 
(Ord. 06-91, eff. July 2, 1991)  
Sec. 2-1.05. - Rules of decorum. 
While the Council is in session, the chair shall preserve order and decorum. No person in attendance shall either by conversation or otherwise delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the Council or disturb either any Council member or any member of the public while speaking nor refuse to obey the orders of the Council of the presiding officer except as otherwise provided. Any person making personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks or who shall become boisterous while addressing the Council shall be forthwith by the presiding officer barred from further audience before the Council unless permission to continue shall be granted by a majority vote of the Council. All persons addressing the Council shall step to the designated podium and shall give his or her name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record. All remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a body and not to any member thereof. No person other than the Council and the person having the floor shall be permitted to enter into any discussion either directly or through a member of the Council without the permission of the chair. No question shall be asked a Council person except through the chair. Every person in attendance desiring to speak shall address the chair and, upon recognition by the chair, shall confine himself/herself to the question under debate avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. Any person in attendance, once recognized by the chair, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it shall be to call him/her to order or as otherwise here and before provided. If a person, while speaking, shall be called to order he/she shall cease speaking until the question of order shall be determined and if in order he/she shall be permitted to proceed. A Council person may request, through the chair, the privilege of having a written abstract of his/her statement on any subject under consideration by the Council entered in the minutes. If the Council consents thereto, such statement shall be entered in the minutes. 
(Ord. 06-91, eff. July 2, 1991)  
Sec. 2-1.06. - Approval of legislation and contract. 
(a)  Preparation of ordinances. All ordinances shall be prepared or approved as to the form by the City Attorney. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the Council unless ordered by a majority vote of the Council or requested in writing by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(b)  Prior approval. All ordinances and contract documents shall, before presentation to the Council, have been approved as to form and legality by the City Attorney or his or her authorized representative and shall have been examined and approved for the administration by the City Manager or his or her authorized representative when there are substantive matters of administration involved. 
(c)  Introducing for passage or approval. Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action by the Council shall be introduced and sponsored by a member of the Council; provided, however, the Mayor, City Manager or his/her designee, or City Attorney may present ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects to the Council, and any Council member may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinances, resolutions, matters, or subjects be adopted; otherwise, they shall not be considered. 
(Ord. 06-91, eff. July 2, 1991)  
Sec. 2-1.07. - Compensation of Council members and reimbursement for expenses. 
(a)  Pursuant to the express provisions of Government Code § 36514.5, City Council members shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. 
(b)  The compensation of City Council members is determined pursuant to the express statutory authority in Government Code § 36516(a) in cities over 50,000 up to and including 75,000 in population. The compensation paid to members of the City Council shall be set at a salary of $500 per month, plus the sum of $100 per month, which represents the total of increases of 5% a year for each calendar year from the operative date of the last adjustment of salary, for a total of $600 per month, payable at the same time in the same manner as salaries are paid to other officers and employees of the City. 
(c)  Any amount paid by the City to Council members for retirement, health and welfare benefits, shall not be included for purposes of determining the salary herein, provided the same benefits are available and paid by City for its employees. 
(Ord. 06-91, eff. July 2, 1991; § 1, Ord. 013-04, eff. September 16, 2004; § 1, Ord. 001-08, eff. February 14, 2008)  
CHAPTER 2. - CITY MANAGER 
 
Sec. 2-2.01. - Position created. 
The office of the City Manager is created and established. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. 
(§ 2, Ord. 013-05, eff. November 17, 2005)  
Sec. 2-2.02. - References to administrator. 
Whenever the words "Administrator" or "City Manager" appear in existing ordinances, they shall be deemed to mean and refer to the City Manager, and all ordinances not expressly repealed by this chapter and not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, referring to or respecting the rights, duties, powers and obligations of the Administrator, are continued in full force and effect. 
(§ 2, Ord. 013-05, eff. November 17, 2005)  
Sec. 2-2.03. - Eligibility. 
No person elected as a member of the City Council of the City of Yuba City shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as City Manager until one year has elapsed after such City Council member shall have ceased to be a member of the City Council. 
(§ 2, Ord. 013-05, eff. November 17, 2005)  
Sec. 2-2.04. - Residence. 
Residence in the City at the time of appointment of a City Manager shall not be required as a condition of the appointment. 
(§ 2, Ord. 013-05, eff. November 17, 2005)  
Sec. 2-2.05. - Compensation. 
The City Manager shall receive such salary and benefits as set forth in an employment agreement between the City Council and City Manager. 
(§ 2, Ord. 013-05, eff. November 17, 2005)  
Sec. 2-2.06. - Expense allowance. 
The City Manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 013-05, eff. November 17, 2005)  
Sec. 2-2.07. - Powers and duties. 
The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the City under the direction and control of the City Council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, by law or by direction of the City Council. The City Manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the City that are under his or her control. In addition to the general powers as administrative head, the City Manager shall have the following specific duties, responsibilities and powers: 
(a)  To enforce all laws and ordinances of the City and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the City Council are faithfully observed; 
(b)  To control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the City under his or her jurisdiction through their department heads; 
(c)  To appoint, promote, demote, remove and grant severance packages in an amount authorized by the City Council for all officers and employees of the City, excepting elective officers and the City Attorney; 
(d)  To establish an organizational structure of offices, departments, positions and units within the City as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the City's business; 
(e)  To recommend to the City Council the adoption of such ordinances and resolutions as deemed necessary or appropriate; 
(f)  To attend all meetings of the City Council or provide for a designated representative; 
(g)  To prepare and submit the proposed annual budget to the City Council for its approval; 
(h)  To be responsible for purchasing pursuant to the provisions of Title 2, Chapter 6 of the Yuba City Municipal Code for all the departments of the City; 
(i)  To approve agreements for contractual services as defined in Title 2, Chapter 6 of the Yuba City Municipal Code and in accordance with administrative policies adopted by the City Council, which shall, among other things, establish the maximum compensation that may be provided for in any such agreement; 
(j)  To investigate, when necessary, the affairs of the City and any department or division thereof and any contract obligation of the City; further, it shall be the duty of the City Manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the City government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the City; 
(k)  To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public properties which are under the control and jurisdiction of the City Council; 
(l)  To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to the City Manager from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action in the City Council. 
(§ 2, Ord. 013-05, eff. November 17, 2005)  
Sec. 2-2.08. - Relations with City Council. 
The City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the City only through the City Manager and neither the City Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager, except that this limitation and prohibition does not apply to the City Council's relations with the City Attorney. No individual Councilmember shall give any orders or instructions to the City Manager. The City Council shall instruct the City Manager in matters of policy. Any action, determination or omission of the City Manager shall be subject to review by the City Council. 
(§ 2, Ord. 013-05, eff. November 17, 2005)  
Sec. 2-2.09. - Department cooperation. 
It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the City Attorney to assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City efficiently, economically and harmoniously. 
(§ 2, Ord. 013-05, eff. November 17, 2005)  
Sec. 2-2.10. - Attendance at commission meetings. 
The City Manager may attend any and all meetings of the Planning Commission, and any other commission, board or committee created by the City Council, upon his or her own volition or upon direction of the City Council. At such meetings which the City Manager attends, he or she shall be heard by such commission, board or committee as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address the members thereof. The City Manager shall inform such members as to the status of any matter being considered by the City Council, and he or she shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the City Council. 
(§ 2, Ord. 013-05, eff. November 17, 2005)  
Sec. 2-2.11. - Removal. 
The City Manager may be removed from his or her position in accordance with this section. 
(a)  The City Manager shall at all times serve at the pleasure of the City Council and, subject to the provisions below, may be removed from office at any time with a three-fifths vote of the City Council, with or without cause; 
(b)  The removal of the City Manager shall be effected only by the City Council and shall be done in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances and in compliance with the City Manager's employment agreement. 
(c)  The City Manager shall not be removed from office, nor shall notice of removal be determined, during or within a period of 90 days next succeeding any municipal election held in the City at which a member of the City Council is elected. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected member to the City Council or a reorganized City Council to observe the actions and ability of the City Manager in the performance of the office of City Manager. 
(§ 2, Ord. 013-05, eff. November 17, 2005)  
Sec. 2-2.12. - Agreements with Council not limited. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the City Council to enter into any agreement with the City Manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment. The terms and conditions of any employment agreement may be inconsistent with, and supersede, this chapter only if expressly provided for in the agreement. 
(§ 2, Ord. 013-05, eff. November 17, 2005)  
CHAPTER 3. - OFFICIAL BONDS (To Be Enacted)  
CHAPTER 4. - OFFICIAL SEAL (To Be Enacted)  
CHAPTER 5. - PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 2-5.01. - Purpose and objectives. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish an equitable and uniform system of personnel administration for the City service. 
(§ 1, Ord. 598, eff. November 18, 1970)  
Sec. 2-5.02. - Career service, executive service, and exempt service positions. 
All offices and positions of the City shall be divided into the career service, the executive service, and the exempt service as follows: 
(a)  The career service shall be comprised of all budgeted offices and positions in the government of the City not included in the exempt service or the executive service. 
(b)  The executive service shall include the following: 
(1)  The City Manager and his or her principal administrative assistants; 
(2)  Heads of City departments; and 
(3)  Other positions as may be specifically designated by the Council. 
(c)  The exempt service shall include the following: 
(1)  All elected officials and members of boards and commissions; 
(2)  Persons serving the City as independent contractors; 
(3)  Consultants and counsel rendering temporary professional services; 
(4)  Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to serve without pay; 
(5)  Persons employed to render the City expert service of occasional character; and 
(6)  Positions involving seasonal, temporary, or part-time employment, as defined in the personnel rules. 
(§ 1, Ord. 598, eff. November 18, 1970)  
Sec. 2-5.03. - Reserved. 
(§ 1, Ord. 598, eff. November 18, 1970; repealed § 3, Ord. 013-05, eff. November 17, 2005)  
Sec. 2-5.04. - Personnel program administration. 
The administration of the personnel program established by this chapter shall be the responsibility of the City Manager. The City Manager may designate another officer or employee of the City as Personnel Officer and delegate to him or her the responsibility of the administration or assisting in the administration of the provisions of this chapter. The City Manager and/or the individual designated as Personnel Officer shall: 
(a)  Administer all the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules; 
(b)  Prepare and recommend revisions and amendments to the personnel rules; 
(c)  Meet from time to time with representatives of the City employees to consider information, suggestions, and recommendations regarding the personnel policies and practices of the City; 
(d)  Attend all meetings of the Personnel Board and serve as its secretary; 
(e)  In accordance with the personnel rules, publish or post notices of examinations for positions in the career service, receive applications, conduct and grade examinations, and certify to the appointing authority lists of eligible persons for appointment to appropriate positions; 
(f)  Be responsible for adopting and maintaining a position classification plan, which shall group all positions in the City service into classes based upon duties, authority, and responsibilities, and allocate positions to the appropriate class and make revisions in the classification plan, which shall consist of additions, abolishments, consolidations, divisions, or amendments to existing classes; 
(g)  The City Manager, with the assistance of the individual designated as Personnel Officer, and in consultation with the Director of Finance and representatives of the City employees, shall annually recommend for adoption by the Council a compensation plan. The compensation plan shall include for each class a minimum and maximum rate and such intermediate rates as are considered necessary and equitable. The rate or pay range assigned to each class shall be such as to reflect fairly the differences in the duties and responsibilities between it and other classes and shall take into account rates paid by other employers for comparable work in both public and private employment, the City's financial condition and policies, unusual problems of recruitment and turn-over, and other relevant factors; 
(h)  The City Manager may, with the consent of the Council, obtain on behalf of the City necessary services from persons or agencies competent in personnel administration; and 
(i)  Perform such other related duties as may be prescribed from time to time by the Council, the Personnel Board, or the City Manager. 
(§ 1, Ord. 598, eff. November 18, 1970)  
Sec. 2-5.05. - Personnel Board—Membership chairperson. 
There is hereby created a Personnel Board consisting of five members. Appointments shall be made by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. Members of the Personnel Board shall be residents of the City. Terms shall be for a period of four years. Vacancies on the Board shall be filled in the same manner as appointments for the unexpired term. The members of the Personnel Board appointed in accordance with the previous provisions of this chapter shall continue to serve their present terms. 
Annually, at a meeting in July, the Personnel Board shall select one of its members to serve as chairperson for a one-year term. 
(§ 1, Ord. 598, eff. November 18, 1970; § 1, Ord. 1060, eff. September 14, 1988)  
Sec. 2-5.06. - Personnel Board—Meetings; quorum. 
The Personnel Board may adopt rules of procedure, determine the order of business for the conduct of its meetings, and meet periodically as required, other than the meeting in July to select a chairman. Special meetings may be called by the chairman or by three members of the Personnel Board. 
Three members of the Personnel Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(§ 1, Ord. 598, eff. November 18, 1970)  
Sec. 2-5.07. - Personnel Board—Powers and duties. 
The Personnel Board shall have the power and be required to: 
(a)  Review and recommend to the Council any personnel rules or amendments to personnel rules which do not have a financial impact; 
(b)  Review and recommend to the Council any personnel rules or amendments to the personnel rules having a financial impact which have been referred to the Personnel Board by the Council; 
(c)  In accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules and as provided for by this chapter and the personnel rules, hear appeals of employees in the career service relative to disciplinary actions or alleged violations of the provisions of this chapter or the personnel rules; 
(d)  Offer guidance and counsel and submit recommendations to the City Manager, the individual designated as Personnel Officer, or the Council regarding the conduct of personnel administration for the City service; 
(e)  When requested by the Council or City Manager, hold hearings and make investigations and/or recommendations which may be considered desirable on any matter of personnel policy and report its findings to the Council or the City Manager as may be appropriate; and 
(f)  Serve as a fact finding, mediation, or conciliation board when so requested in matters of employer-employee relations. 
(§ 1, Ord. 598, eff. November 18, 1970)  
Sec. 2-5.08. - Rules promulgation. 
The City Manager or the individual designated as Personnel Officer shall draft, in consultation with the City Manager and with representatives of the City employees, such rules as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. Those rules which in any way would have any financial impact shall be referred directly to the Council for adoption or amendment. Those rules which do not have a financial impact shall be referred directly to the Personnel Board for review and recommendations to the Council for adoption or amendment. Personnel rules shall be adopted, amended, or rescinded by resolution of the Council. The Council may request the review and recommendations of the Personnel Board on those rules having a financial impact. Rules shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Administration of the compensation plan, including provisions for in-range salary adjustments and overtime compensation; 
(b)  Provisions relating to fringe benefit programs, including health insurance, retirement, training, and other fringe benefit programs determined to be necessary and desirable for the general welfare of the employees; 
(c)  Provisions regarding the conduct of employer-employee relations; 
(d)  Administration of the position classification plan, including provisions for reclassifications and for employees to appeal the allocation of their position to a particular class; 
(e)  Provisions covering the appointment, reappointment, and promotion of employees, which shall include the use of various screening and selection techniques to obtain for the City service the best qualified persons available; provided, however, there shall be no discrimination against any person seeking employment because of any considerations of political or religious affiliation or belief, non-affiliation or non-belief, or because of race, sex, or military status. The City Manager shall be the appointing authority and shall appoint, when necessary for the good of the service, discipline, and remove all employees in the career service, the executive service and employees in the exempt service involved in seasonal, temporary, or part-time employment as defined in the personnel rules, except as he or she may authorize the head of any department or office to appoint, discipline, or remove subordinates in such department or office; 
(f)  Provide for a probationary period for new employees or promoted employees during which new employees may be discharged or promoted employees may be demoted to a position in the classification from which they were promoted without appeal and provide for an extension of the probationary period not to exceed an additional six months; 
(g)  Provide that the tenure of every employee shall be conditioned on generally acceptable behavior and the satisfactory performance of duties and that an employee may be disciplined by suspension, demotion, dismissal, or other appropriate action; 
(h)  Provide the manner in which layoffs shall be made whenever there is a lack of work or lack of funds requiring reductions in the number of employees in a department, division, or section; 
(i)  Provide for a grievance procedure; 
(j)  Provide that employees in the career service shall have the right to appeal to the Personnel Board; 
(k)  Provisions covering the accrual and use of sick leave and vacation time, or a combination thereof, and provisions relating to holidays and days off; 
(l)  Provisions covering the adoption, amendment, and addition of personnel rule; and 
(m)  Such other matters as may be deemed desirable in order to provide a modern personnel program. 
(§ 1, Ord. 598, eff. November 18, 1970; §§ 4,5, Ord. 013-05, eff. November 17, 2005)  
Sec. 2-5.09. - Status of personnel rules. 
The personnel rules in effect on November 18, 1970, shall remain in effect until other personnel rules are adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 598, eff. November 18, 1970)  
Sec. 2-5.10. - Employment ineligibility for criminal conduct. 
No person convicted (including pleas of guilty and nolo contendere) of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude shall be eligible for employment by any department of the City; provided, however, the appointing authority may disregard such conviction if it is found and determined by such appointing authority that mitigating circumstances exist, such as, but not limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, the length of time elapsed since such conviction, the age of such person at the time of the conviction, or the fact that the classification applied for is unrelated to such conviction. 
The City Manager, Personnel Officer, Personnel Technician, Police Chief, City Attorney, and each appointing authority of the City are hereby authorized to have access to the "State Summary Criminal History Information," as provided for in Penal Code § 11105, when it is required to assist such individual to fulfill the employment responsibilities set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 778, eff. July 5, 1978)  
CHAPTER 6. - PURCHASING SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 2-6.01. - Purpose and objectives. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment, contractual services and construction work for both public projects as defined in the Public Contracts Code or non-public projects for the City at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, and to clearly define the authority for the purchasing function. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 1, Ord. 16-93, eff. January 6, 1994; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.02. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Contractual services" shall mean the rental, repair, or maintenance of equipment, machinery, and other City-owned property and other services of a like nature. 
(b)  "Open market purchases" shall mean purchases made without prior newspaper advertising or Council action. 
(c)  "Public project." The City elects to be subject to the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act as set forth in Section 22000 et seq. of the Public Contract Code ("Act"), and the uniform construction cost accounting procedures as set forth in said Act. Public project shall be as defined in the Act and shall be performed or awarded in accordance with the Act as the Act now reads or as hereinafter amended. 
(d)  "Purchasing Officer" shall mean the City Manager and/or the individual designated by the City Manager as Purchasing Officer. 
(e)  "Supplies," "materials," and "equipment" shall mean any and all articles or things which shall be furnished to or used by any department, or division thereof. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 16-93, eff. January 6, 1994; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.03. - Purchasing subject to other regulations. 
Purchases of supplies, materials, equipment, contractual services, and public projects shall be made subject to such regulations as may be prescribed by resolution of the Council and to the provisions of the Public Contract Code. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 3, Ord. 16-93, eff. January 6, 1994; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.04. - Exemptions from centralized purchasing. 
The City Manager or designee shall be authorized to process for payment those claims against the City where a reasonable advance estimate of costs is not possible or for essential services of a recurring nature. Included, but not limited to this authorization, shall be such items as utility services for telephone, electricity, and gas, approved claims for liability under the City's insurance program, renewal premiums for authorized insurance policies, and all expenditures for the City's payroll and employee withholdings. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.05. - Purchasing Officer—Powers and duties. 
The Purchasing Officer shall have the power and duty to purchase or contract for supplies, materials, equipment, and contractual services needed by any and all departments of the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.06. - Estimates of requirements. 
All using departments shall file with the Purchasing Officer detailed estimates of their requirements for supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services in such manner, at such times, and for such future periods as the Purchasing Officer shall prescribe. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.07. - Requisitions. 
Each department, or division thereof, shall utilize the form of requisition to be prescribed by the Purchasing Officer. No purchase requisition shall be initiated unless the department has a sufficient unencumbered balance in excess of all unpaid obligations to defray the amount of such order. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.08. - Open market purchases and sales. 
(a)  Purchases up to $1,000. The purchase order as prescribed by the Purchasing Officer may be used for purchases up to $1,000 by any employee authorized by their department head. Procurement Card purchases as prescribed by the Purchasing Officer may be used for purchases up to $1,000. 
(b)  Purchases and sales up to $5,000. 
(1)  Purchases up to $5,000. The large purchase order prescribed by the Purchasing Officer may be used for the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services greater than $1,000 and up to $5,000, and may be made by City departments in the open market. Insofar as it is practical, no less than three quotes shall be solicited to from vendors. Award shall be made to the responsible vendor offering the lowest acceptable quotation. The names of the vendors submitting quotations, the date and the amount of the quotation shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. 
(2)  Sales up to $5,000. City property that has become obsolete or is to be disposed of for any other reason valued up to $5,000 may be sold by the Purchasing Officer in the open market. Insofar as it is practical, no less than three offers shall be solicited from potential buyers. The sale shall be made to the buyer making the highest offer. 
(c)  Purchases and sales up to $50,000. 
(1)  Purchases up to $50,000. Purchases of supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services greater than $5,000 and up to $50,000 may be made by the Purchasing Officer in the open market through the informal bid process. The large purchase order shall be prescribed by Purchasing Officer. 
(2)  Sales up to $50,000. City property that has become obsolete or is to be disposed of for any other reason and whose value is greater than $5,000 and up to $50,000 may be sold by the Purchasing Officer through the informal bid process. Insofar as it is practical, no less than three offers shall be solicited from potential buyers. The sale shall be made to the buyer making the highest offer. 
(3)  Soliciting informal bids. The Purchasing Officer shall serve the best interest of the City through soliciting informal bids by direct mail requests/e-mail, checking prices by telephone inquiry, the comparison of prices on file, use of the internet, or by other appropriate means. Insofar as it is practical, no less than three vendors shall be solicited to submit quotations. Informal bid awards for purchases shall be made to the responsible vendor offering the lowest acceptable quotation, sales shall be made to the buyer making the highest acceptable offer. The Purchasing Officer shall keep a record of all open market purchases and sales and informal bidding competition thereon, and such records shall be maintained as a public record. 
(d)  Rejection of informal bids, offers, or quotations. The Purchasing Officer may reject any and all informal bids, offers or quotations when, in his or her discretion, it shall be in the best interest of the City to do so. 
(e)  Public projects informal bidding procedures. Public projects as defined by the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in Section 22000, et seq., of the Act as follows: 
(1)  A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Public Contracts Code § 22034 and criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. 
(2)  Where a public project is to be performed which is subject to the provisions of this chapter, a notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list developed in accordance with this section, and to all construction trade journals as specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in accordance with Public Contracts Code § 22036. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the City, provided, however: 
(i)  If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the City for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the Commission. 
(ii)  If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors. 
(3)  The Purchasing Officer is authorized to award informal contracts pursuant to this chapter. 
(4)  All mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals shall be completed not less than ten calendar days before the bids are due. 
(5)  The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms, how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 1, Ord. 881, eff. October 19, 1981; § 4, Ord. 16-93, eff. January 6, 1994; § 1, Ord. 14-99, eff. October 7, 1999; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.09. - Purchases and sales above limits for formal bidding. 
(a)  Soliciting bids; notices. Purchases of supplies, materials, equipment, contractual services and sales of City property which has become obsolete or unusable or for any other reason is to be disposed of, when the total expenditure or the value of the City property to be sold exceeds the limits of Section 2-6.08(c) of the City of Yuba City Municipal Code as the same now reads or as hereinafter amended, shall be made after two inviting bids are published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City, the first publication of which shall be at least ten days before the time for opening the bids. Notices for receiving bids for the construction of public projects will be provided in accordance with Public Contracts Code § 22037. 
(b)  Tabulating bids and award. At the time specified in the notice inviting bids, such bids shall be opened publicly and declared by the City Clerk or designee. The Purchasing Officer or designee shall review all bids received and make award recommendations to City Council. Public records of all bids received shall be maintained. 
(c)  Rejection of bids. The City Manager/Council may reject any and all bids presented and may readvertise at its discretion. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 881, eff. October 19, 1981; § 5, Ord. 16-93, eff. January 6, 1994; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.10. - Splitting purchases. 
No undertaking involving amounts in excess of the statutory limit set forth in Section 2-6.09(a) hereof shall be split into parts by the department head requesting the purchase or by the Purchasing Officer so as to produce amounts less than the referenced statutory limits set forth herein for the purpose of avoiding the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.11. - Bidder's security. 
When deemed necessary by the Purchasing Officer, bidder's security may be required. Bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid security; provided, however, a successful bidder shall forfeit his or her bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the contract is awarded, unless the City is responsible for the delay. On the refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, the bid may be awarded to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the contract is awarded to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the City to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. 
Bidder's security for the construction of public projects shall be required in accordance with Public Contracts Code § 20170 or as amended. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.12. - Performance bonds. 
When deemed necessary by the Purchasing Officer, a performance bond may be required before entering into a contract in such amount as is reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.13. - Labor/material bonds. 
When deemed necessary by the Purchasing Officer, a labor/material bond may be required before entering into a contract in such amount as is reasonably necessary to protect the best interest of the City. Labor and materials bonds for the construction of public projects will be in accordance with Civil Code § 3247 or as amended. 
(§ 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.14. - Exemptions from competitive bidding. 
Competitive bidding requirements for purchases and sales over the limits set forth in Section 2-6.09 may be waived when the Council determines that it is in the best interest of the City to do so. The conditions authorizing waiver of the competitive bidding requirements may include, but not be limited to, cooperative purchasing or sales in conjunction with other governmental entities, professional services, annual service or supply agreements or purchases necessary for standardization on particular types of equipment or sole source when the purchase or sale can only be obtained from one source. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 3, Ord. 881, eff. October 19, 1981; § 2, Ord. 14-99, eff. October 7, 1999; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.15. - Emergency purchases. 
(a)  In the event an emergency shall arise which precludes action by the Council and which requires any purchase of supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services, the Purchasing Officer is hereby authorized to secure in the open market at the lowest obtainable price any such supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services even though the amounts thereof shall exceed the statutory limits set forth in Section 2-6.09. In each such instance the Purchasing Officer shall submit to the Council in writing a full explanation of the circumstances of such emergency and a description of the supplies purchased which report shall become a part of the records of the next ensuing meeting of the Council and be open for public inspection. 
(b)  Pursuant to the Public Contracts Code § 22050, in the event of an emergency for public projects, the authority to order any action required by an emergency to procure the necessary equipment, services, and supplies, without giving notice to bids to let contracts, is delegated to the City Manager. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 4, Ord. 881, eff. October 19, 1981; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.16. - Purchase orders—Preparation. 
Upon ascertaining the price to be paid for any supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services, the Purchasing Officer shall prepare a purchase order on a prescribed form. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2. Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.17. - Encumbrance of funds. 
Upon the receipt of a copy of the purchase order from the Purchasing Officer, the Finance Division shall encumber any amount of purchase over $1,000 against the unencumbered appropriated balance indicated on the records of such department as the purchase is made. This may be completed electronically. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.18. - Receipt of purchases. 
Upon the receipt by any department of supplies, materials, and equipment, the department head or designee shall be responsible for the making of a careful check of the quality, condition, and quantity received against a copy of the purchase order and the packing lists. If all of the supplies, materials, and equipment referred to in the purchase order have been received, the department head or designee shall sign the receiving copy of the purchase order, attaching thereto the packing lists/invoice, if any, and forward the same to the Finance Department. If a delivery represents only a partial delivery of the supplies, materials, and equipment, the department receiving the delivery shall request a partial payment for the items actually received and send the request to the Finance Department, as appropriate. Upon receiving the balance of the order, the department head shall sign the receiving copy of the purchase order and return it to the Finance Department. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff, April 17, 2008.)  
Sec. 2-6.19. - Invoices. 
The Finance Department shall compare the vendor's invoice with the copy of the purchase order. It shall check the invoice for correctness of unit prices, discounts, transportation allowances, and the like, and with the reports of quantity and quality of goods received. Upon satisfaction that the invoice is correct, the Finance Department shall approve the invoice for payment. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.20. - Inspections of goods received. 
The Purchasing Officer shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, all deliveries of supplies, materials, equipment, and contractual services to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. Any department, or division thereof, having the staff and facilities for adequate inspection may be authorized by the Purchasing Officer to inspect all deliveries made to such using department. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.21. - Storerooms and warehouses. 
The Purchasing Officer shall control and supervise, or cause to be controlled and supervised, all storerooms and warehouses. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.22. - Warehouse revolving fund—Inventory records. 
The Council shall provide a warehouse revolving fund of sufficient amount to finance the purchase and storage of supplies, materials, and equipment which are used in sufficient quantities to effect advantageous purchasing and storage. Such fund shall be under the control of the Purchasing Officer, who shall also be responsible and accountable for all supplies, materials, and equipment in his or her custody and shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, a suitable inventory record thereof. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.23. - Surplus and unclaimed property. 
(a)  Surplus/unclaimed property. The Purchasing Officer shall have the power to sell all supplies, materials, and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out, or scrapped, or which have become unsuitable for public use, or to exchange for or trade in the same on new supplies, materials, and equipment. All unclaimed property shall be sold in accordance with Civil Code § 2080 et seq. The Purchasing Officer shall have the power to sell unclaimed property. All sales shall be in accordance with the provisions outlined in Section 2-6.08 and Section 2-6.09. 
(b)  Disposal of personal property not worth more than $500. Pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code § 217, in lieu of the provisions contained in Civil Code § 2080, an alternative procedure is established with respect to the disposal of unclaimed personal property not worth more than $500. The Purchasing Officer is authorized with respect to personal property not worth more than $500 which have been unclaimed for at least 90 days, to transfer and deliver any such items to the Probation Officer of the County, to the Welfare Department of the County or to any charitable or nonprofit organization which is authorized under its articles of incorporation to participate in a program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency, and which is exempt from income taxation under Federal or State law, or both, for use in any program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 1, Ord. 32-92, eff. February 4, 1993; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.24. - Rules and regulations. 
The Purchasing Officer shall establish, and from time to time amend, all rules and regulations authorized by this chapter and any others necessary to its operation. Such rules and regulations, and amendments thereto, shall be subject to the approval of the Council by resolution. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
Sec. 2-6.25. - Annual reports. 
The Purchasing Officer shall submit to the Finance Department an annual inventory of the supplies, materials, and equipment purchased through the Warehouse Revolving Fund for the prior fiscal year. 
(§ 2, Ord. 688, eff. October 16, 1974; § 2, Ord. 008-07, eff. May 31, 2007; § 2, Ord. 003-08, eff. April 17, 2008)  
CHAPTER 7. - TRAINING OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 2-7.01. - Declaration of qualification standards. 
The City hereby declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the State pursuant to the provisions of Penal Code ch. 1, tit. 4, pt. 4. 
(§ 1, Ord. 447)  
Sec. 2-7.02. - Declaration of adherence to standards. 
Pursuant to Penal Code § 13522, the City, while receiving aid from the State pursuant to said provisions of the Penal Code, agrees to adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(§ 2, Ord. 447)  
CHAPTER 8. - EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION 
 
Sec. 2-8.01. - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the City in the event of an emergency; the direction of the Emergency Organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of the City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(Ord. 682, eff. June 19, 1974)  
Sec. 2-8.02. - Emergency defined. 
As used in this chapter, "emergency" shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the City caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or the imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are, or are likely to be, beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of the City, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
(Ord. 682, eff. June 19, 1974)  
Sec. 2-8.03. - Disaster Council—Membership. 
The Yuba City Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following: 
(a)  The Mayor, who shall be the chairman; 
(b)  The Director of Emergency Services, who shall be the vice-chairman; 
(c)  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current Emergency Plan of the City adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; and 
(d)  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veteran, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the Director of Emergency Services with the advice and consent of the City Council. 
(Ord. 682, eff. June 19, 1974; as amended by §§ 1, 2, Ord. 952, eff. July 18, 1984)  
Sec. 2-8.04. - Disaster Council—Powers and duties; meetings. 
It shall be the duty of the Yuba City Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon the call of the chairman or, in his or her absence from the City or inability to call such meeting, upon the call of the vice-chairman. 
(Ord. 682, eff. June 19, 1974)  
Sec. 2-8.05. - Director of Emergency Services—Offices created. 
There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services. 
(Ord. 682, eff. June 19, 1974; as amended by §§ 1, 3, Ord. 952, eff. July 18, 1984)  
Sec. 2-8.06. - Director of Emergency Services—Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Director of Emergency Services is hereby empowered to: 
(1)  Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency," if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director of Emergency Services, the City Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter, or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect; 
(2)  Request the Governor of the State to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the Director of Emergency Services, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
(3)  Control and direct the effort of the Emergency Organization of the City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
(4)  Direct cooperation between, and coordination of, the services and staff of the Emergency Organization of the City and resolve questions of authority and responsibility which may arise between them; 
(5)  Represent the City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in Section 2-8.02 of this chapter; and 
(6)  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency," as provided in this subsection (a), the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the Director of the Office of Emergency Services of the State, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the Director of Emergency Services is hereby empowered: 
(i)  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations shall be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council; 
(ii)  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property, to bind the City for the fair value thereof, and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
(iii)  To require the emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the County of the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of the community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all the privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by State laws for registered disaster service workers; 
(iv)  To requisition the necessary personnel or materials of any City department or agency; and 
(v)  To execute all of his or her ordinary powers as City Manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by the provisions of this chapter or by resolution of Emergency Plan adopted by the City Council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City Council, or by any other lawful authority. 
(7)  Assign, as he or she determines appropriate, responsibility to emergency services chiefs for developing and directing the various City emergency response capabilities and providing for the training of City personnel. 
(b)  The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession to his or her office to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings or otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. 682, eff. June 19, 1974; as amended by §§ 4, 5, Ord. 952, eff. July 18, 1984)  
Sec. 2-8.07. - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of the City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may, by agreement or operation of law, including persons pressed into service pursuant to the provisions of subsection (iii) of subsection (6) of subsection (a) of Section 2-8.06 of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the City during such emergency, shall constitute the Emergency Organization of the City. 
(Ord. 682, eff. June 19, 1974)  
Sec. 2-8.08. - Emergency plan. 
The Yuba City Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the City of Yuba City Emergency Plan, which shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, a state of emergency, or a state of war emergency, and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the Emergency Organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 682, eff. June 19, 1974)  
Sec. 2-8.09. - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City. 
(Ord. 682, eff. June 19, 1974)  
Sec. 2-8.10. - Punishment of violations. 
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed $500, or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person during an emergency to: 
(a)  Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the Emergency Organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of the provisions of this chapter; 
(b)  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof; or 
(c)  Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the Emergency Agency of the State. 
(Ord. 682, eff. June 19, 1974)  
Sec. 2-8.11. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
Ordinance Nos. 231 and 338 are hereby repealed; provided, however, it is the intent of the City Council in enacting this chapter that it shall be considered as a revision and continuation of said ordinances, and the status of volunteers shall not be affected by such repeal, nor shall civil defense and disaster mutual aid plans and agreements, rules and regulations, or resolutions adopted pursuant to such repealed ordinances be affected by such repeal until amended, modified, or superseded as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 682, eff. June 19, 1974)  
CHAPTER 9. - GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 2-9.01. - Date of election. 
Pursuant to Government Code § 36503.5, the City Council of the City of Yuba City fixes the day of the statewide general election, to wit, the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even numbered year (pursuant to Elections Code §§ 2500 and 2501) as the date of the general municipal election within the City of Yuba City and which otherwise would be held on the second Tuesday in April of even numbered years. The municipal election thereafter shall be conducted on the date of the statewide general election unless this chapter is later repealed by the City Council. 
(§ 1, Ord. 888, eff. December 14, 1981, § 1, Ord. 894, eff. March 16, 1982)  
Sec. 2-9.02. - Continuance in office of City officers. 
Pursuant to subsection (c) of Section 36503.5 those elected City officers whose four-year term of office would have, prior to the adoption of this chapter, expired on the Tuesday succeeding the second Tuesday in April of an even numbered year, shall instead continue in their offices until the fourth Tuesday after the date herein fixed by this chapter as the date for the general municipal election. 
(§ 2, Ord. 888, eff. December 14, 1981, § 2, Ord. 894, eff. March 16, 1982)  
Sec. 2-9.03. - Notice to voters. 
The City Clerk shall, pursuant to Section 36503.5 (a), submit this chapter for approval to the Sutter County Board of Supervisors and further shall, within 30 days after this chapter becomes operative, to wit, upon approval by the Sutter County Board of Supervisors, shall cause a notice to be mailed to all registered voters informing the voters of a change in the election date and also informing the voters that as a result of the change in the election date, elected City officeholder's terms in office will be extended and that no term shall be decreased. 
(§ 3, Ord. 888, eff. December 14, 1981, § 3, Ord. 894, eff. March 16, 1982)  
CHAPTER 10. - SENIOR COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-10.01. - Creation/membership. 
The City of Yuba City Senior Commission is hereby established. It shall be composed of five members confirmed by the City Council. The City Council may choose to appoint one alternate member to the Commission, who would serve normally as a non-voting member. In the absence of a regular member of the Commission, the alternate member shall take the absent individual's seat and have the right to vote. All members of the Senior Commission shall reside within the City of Yuba City. The Community Services Director, or his/her designee shall be an ex officio member and shall serve as Secretary of the Commission. 
It is the intent of the City Council that a diversified group of senior citizens be appointed to the Commission. In that regard, every effort will be made to select Commissioners who represent a broad section of views related to the planning and implementation of City programs designated to address the needs of the aged population. 
(§ 1, Ord. 13-93, eff. November, 1993; § 1, Ord. 003-02, eff. March 7, 2002; § 1, Ord. 001-04, eff. February 19, 2004; Ord. No. 007-18 , § 1, 9-18-2018)  
Sec. 2-10.02. - Term of office. 
The terms of members of the Senior Commission shall be four years. 
The anniversary date for all appointments shall be February 28 th of any year. The two current commissioners whose terms expire on December 31, 2019 will be extended to February 28, 2020. The three commissioners whose terms expire on December 31, 2021 will be extended to February 28, 2022. 
The terms of office set forth in this section shall not be deemed arbitrary. Members of the Senior Commission serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed without cause. Council may so order and appoint a successor for the unexpired term of office of the removed member. Should a vacancy occur during the term of a regular member of the Commission, it is the City Council's expectation that the alternate member will be appointed to complete the unexpired term of the vacant position. Any Commissioner appointed to succeed a vacated seat on the Commission shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term of their predecessor. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as appointments for the unexpired term of office. 
Council may establish by resolution appropriate service requirements, criteria and attendance standards governing service on the Planning Commission. Selection shall reflect as nearly as possible the diverse demographic characteristics of the population of Yuba City. Commissioners are expected to attend all Commission meetings. 
(§ 1, Ord. 13-93, eff. November 4, 1993; § 1, Ord. 003-02, eff. March 7, 2002; § 1, Ord. 001-04, eff. February 19, 2004; Ord. No. 007-18 , § 2, 9-18-2018)  
Sec. 2-10.03. - Powers and duties. 
The Senior Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, City Manager and the Parks and Recreation Director in all matters pertaining to the elderly and all general matters concerning issues related to the planning and implementation of City programs designed to address the needs of the aged population. The Commission shall examine and evaluate programs and services provided by the City targeted to the elderly. The Commission shall recommend general policies concerning recreational programs, specific areas of need and longer-term provision of service targeted to the elderly. The Commission may recommend procurement of grants and other similar programs of financial assistance to further programs and services for the elderly. The Commission may advise the City on issues related to the aging population including the activities and programs operated by the City, i.e., the Senior Center, housing issues, health and safety issues, etc. The Parks and Recreation Director shall provide guidance to the Commission to insure that programs and/or projects that the Commission has an interest in are within the policies, programs, and scope of services that the City provides. 
(§ 1, Ord. 13-93, eff. November 4, 1993; § 1, Ord. 003-02, eff. March 7, 2002; § 1, Ord. 012-03, eff. July 31, 2003; § 1, Ord. 001-04, eff. February 19, 2004)  
Sec. 2-10.04. - Officers. 
(a)  The Commission shall choose one of its members to serve as chairperson and one of its members as vice chair. The chair and vice chair shall be elected each calendar year at the first meeting following January 1. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings, submit all motions to vote and in general do all things ordinarily required of a chairperson. The vice chair shall assume the duties of the chairperson in his/her absence. 
(b)  The secretary shall take and keep the minutes of all the meetings and provide information and assistance to the Commission. Copies of the minutes shall be submitted to the City Council for review. 
(§ 1, Ord. 13-93, eff. November 4, 1993; § 1, Ord. 003-02, eff. March 7, 2002; § 1, Ord. 001-04, eff. February 19, 2004)  
Sec. 2-10.05. - Procedures. 
The Commission shall hold regular meetings throughout the calendar year no less than quarterly. 
The Senior Commission may adopt rules of procedure, determine the order of business for its meetings, time and place and conduct of its members. Three members of the Senior Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(§ 1, Ord. 13-93, eff. November 4, 1993; § 1, Ord. 003-02, eff. March 7, 2002; § 1, Ord. 001-04, eff. February 19, 2004 )  
CHAPTER 11. - YOUTH COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-11.01. - Creation/membership. 
The City of Yuba City Youth Commission is hereby established. It shall be composed of nine members confirmed by the City Council. The City Council may choose to appoint one alternate member to the Commission, who would serve normally as a non-voting member. In the absence of a regular member of the Commission, the alternate member shall take the absent individual's seat and have the right to vote. All members of the Youth Commission shall reside within Yuba City. The Community Services Director, or his/her designee shall be the ex officio member and shall serve as Secretary of the Commission. 
It is the intent of the City Council that a diversified group of young people be appointed to the Commission. Members of the Commission shall be of High School age (14-19), for example entering their freshman year of high school through a senior in High School. Every effort shall be made to select Commissioners who represent a broad section of views related to programs for the youth. Eligible persons shall hold the office to which he/she has been appointed until the expiration of such member's term of office notwithstanding that said appointee has reached the age in excess of 19. 
(§ 1, Ord. 15-93, eff. November 18, 1993; § 1, Ord. 004-02, eff. March 7, 2002; Ord. No. 008-18 , § 1, 9-18-2018)  
Sec. 2-11.02. - Term of office. 
Members of the Youth Commission shall be appointed for the following terms of office: 
Each member, including the alternate member, shall serve in office for a term of two years and the method of appointment shall remain the same. The anniversary date for all appointments shall be June 30 of any year. Four members shall be appointed in odd years, and the remaining five members shall be appointed in even years. 
The four current members of the Youth Commission with anniversary dates of December 31, 2012 will have their terms extended to June 30, 2013. The five current members of the Youth Commission with anniversary dates as of December 31, 2013 will have their terms extended to June 30, 2014. 
The terms of office set forth in this section shall not be deemed arbitrary. If it is determined by a majority vote of the City Council that it would be in the best interest of the Youth Commission that a member be removed, Council may so order and appoint a successor for the unexpired term of office of the removed member. Should a vacancy occur during the term of a regular member of the Commission, it is the City Council's expectation that the alternate member will be appointed to complete the unexpired term of the vacant position. Vacancies on the Commission, other than that to be filled by the alternate member, shall be filled in the same manner as appointments for the unexpired term of office. 
Council may establish by resolution appropriate service requirements and criteria and attendance standards governing service on the Youth Commission. Selection shall reflect as nearly as possible the diverse demographic characteristics of the youth population of Yuba City. Commissioners are expected to attend all Commission meetings. 
Every effort shall be made to outreach into the community for a cross section of individuals to participate on the City's Youth Commission. This shall be done through high schools, middle schools, continuation schools, youth related organizations, clubs, social groups, media, City newsletters, etc. in seeking participation on the Youth Commission. Selection of Youth Commissioners can include the participation by youth advisors and Youth Commissioners in making recommendations to the City Council for appointments. 
(§ 1, Ord. 15-93, eff. November 18, 1993; § 1, Ord. 10-00, eff. February 1, 2001; § 1, Ord. 004-02, eff. March 7, 2002; § 1, Ord. 004-12, eff. November 1, 2012)  
Sec. 2-11.03. - Powers and duties. 
The Youth Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, City Manager and the Parks and Recreation Director in all matters pertaining to youth and all general matters concerning issues affecting youth and the City of Yuba City. In addition, the Youth Commission shall: 
(a)  Recommend general polices involving the implementation of recreation programs to meet the needs of the community youth. 
(b)  Foster involvement of youth in municipal government and other agencies affecting youth in the community. 
(c)  Evaluate and seek solutions to problems, activities and concerns of youth as they relate to municipal policies and programs. 
(d)  Co-sponsor the Youth in Government Day and Youth Recognition Program. 
(e)  Prepare an annual report of Commission activities. 
(§ 1, Ord. 15-93, eff. November 18, 1993; § 1, Ord. 004-02, eff. March 7, 2002)  
Sec. 2-11.04. - Officers. 
The duties of the officers of the Youth Commission shall be as follows: 
(a)  The Commission shall choose one of its members to serve as chairperson and one of its members as vice chair. The chair and vice chair shall be elected each calendar year at the first meeting following January 1. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings, submit all motions to vote and in general do all things ordinarily required of a chairperson. The vice chair shall assume the duties of the chairperson in his/her absence. 
(b)  The secretary shall take and keep the minutes of all the meetings and provide information and assistance to the Commission. Copies of the minutes shall be submitted to the City Council for review. 
(§ 1, Ord. 15-93, eff. November 18, 1993; § 2, Ord. 10-00, eff. February 1, 2001; § 1, Ord. 004-02, eff. March 7, 2002)  
Sec. 2-11.05. - Procedures. 
The Commission shall hold regular meetings throughout the calendar year no less than bimonthly. 
The Youth Commission may adopt rules of procedure, determine the order of business for its meetings, time and place, and conduct of its members. Five members of the Youth Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(§ 1, Ord. 15-93, eff. November 18, 1993; § 1, Ord. 004-02, eff. March 7, 2002)  
CHAPTER 12. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-12.01. - Creation/membership. 
The City of Yuba City Economic Development Commission is hereby established. It shall be composed of seven members confirmed by the City Council. The City Council may choose to appoint one alternate member to the Commission, who would serve normally as a nonvoting member. In the absence of a regular member of the Commission, the alternate member shall take the absent individual's seat and have the right to vote. The City Manager or his/her designee shall be an ex officio member and shall serve as Secretary of the Commission. All members of the Commission except ex officio members shall have the right to vote. 
(§ 1, Ord. 009-08, eff. October 16, 2008; Ord. No. 001-19 , § 2, 5-21-2019)  
Sec. 2-12.02. - Terms of office. 
The terms of members of the Economic Development Commission shall be four years. 
The anniversary date for all appointments shall be February 28 th of any year. The three current commissioners whose terms expire on December 31, 2018 will be extended to February 28, 2019. The two commissioners whose terms expire on December 31, 2020 will be extended to February 28, 2021. 
The terms of office set forth in this section shall not be deemed arbitrary. Members of the Economic Development Commission serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed without cause. Council may so order and appoint a successor for the unexpired term of office of the removed member. Any Commissioner appointed to succeed a vacated seat on the Commission shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term of their predecessor. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as appointments for the unexpired term of office. 
Council may establish by resolution appropriate service requirements, criteria and attendance standards governing service on the Planning Commission. Selection shall reflect as nearly as possible the diverse demographic characteristics of the population of Yuba City. Commissioners are expected to attend all Commission meetings. 
(§ 1, Ord. 009-08, eff. October 16, 2008; Ord. No. 005-18 , § 1, 9-18-2018)  
Sec. 2-12.03. - Powers and duties. 
The Economic Development Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, the City Manager, the Redevelopment Executive Director, and the City's Economic Development Staff in all matters pertaining to economic development. The Commission shall provide input to the City's Economic Development Strategy/Work Plan, oversee its implementation, and recommend changes as economic market conditions shift and opportunities arise. The Commission may be a network conduit for the City's Economic Development staff with businesses and key business influencers and identify opportunities and available resources. 
The Economic Development Commission, in coordination with the City staff, shall develop and submit for City Council approval an annual work program establishing the priority work items each year. 
(§ 1, Ord. 009-08, eff. October 16, 2008)  
Sec. 2-12.04. - Officers. 
The Commission shall choose one of its members to serve as chairperson and one of its members as vice chair. The chair and vice chair shall be elected each calendar year at the first meeting following January 1. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings, submit all motions to vote and in general do all things ordinarily required of a chairperson. The vice chair shall keep minutes of all the meetings and provide information and assistance to the Commission. Copies of the minutes shall be submitted to the City Council for review. 
(§ 1, Ord. 009-08, eff. October 16, 2008)  
Sec. 2-12.05. - Procedures. 
The Economic Development Commission may adopt rules of procedure, determine the order of business for its meetings, time and place, and conduct of its members. Four members of the Economic Development Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(§ 1, Ord. 009-08, eff. October 16, 2008; Ord. No. 001-19 , § 3, 5-21-2019)  
TITLE 3. - FINANCE  
CHAPTER 1. - FINANCE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 3-1.01. - Established. 
There is hereby established a Finance Department. 
(§ 1, Ord. 426)  
Sec. 3-1.02. - Supervision. 
The Finance Department shall be supervised by a Finance Director who shall be responsible to the City Manager. 
(§ 2, Ord. 426)  
Sec. 3-1.03. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The Finance Department shall be vested and charged with the following duties and responsibilities: 
(a)  To control all City revenue collections; 
(b)  To supervise the Water Office; 
(c)  To perform such other duties and functions as may be required by the Council or the City Manager; and 
(d)  To perform the accounting functions of the City for which the Finance Department is responsible. 
(§ 3, Ord. 426)  
Sec. 3-1.04. - Finance Director. 
In accordance with the provisions of Government Code §§ 40805.5 and 37209, the financial and accounting duties imposed upon the City Clerk pursuant to the provisions of Government Code §§ 40802 through 40805 are hereby transferred to the Finance Director. 
(§ 3, Ord. 426)  
CHAPTER 3. - DEMANDS AGAINST THE CITY 
 
Sec. 3-3.01. - Presentation. 
The furnisher of supplies and services to the City shall present a statement or invoice, in duplicate, of their demands against the City to the Finance Director. 
(§ 1, Ord. 237; § 2, Ord. 26-92, eff. November 5, 1992)  
Sec. 3-3.02. - Audit. 
The Council shall audit all demands against the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 237; § 2, Ord. 26-92, eff. November 5, 1992)  
Sec. 3-3.03. - Warrants for payment; preparation. 
Upon allowing a demand a check or warrant shall be drawn upon the City Treasurer, supplying the purpose for which it is drawn and the fund from which it is to be paid. The City Council shall by resolution establish the City officers and employees authorized to sign City checks, warrants or drafts. 
(§ 3, Ord. 237; § 2, Ord. 26-92, eff. November 5, 1992)  
Sec. 3-3.04. - Special claims procedures. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in Government Code § 935, the following claims procedures are established for those claims against the City for money or damages not now governed by State or local laws: 
(a)  Employee claims. Notwithstanding the exceptions contained in Government Code § 905, all claims by public officers or employees for fees, salaries, wages, overtime pay, holiday pay, compensating time off, vacation pay, sick leave pay, any other expenses or allowances, or any other term or condition of employment claimed due from the City, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by State or local laws, resolutions, or Memos of Understanding with employee groups, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Government Code §§ 910 through 915.2 as the same now reads or as hereinafter amended. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Government Code § 945.4 as the same now reads or as hereinafter amended relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action thereon by the City Council. 
(b)  Contract and other claims. In addition to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, and notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in Government Code § 905 as the same now reads or as hereinafter amended, all claims against the City for damages or money, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by State or local laws, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Government Code §§ 910 through 915.2 as the same now reads or as hereinafter amended. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Government Code § 945.4 as the same now reads or as hereinafter amended relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action therein by the City Council. 
(c)  Filing. All claims against the City shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(§ 1, Ord. 17-93, eff. January 6, 1994)  
CHAPTER 4. - LICENSING 
 
Sec. 3-4.01. - Establishment of business license tax. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Business License Tax Code." It is enacted solely to raise tax revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for regulation. The City Council from time to time shall establish the business license tax and related application and other base service or enforcement fees implementing that action by appropriate adopting resolution. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.02. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Administrative headquarters" shall mean any business operation where the principal business transacted consist of providing administrative or management related services such as, but not limited to, record keeping, data processing, research, advertising, public relations, personnel administration, legal and corporate headquarters services, to other locations where the operations of the same business are conducted which lead more directly to the production of gross receipts. 
(b)  "Ambulance" shall mean any vehicle specifically equipped or previously used to transport the sick, wounded, handicapped, injured, or deceased. 
(c)  "Ambulette" shall mean any vehicle equipped or primarily used for transporting handicapped persons for nonemergency purposes. 
(d)  "Annualization" shall mean an estimation, extended for a 12-month period, based on reported gross receipts for a prior period of less than 12 months. 
(e)  "Applicant" shall mean any person who applies for a license or a license renewal under the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  "Automobile dismantler" shall mean any person who has an established place of business and is engaged in the business of buying, selling, or dealing in vehicles of a type required to be registered pursuant to Vehicle Code § 220, as the same now exists or as hereafter amended, for the purpose of dismantling the same, who buys or sells the integral parts and component materials thereof, in whole or in part, deals in used motor vehicle parts. This section does not apply to the occasional and incidental dismantling of vehicles by dealers who have secured dealers' plates from the California Department of Motor Vehicles and whose principal business is buying and selling new and used vehicles, or by owners who desire to dismantle not more than three personal vehicles within any 12-month period. 
(g)  "Building and loan" shall mean any person who for a fee engages in the loan of money upon personal security, evidences of debt, automobile, or any personal property, or purchases automobile contracts, commercial paper, evidences of debt, assignments of salary, salary warranty, salary demands, time checks, or other evidences of salary due or to become due, or automobile paper. The term "building and loan" as used in this chapter excludes savings and loans, pawnbrokers or the holder of a bond brokers license, or any person conducting a banking business under the laws of the State or any person subject to the State corporate income tax as a financial corporation. 
(h)  "Building-tradesman (handyperson)" shall mean any person engaged within the City, as an independent contractor in any trade, art, calling, avocation or occupation of the building trades and not licensed as a contractor by the State. 
(i)  "Business" shall include all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in within the City, including any commercial or industrial enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, vocation, calling, or livelihood, including lease or rental of residential or nonresidential real estate, and every other kind of activity whether or not carried on for gain or profit, and whether or not engaged in as a principal or as an independent contractor, but shall not include the services rendered by an employee to his or her employer. 
(j)  "Business by vehicle" shall mean the running, driving or operating of any vehicle, automobile, truck, or any vehicle for the purpose of transportation, sale, collection, or delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, or other personal property of any kind from a vehicle, either as a principal business or in connection with any other business, or in soliciting for work, labor, or services to be performed upon the public streets on or from a vehicle, or to be performed on goods, wares, merchandise, clothes, or other personal property to be taken for such purpose to a plant or establishment inside or outside the City. This definition shall not be deemed to apply to the delivery of goods by persons operating such a vehicle in conjunction with a fixed place of business within the City for which such business a license fee has been paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. This definition shall not be construed as imposing a tax upon vehicles, but as a method of classification of businesses and distinguishing between persons maintaining a fixed place of business in the conduct of which a vehicle is used, and persons maintaining a business in the conduct of which vehicles are used, but who do not have a fixed place of business in the City. 
(k)  "Business License Inspector" shall mean the designee of the Collector. 
(l)  "Business License Officer" shall mean the Collector or the designee of such person. 
(m)  "Business license certificate" shall mean the certificate required to be posted or displayed as evidence of a business' payment of the tax required by the provisions of this chapter and shall herein be referred to as "license certificate" or "license" except as otherwise specified. 
(n)  "Business license tax" shall mean the privilege tax paid as required by the provisions of this chapter and shall herein be referred to as "business or license tax" except as otherwise specified. 
(o)  "Charge" shall mean any base service fee fixed herein which is intended solely to cover the reasonable administrative cost incurred in performing any specified act or acts on behalf of the City. 
(p)  "City" shall mean the City of Yuba City. 
(q)  "Coin-operated machine or device" shall mean any machine or device that dispenses a product, or provides a service, or utility or amusement; resulting from insertion or use of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, plug, key, check or other device, or money, or thing of value. 
(r)  "Collector" shall mean the Director of Finance or other City official charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(s)  "Commission agent, broker or merchant" shall mean any person engaged in the business of buying and selling of goods, wares, or merchandise for the owner or consignee thereof for a fee of commission, whether or not the operation of such business customarily includes the actual possession, custody or control of goods, wares or merchandise to the extent that such person: 
(1)  Does not engage in the business of manufacturing, refining, fabricating, milling, treating or other processing of the goods, wares or merchandise bought and sold, and does not cause said goods, wares or merchandise to be manufactured, refined, fabricated, milled, treated or otherwise processed; 
(2)  Does not obtain or retain title to said goods, wares or merchandise except during one or more of the following situations: while such goods, wares or merchandise are actually in transit, or for short periods of time before transportation commences or after it ceases; and 
(3)  Does not store or warehouse such goods, wares or merchandise except during one or more of the following: while such goods, wares or merchandise are actually in transit, or for short period of time before transportation commences or after it ceases. 
(t)  "Conduct." See "Transact and carry on." 
(u)  "Consignment." See "Second hand dealer." 
(v)  "Contractor." shall mean any person who is licensed as a contractor by the State of California and who undertakes to or offers to undertake to or purports to have the capacity to undertake to or submits a bid to, or does himself or herself or by others, construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or works in connection therewith. The term contractor as used in this chapter includes, general engineering contractor, general building contractor, specialty contractor and subcontractor except as otherwise specified herein. 
(w)  "Cost of doing business" shall mean that amount which is equivalent to the volume of business performed, where the business of any local office, facility, agent, broker, or employee is that of performing administrative or management related services in connection with sales or services performed or rendered elsewhere. Said amount shall be computed by determining the total cost of maintaining said local office, facility, agent, broker or employee. Said total cost of maintaining said local office, facility, agent, broker or employee shall include, but is not limited to, the wages, salaries, commissions, bonuses, rent, and/or depreciation, telephone, postage, utilities, janitorial and other expenses allocated for maintenance of said office, facility, agent, broker or employee. 
(x)  "Disabled veteran" shall mean any honorably discharged member of the Armed Forces of the United States, who is physically unable to obtain his or her livelihood by means of manual labor and who is a qualified voter of the State. (BP Section 16001) 
(y)  "Driver's permit" shall mean the permit issued to any person operating or driving a vehicle for hire. 
(z)  "Employed" shall mean engaged in the operation or conduct of a business, or related activity, whether as a proprietor or otherwise. 
(aa)  "Employee" shall mean any and all owners, or members of the owner's family, partners, or associates or individuals earning a wage. 
(ab)  "Engaged in business" shall mean the transacting and carrying on, managing or operating of a business whether done as owner, or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee, or lessee. 
(ac)  "Fee" shall mean that amount charged to cover base service, administrative or enforcement costs of processing any business license application or renewal. 
(ad)  "Flea market." See "Swap meet." 
(ae)  "Fixed place of business" shall mean the place within the City at which the principal tools, equipment, or machinery used in a business are customarily stored or located, or at which are maintained the principal stock of materials or supplies and the books and records used in a business. 
(af)  "Flat rate" or "flat rate tax" shall mean a fixed amount assessed per business location, or alternately, a fixed amount or fixed scale of amounts whose sum is variable depending on the number of factors furnishing the basis for determination of the license tax. 
(ag)  "General contractor" shall mean and shall include any general building contractor or general engineering contractor or any other person who is licensed pursuant to Business and Professions Code § 7056 and/or 7057 as the same now exists or as hereafter amended. 
(ah)  "Garage sale" shall mean the sale, or offering for sale, of personal property in, at or upon any property used or occupied for residential purposes. Garage sales shall include, but not be limited to, any yard sale, home sale, patio sale, or any other sale similarly conducted on any property used or occupied for residential purposes. 
(ai)  "Gross receipts" shall include the total amount of the sale price of all sales and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act or service of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares, or merchandise. The following shall be included in "gross receipts": All receipts, rents, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost or property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, interest paid or payable, or loss or other expenses whatsoever. (See Section 3-4.09 (b) Combined Businesses.) 
The following shall be excluded from "gross receipts": (See Section 3-4.21 Apportionment of Gross Receipts.) 
(1)  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
(2)  Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold; 
(3)  Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; 
(4)  Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon recision of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit; 
(5)  Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent, or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected, other than amounts received as commissions or fees earned, or charges of any character made or compensation of any character received for the performance of any service as agent, or trustee; provided that any agent, or trustee dealing in stocks or other similar written instruments evidencing a right to participate in the assets of any business, or dealing in bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, who also deals in such property as a principal, shall include in the gross receipts by which the tax is measured the amount of his or her trading profits resulting therefrom. No deduction from receipts attributable to trading as a principle shall be made unless such deduction is provided for in this section; 
(6)  The difference between the balance owed and paid on a defaulted purchase or finance contract upon repossession by seller and the amount received from resale of the repossessed article by the repossessing seller; 
(7)  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded; 
(8)  As to a retail gasoline dealer, a portion of his or her receipts from the sale of motor vehicle fuels equal to the motor vehicle fuel license tax imposed by and previously paid under the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 2, as the same now exists or as hereafter amended; 
(9)  As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel tax imposed by 26 U.S.C. § 4041, as the same now exists or as hereafter amended, if paid by the dealer or collected by him or her from the purchaser; 
(10)  Cash value of sales, trades, transfers, or other transactions as made between separate departments, divisions, or units of any single business activity; 
(11)  Sales for convenience where sales of new goods, wares, or merchandise are made by a person engaged in selling such articles to another person engaged in selling like or similar articles; 
(i)  Where the primary purpose of the particular transaction of sale is to accommodate the purchaser rather than to make a sale in the ordinary course of business and the price paid is essentially the book value of the article; 
(ii)  Where, in the particular kind of business involved, a similar manner of dealing is frequent or customary in the circumstances under which the particular sale is made; and 
(iii)  Where goods, wares, or merchandise or like or similar kind and of substantially equivalent value to that which was sold is received in consideration; 
(12)  The balance owed on defaulted open accounts written off as uncollectible, at the time they are deemed to be uncollectible; however, any amount later collected through whatever means shall be included with future gross receipts. 
(13)  The value of construction on projects constructed for the Federal government, State government or local government. 
As to bail bond brokerages, commission agent brokerages, mortgage brokerages, securities brokerages, travel agencies, and other similar businesses employing agents, brokers and/or commissioned employees, "gross receipts" shall include the total gross commissions or other receipts attributable to the local office, agents, brokers and/or employees. 
As to real estate brokerages either practicing solely, or in partnership, or as a professional corporation, "gross receipts" shall include the total gross fees or other receipts attributable to services performed or otherwise rendered on properties located within the City. 
As to accountants, architects, attorneys, chiropractors, doctors, dentists, optometrists, podiatrists, psychologists, veterinarians and other professionals, either practicing solely, or in partnership, or as a professional corporation, "gross receipts" shall include the total gross fees or other receipts attributable to services performed or otherwise rendered within the City. 
As to contractors and builder-owners, "gross receipts" shall include the valuation of the construction as determined by the Building Official of the City or the Public Works Director at the time a permit for construction is issued. 
As to other persons having a fixed place of business within the City and providing a service or plying an occupation or trade, or involved in similar businesses, "gross receipts" shall include the total fees, commissions, or other receipts attributable to that local location and/or employees. (See Section 3-4.21 Apportionment of Gross Receipts.) 
As to manufacturers, "gross receipts" shall include the total amount of sales or transactions rendered within the City; however, manufacturers shall pay a minimum business license tax on 5% of the total gross receipts produced for domestic consumption from facilities located within the City. 
As to the rental of residential property, the first three units shall be exempt from gross receipts. 
As to building and loan associations, "gross receipts" shall include: 
Interest on real estate loans; 
Loan fees of various kinds such as: fee for escrow, appraisal drawing papers, and other similar charges; 
Bonuses received for prepayment of loans; 
Penalty charges on delinquent loans; 
Tax service fees; 
Interest on personal loans to depositors; and 
Receipts over and above the recovery of principal from the sale of mortgages or other evidence of money due from loans. 
As to building and loan associations, the following shall be excluded from "gross receipts": 
Interest and dividends earned from the placing of surplus funds in bonds, securities, or federal home loan banks; 
Payments received on the principal amount of outstanding loans; 
Sale of capital assets used in the conduct of the business; 
Payments made to other building and loan associations which represents their share of interest under participation agreements; and 
Gains or losses on the sale of real estate acquired by foreclosure. 
As to a business established outside the City but maintaining an office with the City through an agent, broker, or employee, "gross receipts" shall include the total sales or receipts attributable to the local office or facility, agent, broker or employee. 
In the event separate sales or receipt records are not maintained for said local office or facility, agent, broker or employee, or in the event any retailing, wholesaling, manufacturing, or processing activity conducted thereat does not generate gross receipts as hereinabove defined, or in the event said local office or facility, agent, broker, or employee is engaged in providing administrative or management related services, to include, but not [be] limited to, record keeping, data processing, research and development, advertising, public relations, personnel administration, or legal services, in connection with sales or services performed or rendered elsewhere, the business tax shall be based upon an amount which bears the same proportion to the total gross receipts of the business which cost of maintaining said local office, facility, local agent, broker or employee bears to the total cost of maintaining said business. 
As to a business established within the City but maintaining a local branch office or establishment through an agent, broker, or employee engaged in providing administrative or management related services within the City, the business tax shall be based on an amount equivalent to the cost of doing business. 
As to the business established outside the City but transacting and carrying on business within the City, or otherwise performing or rendering services negotiated, or contracted for within the City, whether or not by a principal or through an agent or employee, "gross receipts" shall include the total fees, commissions, or other receipts attributable to the business activity conducted. 
(aj)  "Gun dealer." See Penal Code § 12071. 
(ak)  "Handy-crafter" shall mean any person who makes or creates any tangible product or novelty and then offers that item for sale. 
(al)  "Handyperson." See "Building-tradesman." 
(am)  "Hobby" shall mean an activity that does not result in the sale of any service or product. 
(an)  "Hotel-motel." See "Rental of residential real estate." 
(ao)  "Independent contractor" shall mean any natural person other than a State licensed contractor, who is engaged to aid in the business of any other person, whether as a professional as defined hereinbelow, or whether pursuant to any license, certificate or registration authorized by the California Business and Professions Code, as the same now exists or as hereafter amended, or whether with regard to any other trade, skill or occupation, and who receives enumeration either through commission, or pursuant to any contract of employment which excludes regular wages or salary, or in any other manner other than through regular wages, salary or a direct participation in the profits of the business. 
(ap)  "Insurance agent" shall mean any person, including bailbond agents directly authorized by and on behalf of an insurer, to transact insurance and to bind the insurer in the execution of insurance policies. 
(aq)  "Insurance broker" shall mean any person, including bailbond brokers, who, for compensation and on behalf of another person, transact insurance other than life with, but not on behalf of, an insurer. 
(ar)  "Itinerant merchant" shall mean any person who engages in a temporary or transient business in the City, selling or offering for sale goods, wares, merchandise, or articles of value, with the intention of conducting such business in the City for a period of not more than 90 days in any calendar year, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires, leases, or occupies any room, doorway, vacant lot, building or structure, for the exhibition or sale of goods, wares or merchandise, or who associates temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or who conducts such temporary or transient business in connection with or as part of or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(as)  "Junk collector" shall mean any person not having a fixed place of business in the City engaged in the business of buying or selling, either at wholesale or retail, any rags, bottles, papers, cans, metals or other junk. 
(at)  "Junk dealer" shall mean any person having a fixed place of business in the City engaged in the business of buying or selling, either at wholesale or retail, any rags, bottles, papers, cans, metals or other junk. 
(au)  "Junk salvager" or "junk recycler" shall mean any person, at a fixed place of business in the City engaged in the business of carrying on or collecting, buying or selling at either retail or wholesale or otherwise dealing in junk and/or rubbish, waste material, refuse and/or any rags, sacks, bottles, papers, cans, metals, rubber, cordage, tires and other like articles, whether the same can be sold or otherwise disposed of for the purpose of being treated, repaired or prepared so as to be used again in some other form. 
(av)  "Junk yards," "automobile wrecking yards" and "salvage yards" shall mean any space of 200 square ft. or more of area of any lot used for the storage, sale, keeping or abandonment of inoperable vehicles, junk or waste material, including scrap metal or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles, other vehicles, machinery or parts thereof, other than an impound yard. 
(aw)  "License" shall mean a license issued pursuant to this chapter and "Licensee" shall mean any person who holds a valid, current business license issued to that person under this chapter. 
(ax)  "Life agent" shall mean any insurance agent authorized, by and on behalf of a life, disability or life and disability insurer, to transact life, disability or life and disability insurance. 
(ay)  "Life and disability insurance analyst" shall mean a person who, for a fee or compensation of any kind, paid by or derived purports to advise, or offers advice to any person insured under, named as a beneficiary of, or having an interest in, a life or disability insurance contract, in any manner concerning that contract or his or her rights in respect thereto. 
(az)  "Manufacture" or "process" shall mean all the activities of a commercial or industrial nature wherein labor or skill is applied, by hand or machinery, to materials so that as a result thereof a new, different or useful article of tangible personal property or substance of trade or commerce is produced and shall include the production or fabrication of specially made or custom made articles. 
(ba)  "Manufacturer" shall mean any person, who, directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or for commercial or industrial use from his or her own materials or ingredients any articles, substances or commodities. 
(bb)  "Mobile vending" shall mean the conduct of a business by means of an automobile, truck, wagon, motorcycle or any other vehicle which may be used to transport, sell, collect or deliver goods, wares, merchandise or property of any kind from a vehicle, either as a principal business or in connection with any other business, or in the solicitation or work, labor or services to be performed on the public streets or private places in or from a vehicle. 
(bc)  "Nonprofit organization" shall mean an institution, corporation, organization, or association organized or conducted for charitable, religious, political or other nonprofit purposes only, where the receipts derived from peddling or soliciting activities are to be used wholly for the benefit of such entity and, except for wages paid to employees of such entity, are not used in whole or in part for the private gain of any person. Such organizations shall have State of California and United States government tax exempt status. Within the meaning of this chapter, solicitors and peddlers who are paid for such services by a nonprofit organization are not employees of the nonprofit organization. All other organizations shall be termed "for profit organizations." 
(bd)  "Outside City" shall mean the conducting of a business within the City, but not having a fixed place of business within the City. 
(be)  "Owner" as applied to any building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, co-partnerships of the whole or of a part of such building or land, or a person having an interest in community property as a member, or former member, of the community. 
(bf)  "Pawnbroker" shall mean a person employed in the business of loaning money upon personal property, personal security, pawns or pledges, or the business of purchasing articles of personal property and reselling, or agreeing to resell, such articles to the vendors or their assignees at prices agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase. (Business and Professions Code § 21626) 
(bg)  "Pawnshop" shall mean a room, store, or place in which the business of a pawnbroker is conducted. 
(bh)  "Peddler" shall mean a hawker, vendor, or other person who, without appointment thereat, goes from house to house, place to place, or in or along the streets of the City selling and making immediate delivery, or offering for sale and immediate delivery, any goods, wares, merchandise, or anything of value in the possession of the peddler to persons other than manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, or retailers in such commodities. 
(bi)  "Permit" shall mean a written authorization, or permission, to conduct a business within the City. A business license issued pursuant to this chapter does not constitute a "permit." 
(bj)  "Person" shall mean a domestic or foreign corporation, an association, a syndicate, a joint-stock corporation, a partnership of any kind, a club, business or common-law trust, a society or an individual conducting any business in the City. 
(bk)  "Pickup" shall mean to take into a vehicle. 
(bl)  "Premises" shall mean all lands, structures, places, and also the personal property, equipment, and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business. 
(bm)  "Processor" shall mean any person engaging in the business of converting an article, substance or commodity into marketable form for the purpose of resale by changing its physical form or chemical composition. 
(bn)  "Professional" shall mean any person, including any professional corporation, wherever located, engaged in or carrying on, within the City, any profession requiring satisfactory compliance with written and/or oral examination standards adopted by a branch of the State or Federal government and/or requiring a certain amount of tenure with such branch of government. Such professions to include but not be limited to: architect (all types), attorney, accountant (all types), auditor, audiologist, chiropractor, clinical social worker, dentist, practitioner, electrologist, geologist, gemologist, herbalist, marriage, family and child counselor, naturopath, nurse (registered), oculist, optician, optometrist, osteopath, physician (all types), podiatrist, psychologist, speech pathologist, surveyor, veterinarian. 
(bo)  "Professional corporation" shall mean any corporation organized under the California General Corporation Law which is engaged in rendering professional services in a single profession, or as hereafter amended, and which in its practice or business designates itself as a professional or other corporation as may be required by statute. 
(bp)  "Pushcart" shall mean any wagon, cart, or similar wheeled container, not a "vehicle" as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, from which food, beverage, or product is offered for sale to the public. 
(bq)  "Real estate agent" shall mean any person licensed as such by the State and engaged wholly or in part in transacting and carrying on the sale of real estate. 
(br)  "Real estate broker" means any person licensed as such by the State and engaged wholly or in part in transacting and carrying on the sale of real estate including soliciting or offering to buy, sell, or lease real property for others; negotiating and collecting loans for borrowers or lenders; dealing in real property sales contracts and promissory notes; receiving advance fees for real estate listings; and dealing in real estate syndicate securities. 
(bs)  "Real estate developer" means any person conducting, managing, or transacting and carrying on the business of acquiring, subdividing, improving, selling, renting and otherwise dealing in and disposing of or developing real property, for commercial, industrial, residential, or nonresidential purposes including, but not limited to, one who constructs improvements upon real property for commercial, industrial, or nonresidential purposes with the object of selling, renting or developing it for his or her own use. 
(bt)  "Rental of nonresidential real estate" shall include every person engaged in the business of renting, leasing, providing, exchanging or trading, without loss of ownership, any land, dwelling, building, premises or portion thereof for industrial, commercial, office, warehouse or other entrepreneurial uses or purposes other than dwelling, sleeping or lodging. The license tax for the rental of such properties shall be assessed per property and liability for said tax shall be determined by ownership of the property. Agents acting for property owners are responsible for payment of the license tax on the rental of such property, if the owner of said property has not paid the tax when due and payable, and in addition, are subject to the license tax as a separate business. 
(bu)  "Rental of residential real estate" shall include every person engaged in the business of renting, leasing, providing, exchanging or trading, without the loss of ownership, any land, dwelling, building, premises or portion thereof for the purpose of occupancy, sleeping, lodging, boarding, or other use and accommodation. The license tax for the rental of such properties shall be assessed per property and liability for said tax shall be determined by ownership of the property. Agents acting for property owners are responsible for payment of the license tax on the rental of such property, if the owner of said property has not paid the tax when due and payable, and in addition, are subject to the license tax as a separate business. 
(bv)  "Recreational services" shall mean any person engaged in the business of providing facilities for recreational use. Such services include but are not limited to: amusement machine arcades, bowling alleys, driving ranges, golf courses (including miniature), motion picture theaters (including drive-in), pool halls (including billiards and snooker), riding stables, skating rinks, social clubs, sports clubs (including spas, health clubs, and conditioning gyms), swimming pools, and tennis and racket clubs. 
(bw)  "Retailer" shall mean any person engaging in the business of selling goods, wares, or other merchandise to consumers or users thereof. 
(bx)  "Revenue Officer" shall mean the duly authorized agent of the Collector charged with assisting the Collector in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him or her hereunder. 
(by)  "Revocation" shall mean the act of revoking, or the condition of being revoked; canceled; repealed. 
(bz)  "Safety inspection sticker" shall mean a sticker affixed to a vehicle for hire or ambulance evidencing that it has been inspected by the County Sheriff, local Police Department, or the California Highway Patrol and found to be in safe operating condition. 
(ca)  "Sale" shall mean the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying, or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law. 
(cb)  "Sale at retail" and "retail sale" shall mean every sale of tangible personal property (including articles produced, fabricated or imprinted) other than sale to one who (1) purchases for the purpose of resale as tangible personal property in the regular course of business, or (2) purchases for the purpose of consuming the property purchased in producing for sale a new article of tangible personal property or substance, of which such property becomes an ingredient or component, or as a chemical used in processing, when the primary purpose of such chemical is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of a new article being produced for sale. 
(cc)  "Sale at wholesale" and "wholesale sale" shall mean any sale of tangible personal property which is not a "sale at retail." Sales otherwise classified hereinabove as "retail sales," may, nevertheless be classified as "wholesale sales" under this section, if the vendor can establish to the satisfaction of the Collector that the sale was made to a government agency, public utility, manufacturer, processor or contractor who consumed the articles in the course of his or her own operations and did not offer the articles for resale to the general public except as an integral part of manufacturing, construction or service. 
(cd)  "Second hand dealer." See Business and Professions Code § 21626. 
(ce)  "Services" shall mean the business of providing, maintaining, or performing labor for the benefit of another within the City; of supplying some general demand for the benefit of another within the City which does not produce a tangible commodity; or furnishing of services and all activities in which any person, for any other person performs any personal service and all services in which any real or personal property, real or personal property of others, stocks or bonds, or other financial instruments, or evidences of debt, or contacts of insurance or any money or credits are exchanged, leased, transferred, or loaned; as well as every business of maintaining, storing, cleaning, improving or repairing tangible commodities within the City whether or not such business is conducted from a premises, vehicle, or mobile location within or outside the City. Services include recreation services but do not include theatrical performances, exhibitions, or temporary amusements nor do they include professional services, or telephone services within the terms of this chapter. 
(cf)  "Solicitor" shall mean a person engaged in soliciting, canvassing, or taking orders from house to house, or from place to place, or by telephone, or by any other means of communication for any goods, wares, merchandise, or any article to be delivered in the future, or for services to be performed in the future, or making, manufacturing, or repairing any article whatsoever for future delivery, or subscriptions to periodicals or tickets of admission or entertainments, or memberships in any club. Solicitor includes persons soliciting funds for organizations which are not nonprofit organizations as defined herein. Solicitor also includes those receiving donations in public places or places open to the public who do not accost or approach persons for the purpose of soliciting or begging alms. (See local Regulatory Ordinance.) 
(cg)  "Stock broker" and "bond broker" shall mean any person engaged in the business of buying or selling Federal, State, County or municipal stocks or bonds, or stocks or bonds or partnerships or other incorporated entities, or evidences of indebtedness of private persons, partnerships or of incorporated entities, for a fee or commission. 
(ch)  "Subcontractor." See "Contractor." 
(ci)  "Swap meet" shall mean any event where the place or location at which the event is held has been advertised by any means whatsoever as a place or location to which members of the public at large, during a specified period of time, may bring identifiable, tangible property and exhibit the same for sale or exchange. 
(cj)  "Swap meet exhibitor" shall mean any person exhibiting, displaying, selling, exchanging, offering for sale or exchange any property at a swap meet. 
(ck)  "Swap meet operator" shall mean any person or organization conducting or operating the business of a swap meet on any premises in the City excluding, however, swap meet exhibitors. 
(cl)  "Sworn statement" shall mean an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths, or a declaration, certification, or verified affidavit made under penalty of perjury. 
(cm)  "Tax" shall be that amount collected for the privilege of engaging in a business or occupation. 
(cn)  "Taxicab" shall mean any motor vehicle used in the business of transportation of passengers for hire, where transportation is not over a fixed and definite route, but is under the control, as to the destination and/or route, of the passenger or passengers being carried therein. 
(co)  "Taximeter" shall mean any mechanical instrument, appliance, device or machine by which the charge for hire of a motor vehicle is mechanically calculated, whether for distance traveled or time consumed, or both, and on said instrument is indicated by figures. 
(cp)  "Tax period" shall mean the 12-month period from March through February inclusive or other period of time defined by the collector to facilitate the annual processing of license renewal applications. 
(cq)  "Telephone services" shall mean any person engaged in the business of providing telephone services as a "telephone company" pursuant to Article XIII, Section 19 of the State Constitution. 
(cr)  "Transact and carry on" shall mean to repeat, or intend to repeat, or to continue, and includes: 
(1)  The maintaining, operating, managing, or being in control of, any office, store, warehouse, factory, establishment, location or place: 
(i)  Having one or more telephones listed for any business, activity in any classified telephone directory or in the classified section of any consolidated telephone directory. 
(ii)  Having in use in connection with any business, one or more counters, desks, chairs, tables, filing cabinets, typewriters, adding or calculating machines, or other articles of office equipment. 
(iii)  At, from, or in which, any processing, supervising, administration, research, sales promotion, solicitation, distributing, routing, delivery, dispatching, billing, collection, accounting, recordkeeping, or other activity is conducted in connection with any business. 
(iv)  In, or at which, one or more persons may, for any valuable consideration intended to result, or that results, in any livelihood, financial profit or commercial gain to any person, receive any instruction, advice, treatment or examination, or any service upon their person, or any repair, refinishing, renewing, cleaning, or other improvement to, or of, any personal property. 
(v)  In which any letter, announcement, advertisement, circular, handbill, newspaper, agreement, contract, instruction, legal instrument, financial statement, statement of account, financial record, or any other instrument or record, is written, printed, reproduced, published, prepared or kept, in connection with any business. 
(vi)  From which any circular, handbill, newspaper, announcement, statement of account, card or letter is sent, or distributed, in writing, or any contract is made, in person or by telephone, in connection with any business. 
(vii)  Upon any exterior side, wall, window, door, roof or other portion, or in the proximity of which, there is maintained any sign, lettering, announcement or advertisement indicating that such office or place is one in, at or from, which any article exists, or any act is performed, in connection with any business. 
(2)  The repeated or continuous offering, or contracting, orally or in writing, in connection with any business: 
(i)  To sell or rent one or more articles, or one or more rooms, apartments, portions or parcels, of any real or personal property; 
(ii)  To transport any person or personal property; or 
(iii)  To perform any service. 
(3)  In connection with any business, the repeated or continuous: 
(i)  Sale or renting of one or more articles or parcels of real or personal property; 
(ii)  The transporting of any person or property; or 
(iii)  The performance of any service. 
(4)  The performance, in connection with any business, of any single act, with intent to repeat or continue the performance of such act. 
(cs)  "Utility" and "public utility" shall mean any person furnishing the public with communication, water, light, gas, heat or power, subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. 
(ct)  "Vehicle" shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(cu)  "Vehicle for hire" shall mean any taxicab, limousine, tow truck or any other motor vehicle offered in the City of Yuba City or the transportation of passengers for compensation or used or engaged in the soliciting or pickup of passengers for hire in the City of Yuba City, exclusive of any vehicle for which a certificate of public convenience is needed and has been granted by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. "Vehicle for hire" shall not mean an ambulance, ambulette or other vehicle equipped or previously used for transporting the wounded, injured, sick, handicapped or deceased. See "Ambulance"; "Ambulette." 
(cv)  "Vending operations" shall mean any business conducted or carried on by any person engaged in the business of operating coin-operated machines or devices on the premises of another or in the business of owning, renting, leasing, lending, or otherwise distributing or supplying coin-operated machines or devices while retaining title thereto. Such machines include, but are not limited to, vending, amusement, service and telephone machines. 
(cw)  "Vendor" shall mean any individual, sole proprietor, corporation, or business entity engaged in the conduct of business as defined by this chapter. 
(cx)  "Warehousing" shall mean any person who engages in business where the principal business activity involves the warehousing and storage of goods manufactured or produced outside of the City and stored prior to shipment and sale. 
(cy)  "Wholesaler" shall mean any person engaging in the business of selling goods, wares, merchandise or other products for the purpose of resale and not to consumers or users thereof. 
(cz)  "Yard sale." See "Garage sale." 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.03. - Effect on other laws. 
Persons required to pay a business license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other law of the City and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other such laws. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.04. - No required permits waived. 
Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any additional permit fees for the privilege of carrying on any similar or related activity required under any other ordinance of the City and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances and laws. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.05. - Licenses required. 
There is hereby imposed upon any business, trade, profession, calling and/or occupation conducted within the City, a business license fee, including gross receipts tax, in the amount hereinafter prescribed or that prescribed by City Council. It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or employee, either for himself or herself or for any other person, or for body corporate, or as an officer of any corporation to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation to conduct any business within the City without first having procured a license from the City to do so, and paid the license fee and applicable gross receipts tax therefor or without complying with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the City if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States, the State of California or local ordinances. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.06. - Business license fee; when payable. 
(a)  New. Initial business license fees including gross receipts tax, are due and payable prior to issuance of the license for which application is made. The base service fee for the business license and gross receipts tax or flat fee shall be established by the City Council. The payment of such fees and taxes shall not in any way constitute a right or permission to begin operations of said business. 
(b)  Renewal. Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, all fees for renewal and gross receipt taxes of a business license under the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable the day after the anniversary date on which the license expired. 
(c)  Contractor; builder-owner. The base service fee portion of the gross receipts business license tax shall be collected per Section 3-4.06(a) and (b) above. The gross receipts portion of the business license tax shall be collected at the time a building permit or construction permit is issued, and the gross receipts tax shall be based on the value of construction for the permit. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.07. - Evidence of doing business. 
When any person by use of signs, circulars, business cards, telephone book, or newspapers, advertises, holds out, or represents that such person is conducting a business within the City, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that such person is in business within the City, or when any person indicates any other evidence of transacting and carrying on business as may be defined elsewhere herein and such person fails to deny by a sworn statement given to the Business License Officer or Collector that he or she is not conducting a business within the City, after being requested to do so by the Business License Officer or Collector then the foregoing facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that such person is conducting a business within the City. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.08. - Schedule of license fees generally. 
(a)  Every person who engages in business within the City shall pay a license tax in the amount of, or at the rate which the City Council may from time to time establish. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to require any person to pay a license tax prior to conducting business within the City if such requirement conflicts with applicable State or Federal law. 
(c)  Persons not required to pay a license tax prior to conducting business within the City because of conflict with applicable State or Federal law shall nevertheless obtain a business license upon the commencement of business within the City. 
(d)  Any person claiming exemption pursuant to this section shall file a sworn statement with the Collector stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed. 
(e)  The Collector shall upon a proper showing contained in the sworn statement, issue a license to a person claiming exemption under this section. Issuance under this subsection shall be without payment to the City of any license tax required by this chapter. 
(f)  The Collector, after giving notice and reasonable opportunity for hearing to the affected licensee, may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon a showing that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided herein. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.09. - Multiple business, business activities, or branch locations. 
(a)  Two or more allied businesses. Whenever any person is engaged in two or more correlated businesses, or is carrying on two or more allied activities at the same location and under the same ownership and management then in that event the business license base service charge shall be applied once only, and for which amount a single combined license shall be issued. Provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to relieve the payment of two or more business license tax when required, where two or more separate businesses are conducted in the same location by the same owner and management and such businesses are not construed by the Collector to be correlated or allied with each other. An appropriate business license as set forth in this chapter shall be paid for each business. 
(b)  Combined businesses. Whenever any person is engaged in a combined business conducted at the same location and by the same owner and management is carrying on manufacturing, selling at wholesale and selling at retail, or any combination of business activities then in that event a single combined statement separately showing the amount of manufacturing and wholesale and retail business engaged in or other combination of business activities shall be filed and the combined fee shall be separately calculated according to the respective rates appropriate for each category of business activity, to which amount the minimum business license tax and business license base service charge shall be applied once only, and for which amount a single combined license shall be issued. In the event that such a combined statement is not filed, or in the event sufficient records have not been kept which will enable the manufacturing, wholesale, and the retail portion of such business to be ascertained, then in that event all business done by any such person, whether manufacturing, wholesale, or retail, shall for the purposes of this section be considered a retail business and the rate prescribed for retail business shall be applied to calculate the amount of the business license tax due, to which amount the minimum business license tax and business license processing charge shall be applied once only, and for which amount a single combined license shall be issued. 
Provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to relieve the payment of two or more business license taxes when required, where two or more separate business activities are conducted in the same location by the same owner under the same management and such business activities are not construed by the Collector to constitute a combined business. An appropriate business license tax as set forth in this chapter shall be paid for each business. 
(c)  Single location; multiple businesses; separate owners. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to relieve the obligation to obtain a separate license and to pay the appropriate license tax required for each business owned or conducted by a separate owner within an individual establishment or location whether or not under the same management. 
(d)  Single location; single business; single ownership and business classifiable under different categories. Whenever a business may reasonably be classified under two or more separate categories established by the City Council, with differing bases for tax computation, the tax shall be computed using the basis which will result in the highest tax. 
(e)  Concessions; separate license required. Any person who operates any business, whether upon a cost, rental or commission basis as a concession or upon rented floor space in or upon the premises of any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter, shall be required to obtain a separate and independent license pursuant to this chapter except as may be otherwise specified hereinafter. 
(f)  Separate computation of license tax; branch establishments. Where a license tax is imposed upon any business pursuant to this chapter, and such business is conducted with branch establishments or at separate fixed places, the tax shall be computed as if each such branch or place were a separate and independent business. 
A separate license shall be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business and for each separate type of business at the same location. Each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby, at the location specified in the license, and in the manner designated in such license. 
The Collector may waive the requirement of separate business license for a branch establishment and combine the gross receipts in a single business license. 
Warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve any person who is eligible for or claims to be eligible for exemption from payment of a branch establishment business license tax from the requirement to obtain a business license. Said person shall apply to the Business License Officer or Collector for a license in the same manner, and at the same time as is required in this chapter of all other persons applying for a business license and shall be subject to the same procedures for enforcement and for penalties as provided herein. 
(g)  Association with local business. Any person who shall associate temporarily with any local business, dealer, trader or merchant, or by conducting any temporary business in connection with, or as a part of or in the name of, any local business, dealer, trader or merchant, shall not be relieved from the provisions of this chapter and shall be required to pay the appropriate business license tax as specified herein. 
(h)  Partnerships. In the event that any business conducted, managed or carried on in the City is organized as a partnership or joint venture, the scheduled license tax need be paid only by the partnership or joint venture. 
(i)  Corporations; in general. In the event that any business conducted, managed or carried on in the City is organized as a general law corporation, pursuant to the California General Corporation Law, the scheduled license tax need be paid only by the corporation. 
(j)  Professional corporations. In the event that any business conducted, managed or carried on in the City is organized as a professional corporation, the scheduled license tax need be paid only by the corporation. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.10. - Effect of chapter on past actions and obligations previously accrued. 
Unless otherwise specifically or by necessary implication provided herein, neither the adoption of this chapter nor its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the City shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for the violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the adoption hereof, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect for the term prescribed therein. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.11. - Identification of new businesses operating in the City. 
(a)  General contractor's statement. Every person acting as a general contractor, whether building for their own occupancy or not, shall file with the Collector a full, true and complete written statement, signed by such person, under penalty of perjury, listing all subcontractors who have performed or shall perform any service whatsoever for such person within the City for which a license is required under the provisions of this chapter. Any builder-owner, general building contractor, general engineering contractor, specialty contractor, or subcontractor, subcontracting any work shall be deemed a general contractor for the purpose of this section. Said statement shall include the name, address, telephone number, State license number and specialty classification of each person required to be licensed. This section may be waived at the discretion of the collector and is intended to protect the general contractor from public knowledge of trade secrets, or other information of a confidential nature. 
(b)  Motel, hotel business activities. All motels, hotels, and other lodging establishments shall identify special events and related activities scheduled for their facilities and file with the Collector the dates of the activity, name, address, telephone number and type of activity being held at the establishment. Such notification to the Collector shall be given at least 20 days in advance of the activity. 
(c)  Other business activities. All other business establishments shall provide the name, address, telephone number and type of activity or service provided to them on a reoccurring basis from businesses from outside of the City such as route salespersons, consultants, etc. Such lists shall be provided as part of the annual renewal process. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.12. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  License does not permit business otherwise prohibited. The business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter constitutes a receipt for the license tax paid and shall have no other legal effect. A business license is a requirement, not a permit, to transact and carry on any business activity within this City. The business license tax certificate is evidence only of the fact that such tax has been paid. Neither the payment of the tax nor the possession of the business tax certificate authorizes, permits or allows the doing of any act which the person paying or holding the same would not otherwise be entitled to do; and any permit, license, variance or other instrument of approval or evidence that any conditions exist as required by any other section of this Code or by any statute or code provisions of the State must first be obtained or complied with before the doing of any act or thing for which it is required. 
(b)  Unlawful manner of operation. The granting of a license for a business shall not be deemed a permit to conduct the same in an unlawful manner or on premises where such business is prohibited by law. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.13. - Other agency review. 
The Business License Officer or Collector may refer to any governmental agency any statement and all other information submitted by persons subject to the provisions of this chapter in connection with the conduct of a business regulated or supervised or otherwise the concern of any such agency, including agencies concerned with health regulations, zoning conformance, fire safety, police considerations, or any other safeguard of the public interest. Failure to comply with conditions required by other agency review shall result in revocation of the license once granted. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.14. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each article, section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the articles, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases hereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.15. - Decisions on amounts imposed. 
If any license tax imposed by this chapter is for any reason held to be discriminatory or invalid in amount, by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of a lesser amount imposed by the Collector. The City Council hereby declares that it would have imposed a license tax of some amount on the business, occupation, calling, trade, vocation or other enterprise in question, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the license taxes imposed herein may be declared discriminatory or invalid in amount. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.16. - Saving clause. 
Neither the adoption of this chapter nor its superseding any portion of any other chapter shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any chapter or ordinance prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.17. - Unpaid taxes. 
(a)  Tax plus penalties. No business license for any succeeding, current or unexpired tax period shall knowingly be issued to any person, who at the time of application, is indebted to the City for any unpaid tax. The total indebtedness shall include the total tax due plus penalties for failure to pay the tax when due. 
(b)  License tax a debt; civil action. The amount of any business license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent license tax, penalties, and administrative costs incurred in connection therewith, including attorneys' fees. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.18. - Penalties. 
(a)  Conducting a business without first having procured a license. Any person who shall commence, engage, transact and carry on any trade, calling, profession, occupation or business within the City without first having procured a business license from the City to do so, shall be assessed a penalty of 20% of the amount of the license tax owing, which amount shall be calculated for the period beginning with the calendar month in which the commencement of business activity within the City began, and ending with the expiration of the current annual licensing period. Provided, however, that the start of such period shall not exceed three years prior to the date of notification of violation. Such penalty to be collected, and the amount thereof to be enforced, in the same manner as the other business license taxes are collected and the payment thereof enforced. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. 
(1)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this or any succeeding chapter shall be deemed guilty of a criminal infraction except where said violation is specifically deemed a misdemeanor. 
(2)  Every violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be governed by Section 1-2.02 of the Municipal Code. Each day any such violation of any said provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Misrepresentation; penalty. Any person knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the City any material fact in applying for or paying for the business license herein provided for shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Suspension or revocation. The Collector, or his or her designated representative, shall have the power to suspend or revoke any business license whenever it appears to the Business License Officer that the holder of the license: 
(1)  Has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, or any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto; or 
(2)  Commits any act or offense which would have constituted grounds for nonissuance of a business license; 
No suspension shall be for a period of more than 180 days. Notice of suspension or revocation shall be given by either personal service to the permittee or by mail to the address on his or her application and to the address of his or her employer. In the event of such revocation or suspension of a business license, said license shall be surrendered to the Business License Officer, or his or her designated delegate, by the holder thereof. 
A second suspension for the same reason or a third suspension of a business license for any reason shall operate as a revocation of such permit. 
In the event of suspension of revocation of any business license, said licensee shall have a period of ten working days to request a hearing for appeal of such suspension and revocation. 
If said licensee fails within the allotted ten-working-day period to request a hearing to show cause why his or her license should not be revoked, then and in that event the Business License Officer shall suspend or revoke said person's license and give notice thereof to said person. 
(e)  Remedies cumulative. The conviction and fine or imprisonment of any person for engaging in any business without first obtaining a license to conduct such business shall not relieve such person from paying the business tax to conduct such business, nor shall the payment of any business tax prevent a civil action or criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.19. - Cancellation; right of licensee to request. 
The Business License Officer or Collector shall cancel a valid unexpired license issued or granted to the licensee pursuant to this chapter at the request of the licensee provided: 
(a)  The licensee so endorses, signs and surrenders the business license receipt along with any applicable decal, metal-cal, sticker or tag; and 
(b)  All business activity pursuant to licensee's license has ceased. 
Liability for any further business taxes shall cease only if the licensee's account is vacated pursuant to this section. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.20. - Collector. 
(a)  Establishment of position. There is hereby established the position of Collector which shall include any position heretofore referred to in this chapter or any other chapter of this Code as "License Collector," "Business License Officer," "Business Tax Collector," "Police Officer," "Code Enforcement Officer" or any other term used to describe the office of the collector of business license taxes. Provided further that to the extent that any other provision of this Code or any other City ordinance refers to the Director of Finance as the collector of business license taxes such provisions shall be construed to require the execution of such duties by the Collector. 
(b)  Duty to enforce. It shall be the duty of the Collector to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the Chief of Police, the Chief Building Official, Public Works Director, the Fire Chief, and the City Attorney shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required by the Collector. Each department or division of the City which issues permits or entitlement of use shall require the production of a valid unexpired business license receipt or business license exemption receipt prior to the issuance of such a permit. Provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to obtain a license to do business within the City as a prerequisite for the issuance of a City permit or entitlement of use if such requirement conflicts with any applicable statutes of the United States or of the State. 
(c)  Duty to keep records. The Collector shall keep full, adequate and accurate records pertaining to the issuance of licenses under this chapter and the collection of all taxes, penalties and other moneys in connection herewith. The Collector shall keep in his or her office a record in which he or she shall keep the accounts of all licenses currently issued by him or her and remaining in full force and effect. 
(d)  Deposit of taxes, charges and penalties. All taxes, penalties, charges and other moneys received by the Collector pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in the designated fund of the City following the receipt of the same. 
(e)  Duty to determine business type or class. The determination of which business or type or class of business a licensee or applicant is engaged in or about to engage in shall be an administrative function of the Collector. 
(f)  Necessary rules and regulations. In addition to all other powers conferred upon him or her, the Collector shall have the power to make rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(g)  Extension of time for filing-compromising of claims. In addition to all other powers conferred upon him or her, the Collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding 60 days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would have otherwise accrued; and shall have the further power, for good cause shown, to compromise any claim as to the amount of business license tax due. 
(h)  Additional power. In addition to all other powers conferred upon him or her, the Collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to waive any penalty imposed, or charge demanded. 
(i)  Authority to suspend and revoke licenses. The Collector shall have the authority and duty to suspend or revoke any license granted or issued under the provisions of this chapter at any time for any of the following: 
(1)  A material false statement contained in the application for a new license or in the application for a renewal license granted or issued under the provisions of this chapter, or in any affidavit or statement required to be filed under the provisions of this chapter; or 
(2)  Upon the determination that the licensee has not paid the tax required to be paid as a condition for the issuance of the license, pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
Any person transacting and carrying on any business during any period of license suspension shall be deemed to be doing so under an invalid license. Also, any person transacting and carrying on business during any period of license revocation shall be deemed to be doing so without a license. Further, any person transacting and carrying on business during any period of license revocation or suspension shall be refused any permits or entitlement of use the issuance of which requires the production of a valid unexpired business license. 
(j)  Authority to issue citations. The Collector or the designee has the duty to enforce this chapter and is authorized to arrest persons without a warrant whenever believed that the person to be arrested has committed a violation of said provisions in the Collector's presence. In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this section and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, said officer making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his or her promise to appear as prescribed by Penal Code § 853.6 et seq. (Chapter 5C Title III of Part 2). 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.21. - Apportionment of gross receipts. 
(a)  Apportionment; general. None of the business taxes provided for by this chapter shall be so applied so as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the Constitutions of the United States and/or the State of California. A business activity which is conducted both within and outside of the City may, due to the method of conducting business, be taxed on less than the total gross receipts according to Section 3-4.21(c) or (d). 
(b)  Necessary rules and regulations. When, by reason of the provisions of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of California, the business tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter cannot be enforced as to any single class or set of classes of business or business activity without there being an apportionment according to the amount of business done in the City, or in the State of California, as the case may be, the Collector shall make such rules and regulations for the apportionment of the tax as are necessary or otherwise desirable to overcome the constitutional objections. 
(c)  Burden of interstate commerce; petition for adjustment. In any case where a license tax is claimed by a licensee or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce, or be violative of the Constitutions of the United States and/or the State of California, he or she may apply to the Collector for an adjustment of the tax so that it shall not be discriminatory or unreasonable as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at, or within 30 working days after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall by affidavit and supporting testimony show his or her method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the Collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of undue burden on such commerce. The Collector shall then conduct an investigation and shall fix as the license tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory. If the license tax has already been paid, he or she shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the Collector may base the license tax upon a percentage of the gross receipts or any other measure which will assure that the license tax levied shall be uniform with that levied on businesses of like nature so long as the amount levied does not exceed the license tax as prescribed by this chapter. Should the Collector determine the gross receipts measure of business tax to be the proper basis, he or she may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant's business in the City, or at the end of each 12-month period, a verified affidavit of the gross receipts and payment of the amount of license tax therefor; provided that no additional license tax during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee has paid an amount equal to the annual license tax as prescribed in this chapter. 
The Collector shall, upon proper showing contained in the verified affidavit, cause the issuance of a license to such person showing partial exemption under this section with a license tax based upon the approved reduced gross receipts. 
The Collector, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, shall revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided herein. 
(d)  Undue burden on intercity commerce; petition for adjustment. None of the license taxes provided for in this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon any business done in the City, where the business conducted is related to a regularly established business conducted elsewhere. In any case where a license tax is claimed by any licensee or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he or she may apply to the Collector for an adjustment of the tax so that it shall not be discriminatory or unreasonable as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall by affidavit and supporting testimony show his or her method of conducting business, the gross volume of business inside the City, and such other information as the Collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of undue burden of such commerce. The Collector shall then conduct an investigation, and shall fix as the business tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory. If the license tax has already been paid, he or she shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the Collector may base the license tax upon a percentage of gross receipts from business conducted inside the City or any other measure which will assure that the business tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the business tax as prescribed by this chapter. Should the Collector determine the gross receipts measure of business tax to be the proper basis, he or she may require the applicant to submit, either at the time or termination of applicant's business in the City, or at the end of each 12-month period, a verified affidavit of the gross receipts and payment of the amount of license tax therefor; provided that no additional license tax during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee has paid an amount equal to the annual license tax as prescribed in this chapter. 
The Collector shall, upon proper showing contained in the verified affidavit, cause the issuance of a license to such person showing partial exemption under this section with a license tax based upon the approved reduced gross receipts. 
The Collector, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to licensee, shall revoke any license granted pursuant to this section upon information that the person is not entitled to the adjustment as provided herein. 
(e)  Appeal process. If the owner(s) of a business disagrees with the category/classification to which they have been assigned, they may submit an appeal for a change of category/classification to the Collector. The appeal must be in writing and must be received in the Business License Division no later than 30 working days after the receipt of their annual business license renewal form or at the time of application for a business license certificate. The appeal should state the name of the owner(s), the location of the business and the reasons for requesting a reclassification. 
The appointed City representatives will review the facts of the appeal and respond to the applicant not later than 15 working days from the date of submission. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.22. - Procedure. 
(a)  Application. Before any license is issued, the applicant shall make a written application to the Collector, which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The exact nature or kind of business, profession, show, exhibition, game, occupation or enterprise for which the license is requested. 
(2)  The place where such business, profession, show, exhibition, or enterprise is to be carried on; and if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, then the residence address, identified as such, of the owners of the same is to be used. 
(3)  The address where the applicant shall consent to receive mail concerning the license applied for. 
(4)  Where any person contracts, sells or delivers any goods, wares or merchandise in the City for which sales or use tax is payable, the application shall set forth the appropriate California State Board of Equalization Permit Number. 
(5)  Where any person employs others in the course of such business, the application shall set forth the appropriate Federal and/or State Employer Identification Number. 
(6)  Where any person conducting any business is self-employed, the application shall set forth the applicant's Social Security Number and California driver's license number. 
(7)  In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a license to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and address of residence (P.O. boxes are unacceptable) of those owning said business or enterprise. 
(8)  In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a license to a person doing business as a State licensed contractor, the application shall set forth the applicant's State Contractor's License Number and Specialty Classification. 
(9)  Any further information which the Collector may require to enable him or her to issue the type of license applied for; and any further information which the State may require, or any further information which the Collector may deem necessary to properly identify the applicant. 
(10)  A signed statement made under penalty of perjury that the statements therein are true and correct, which statement shall be required to be filed with the Collector upon submission of any original license application, annual renewal statement, miscellaneous supplementary statement, or other return of filing. Each such declaration of truth of application or statement shall have included therein, or attached thereto, a certification or declaration, which shall be substantially in the following form: 
"I declare, under penalty of perjury, that this application, form or statement (including any accompanying schedules, statements, and supporting data has been examined by me, and, to the best of my knowledge, information, and belief, is a full true and correct application, return, or statement and I accordingly so represent. 
Signature of owner, or partner, or officer of corporation, or other authorized agent or representative of any of the above said same." 
All information specified to be set forth on any application form prescribed by the Collector shall be submitted completely and accurately and the license shall be deemed based upon the information submitted and represented. The Collector shall not be required to receive or consider, any application, return or statement unless the above quoted declaration, in substantially the form hereinabove set forth, is contained therein or attached thereto and properly executed by the applicant or the authorized agent or representative of the applicant, and it is unlawful and shall be deemed a misdemeanor in any such application, return or statement for such applicant or authorized agent or representative of the applicant to make any statement which is false or which is contrary to the declaration or representation made in the above quoted form. 
Any license shall be deemed valid based upon the application on file, and if the information is incomplete or inaccurate, the license shall be deemed invalid. If information submitted in an application subsequently becomes incomplete or inaccurate by reason of a change in circumstances, the license shall thereafter be deemed invalid. Upon the Collector's learning of any inaccuracy or incompleteness, notice shall be given forthwith to the licensee, at the address shown on the license where the licensee consented to receive information concerning his or her license, that the license is invalid and requesting the licensee to reapply for a revalidated license within 15 working days. 
Upon the licensee's successful application for a re-validated license within the period hereinabove set the Collector shall apply pro rate to the re-validated license the remainder of the sum originally paid by the licensee. 
Upon the licensee's failure to make successful application for a re-validated license within the period hereinabove set the Collector shall give notice forthwith pursuant to Section 3-4.22(m)(5) that the licensee's license is hereby suspended. Thereafter, upon denial of licensee's appeal it shall be revoked whereupon the licensee's original payment shall be forfeit. 
Any person refusing or failing to make application or to provide information required shall be assessed an amount pursuant to Section 3-4.18(a), and shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Statements not conclusive; information confidential. 
(1)  No statements or applications required hereunder shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the City from collecting by appropriate action such sums as are actually due and payable hereunder. 
(2)  The Business License Officer shall not make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a license or pay a license tax under the provisions of this chapter, or to divulge the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any other document relating thereto which contains specific information as to the amount or source of income or expenditures of any person obtaining a license to be seen or examined by any person; provided, that nothing to this section shall be construed to prevent the disclosure to or examination of records by another City agent for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any of the provisions of this chapter or auditing of accounts of the Business License Officer, Federal or State officials, or a grand jury or court of law upon subpoena or in a legal or administrative proceeding to determine the existence or amount of any license tax liability of the particular licensee to the City; nor shall the disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom licenses have been issued and the general type of their business be prohibited under this section, together with general statistics regarding business taxes collected or business done in the City. 
(c)  Contents of license. All licenses, unless otherwise provided in this Code, shall be prepared and issued by the Collector upon the payment to the City of the sum required to be paid hereunder, or upon filing of proof satisfactory to the Collector of eligibility for exemption from such payment. Each license so issued shall state upon the face thereof the following: 
(1)  The license number of the license. 
(2)  The date of expiration of such license. 
(3)  The persons to whom the same is issued, or where the said persons are doing business under a fictitious name; both the actual and fictitious names to whom the same is issued. 
(4)  The kind of business, profession, show, exhibition, game, occupation or enterprise licensed and the location of the same. 
(5)  A statement that this license is issued without verification that the licensee is subject to or exempt from licensing by the State of California. 
(6)  Any additional statement the Collector may deem necessary or which the State may require. 
(d)  Term of license; new. The term of an initial license shall be from the date of issue through the last day of February of the following calendar year or other ending period as determined by the Collector. 
(e)  Term of license; renewal; due date; grace period. Renewal of the license shall be based on the preceding calendar year. There shall be a grace period of 30 days from the expiration date of the last day of February of each year or other month as established by the Collector for completion of the renewal application process. 
(f)  Tax; how and when payable; effect of dishonored instrument. All business license taxes or deposits in lieu thereof due hereunder shall be paid in advance, in lawful money of the United States, or by check, draft or other instrument in the discretion of the Collector, at the office of the Collector in the Finance Department of the City. No business license shall be issued or renewed until the amount due and payable has been paid in full. Any license, the tax for which has been paid by an instrument such as a check, or draft which is dishonored upon presentation for payment, shall be void and of no effect from its inception. The Collector may, in his or her discretion, withhold the effect of this provision if the tax is paid within five days. Payment of license taxes following a dishonor of such instrument upon presentation for payment shall thereafter be made only by cashier's check, money order or cash, which fee shall include any applicable penalty, as well as a service charge as set forth within the City's current fee resolution. The Collector shall be authorized to reject payment other than by cash, cashier's check or money order from such licensee for a period of one year following any such dishonor. 
(g)  Application of money towards delinquent taxes. Money received during the current year for a license shall first be applied to the payment of delinquent taxes, sums and penalties due during any preceding calendar year, any balance remaining thereafter shall be applied to the payment of the current license taxes and penalties. A license issued during any prior year to the same owner, tenant or occupant for the same place of business shall be prima facie evidence in any court or administrative proceeding that the business was continuously operated by the same person or firm from said prior year to the current year. 
(h)  Statement of tax; mistake not conclusive. 
(1)  No greater or lesser amount of money shall be charged or received for any license tax other than provided for in this chapter. In no case shall any mistake of the Collector in stating the amount of a license tax, or of penalties, or interest accrued thereon prevent or prejudice the collection by the City of what should actually be due from any person carrying on a business subject to license tax under this chapter. No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the City from collection by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. 
(2)  Where a mistake is made in the issuance of any license with regard to the classification under which said license was issued, then a new license shall be issued in the proper classification in lieu thereof, under the date of the original license, and the licensee shall pay any additional amount required by such a change. 
(i)  Notification of flat rate and gross receipts tax due. Notification of business license tax due will be given by first class United States mail, provided that the licensee has submitted a timely renewal statement; provided further that failure to receive such notification shall not exempt the licensee from all requirements under this chapter. 
(j)  Renewal statement; flat rate—submission and filing. In all cases where the license is based on a flat rate, the applicant shall submit to the Collector, for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement upon a form to be provided by the Collector, written under penalty of perjury, setting forth such information concerning the nature, location, intended duration, and, ownership of applicant's business as well as any additional information required by the Collector to enable him or her to ascertain the amount of license tax to be paid by said applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The filing dates for the submission of renewal statements shall be determined by the Collector. 
(k)  Renewal statement; gross receipts—submission and filing. In all cases where the license is based on gross receipts, the applicant shall submit to the Collector, for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license to be paid by the applicant, a written statement upon a form to be provided by the Collector written under penalty of perjury, setting forth such information concerning the nature, location, intended duration, and ownership of applicant's business as well as applicant's gross receipts during the preceding year as may be required by the Collector to enable him or her to ascertain the amount of license tax to be paid by said applicant pursuant the provisions of this chapter. The filing dates for the submission of gross receipts statements shall be during the period determined by the Collector for the period of the preceding calendar year. 
(l)  Payment, statements, made by mail; effect. When the last day of the month in which the business tax is due fails on a Saturday, Sunday, or State or national holiday, payment of the business license tax may be made without penalty on the first working day of the succeeding month. For the purpose of this section, postmarks shall be accepted as the date of payment made, provided the transmitting envelope contains a post office cancellation indicating not later than the date due, or in the case of a weekend or holiday, not later than the first following working day. 
Whenever any other payment, statement, application, report or other communication received by the Collector is received after the time prescribed by this chapter for the receipt thereof, and whenever the Collector is furnished sufficient proof that the payment, statement, application, report, request or other communication was in fact deposited in the United States mail prior to the time prescribed for the receipt thereof, the Collector shall regard such payment, statement, report, request or other communication as having been timely received. 
(m)  Penalties. 
(1)  Penalties for delinquency; application-written agreement to satisfy indebtedness; effect. For failure to pay a license tax when due, the Collector shall add the following penalties: 
(i)  10% of said tax on the past due date thereof; 
(ii)  15% of said tax on the first day of the second month after the past due date thereof; 
(iii)  25% of said tax on the first day of the third month after the due date thereof; and 
(iv)  50% of said tax on the first day of the fourth month thereafter; 
provided that the maximum amount shall not exceed an amount equal to 100% of the amount of the business license tax due. 
No license or sticker, decal, tag, plate or symbol shall be issued, nor shall one which has been suspended or revoked be reinstated or reissued, to any person who, at the time of applying therefor, is indebted to the City for any delinquent business tax, unless such person, with the consent of the Collector, enters into a written agreement with the City, through the Collector, to pay such delinquent taxes, plus 1% per month simple interest upon the unpaid balance, in monthly installments, or oftener, extending over a period not exceeding one year. In any agreement so entered into, such person shall acknowledge the obligation owed the City and agree that, in the event of failure to make timely payment of any installment, the whole amount unpaid, principal together with interest, shall become immediately due and payable. In the event such person fails within a period of 30 days thereafter to render payment in full, his or her current business license shall be revoked by the Collector. In the event legal action is brought by the City to enforce collection of any amount included in the agreement, such person shall pay all costs of suit incurred by the City or its assignee, including attorney fees. The execution penalties on unpaid balances at the rate provided hereinabove, but no penalties or additional interest shall accrue as hereinafter provided on account of fees included in the agreement after the execution of the agreement and the payment of the first installment and during such time as such person shall not be in breach of the agreement. The execution of such an agreement shall render any subsequent appeal null and void and shall constitute a waiver against future action. 
(2)  Failure to submit renewal statement. The failure to submit a renewal statement will result in the gross receipts of the previous business license tax year being increased by 25% or a flat rate business license tax being increased by 25% and a notification of business license tax due being issued. 
(3)  Added to tax. Any penalties assessed hereunder, exclusive of interest, upon attaining a combined amount equal to 100% of the amount of the business license tax due shall become merged with the tax payable hereunder and shall be considered as a part thereof for all purposes. 
(4)  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any business that fails to remit the tax due shall pay interest at the rate of 1% per month, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which remittance first became delinquent until paid. Provided, however, that pursuant to Section 3-4.22(m)(1), penalties upon attaining a combined amount for the business license tax due are merged with the tax payable hereunder and any additional interest charged from such date on shall be charged on the combined amount delinquent until paid. 
(5)  Suspension and revocation of license. The Collector shall suspend and/or revoke any license issued or granted pursuant to this chapter or upon conditions set forth in any written agreement executed pursuant to this chapter. Provided further, that unless revocation is made upon conditions set forth in a written agreement, executed pursuant to subsection (m)(1) above, no licensee's license shall be suspended and/or revoked for failure to pay the license tax or any other amount due pursuant to this chapter until the penalties accruing for such failure to pay, exclusive of interest, equal 100% of the business license tax due for such license. 
Whereupon, the Collector shall give a notice of suspension, which notice shall specify the grounds of suspension, and which notice shall be given by personal service or by depositing it in the United States post office in the City, postage prepaid, addressed to the licensee at the address listed on the application of the licensee where he or she consented to receive mail concerning his or her license, to obtain a license or to pay any license tax due. 
In the event said licensee fails, within a period of ten working days' notice, to pay the license tax due or any other amount due pursuant to this chapter, or to request a hearing, then and in that event the Collector shall give a notice of revocation. The licensee shall be given at least ten working days' notice, which notice shall specify the grounds for revocation, and which notice shall be given pursuant to the hereinabove set forth procedure for giving notice. 
In the event said licensee fails within the allotted ten working day period to request a hearing to show cause why his or her license should not be revoked, then and in that event the Collector shall revoke said person's license and give notice thereof to said person pursuant to the hereinabove set forth procedure for giving notice. 
In the event said licensee fails to file within ten working days thereafter, an appeal of this Code, then the Collector's action in revoking said person's license shall be conclusive as to all matters involved, and the transacting and carrying on by any person of any business pursuant to said license shall thereafter be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(n)  Refunds authorized. Any business license tax, or penalties or interest thereon, or portion thereof, may be refunded, if they were: 
(1)  Paid more than once; 
(2)  Erroneously or illegally collected; 
(3)  Paid in excess of the correct amount; 
(4)  Issued for a business which subsequently does not operate in the City, due to applicant's inability to obtain additional permits required under any provision of this Code. In such case, the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of the business license tax paid. Where applicant cancels his or her license prior to any inspection or investigation taking place, then in that event, applicant shall be entitled to a refund of all fees, inspection or investigation fees paid, without further deduction to cover the administrative cost therefor. 
(5)  Issued for a business which subsequently becomes prohibited or illegal under any law of the State. In such case, the amount refunded shall be prorated on the basis of the proportion which the number of months remaining in the period for which the business license tax was paid bears to the number of months in the whole period. 
(o)  Refunds. 
(1)  Application for refund. No refund of monies howsoever paid or collected shall be allowed in whole or in part unless an application is filed with the Collector within a period of one year from the expiration of the license period for which a refund is sought, and all such claims for refund must be filed with the Collector on forms furnished by him or her in the manner prescribed by him or her. Such application may be made only by the person who made the payment, his or her guardian, executor, administrator or heir. Refunds shall not be made to an assignee of the applicant. Upon the filing of such a claim, and when he or she determines that a refund is warranted, the Collector shall refund the amount warranted, less the fully burdened cost of the refund. Provided, however, that in the case of a refund made pursuant to Section 3-4.22(n)(2), and where applicable, subsection (4), no deduction shall be made on account of the administrative cost therefor. The failure to file such application within the time prescribed herein shall bar any future right of recovery. 
(2)  No refund in instance of other delinquency. Where the Collector has determined that a refund is due upon a particular business license, but where the applicant or licensee is at the time determined to be delinquent or otherwise liable for a business license tax upon a separate business license, or for a separate unlicensed business; then in that event, the Collector shall apply said refund amount to the balance owing and delinquent for said business license or for said unlicensed business. The Collector shall then refund any amount remaining. 
(3)  Fraud bar to refund. No refund shall be made where the business license was issued under a misrepresentation of fact by the applicant and or such applicant actually engaged in the conduct of the business for which the license was granted prior to the date stated in applicant's original application. 
(4)  Proof of payment prerequisite to refund. In all cases proof of payment shall be a prerequisite to any refund. 
(5)  No refund upon termination of business. The business license tax under the terms of this chapter are not refundable upon termination of a business or for any unused portion or term of a license period. 
(p)  Posting; public display; keeping on person. 
(1)  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the City which is open to the public shall keep the license prominently posted in a conspicuous and public place upon the premises where such business is carried on. Provided, further, that any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the City which is closed to the public shall nevertheless keep the license posted in a conspicuous and accessible place upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
(2)  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the City shall keep the license within his or her possession at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. This section may be waived at the discretion of the Collector. 
(3)  Whenever the City shall provide a special tag or plate for the identification of a vehicle for which a business license fee has been paid, such tag or plate shall be affixed to the vehicle in accordance with the pertinent regulations of the Collector. 
(4)  Whenever an identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol has been issued for a vehicle, device, machine, or other piece of equipment as evidence of the issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter, the person to whom such sticker, tag, plate, or symbol has been issued shall firmly affix such symbol upon each such vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment and keep it affixed during the term of the related license at such place thereon as is designated by the Business License Officer. It is unlawful for any person to tamper with, change, or alter any such symbol or to otherwise fail to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(5)  Any person having a license under the provisions of this chapter shall produce and exhibit same whenever required to do so by any collector, or any other officer or official or employee authorized to inspect licenses or by any person being solicited. 
(6)  No person shall exhibit a revoked business license. 
(7)  No person shall reproduce, duplicate, copy or alter an original business license for the purpose of circumventing the requirement of this section by giving a false or misleading impression that any duplication of an original City business license is valid and that the appropriate fee therefor has been paid. 
(q)  Nontransferable, change of name or location. 
(1)  No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable or assignable; provided, that where a license is issued authorizing a person to conduct a business at a particular place, such licensee may upon application therefor have the license amended to authorize the conducting of such business under said license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved. 
(2)  Provided that where a person holding a license issued under the provisions of this chapter changes the name of the business, such person shall upon changing the name make an application to the Collector to have said license amended to reflect the change in name. 
(3)  Provided further that transfer, whether by sale or otherwise, to another person under such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the ownership existing before the transfer, shall not be prohibited by this section. For the purpose of this section stockholders, bondholders, partnerships, or other persons holding an interest in a corporation or other entity herein defined to be a person are regarded as having the real or ultimate ownership of such corporation or other entity. 
(r)  Duplicates. A duplicate license may be issued to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost, damaged, or destroyed upon the licensee filing a statement of such fact, and at the time of filing such statement, paying a duplicate license charge at a rate that is the fully burdened cost of replacing the license. 
(s)  Use of license by unlicensed person. No person holding a license required by this chapter shall permit any unlicensed independent contractor, itinerant merchant, or other person to use the license, the licensed premises or the licensee's name for the purpose of evading payment of any license fee or of evading any other provision of this chapter. Violation of this provision is a criminal infraction and will result in suspension and possible revocation of said license. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.23. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement; Duty to examine all places of business. It shall be the duty of the Business License Officer or the Collector or his or her designated agents to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter and the Chief of Police, the Chief Building Official, the Chief Fire Official, and the City Attorney shall render such assistance in the enforcement thereof as may from time to time be required by the Business License Officer. The Business License Officer in the exercise of the duties imposed hereunder and acting through his or her deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the City to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Enforcement; right of entry. The Collector, Business License Officer, and each and any of his or her assistants, or any police officer, or any Business License Inspector, or any Code Enforcement Officer, Collector shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge, and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed under this chapter, and demand an exhibition of its license. And to include the inspection of premises as deemed necessary. 
(1)  Any person having in his or her possession or control the license for such business, and who willfully fails to exhibit it on demand shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(2)  Any person not having a license for such business on display in a conspicuous place on the premises shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(3)  Any licensee whose license is delinquent and unissued and/or any licensee who has been placed on notice of a suspended license by personal service, or served notice through the United States mail, or by a notice conspicuously posted upon the premises, and who has not applied for, or who is not undergoing the process of a hearing or appeal pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(4)  Any person having been previously placed on notice of violation by personal service, or served notice through the United States mail, or by a notice conspicuously posted upon the premises, and who has not paid said business license tax or applied for exemption therefrom and who has not applied for, or who is not undergoing the process of a hearing or appeal pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(5)  Any person having been previously placed on notice of revocation by personal service, or served notice through the United States mail, or by a notice conspicuously posted upon the premises, and who has not applied for, or who is not undergoing the process of a hearing or appeal of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
It shall be within the authority of the Business License Officer to cause a civil or criminal complaint to be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction against any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter. 
(c)  Audit of books. No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the City from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the Collector, his or her Revenue Officers, or authorized agents of the City, who are hereby authorized to examine, audit, and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for license, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license tax due. 
All persons subject to the provisions of this chapter shall keep complete records of business transactions, including rent collected, sales, sales tax collected and paid to the State, receipts, purchases, and other expenditures, including the number of persons employed and otherwise engaged in the business, and shall retain all such records for examination by the Collector. Such records shall be maintained for a period for three complete calendar years. No person required to keep records under this section shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the Collector to examine said records at reasonable times and places as determined justifiable and necessary by the Collector. Any person who willfully refuses to allow said examination on demand and at a reasonable time and place as herein provided shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Confidentiality. It shall be unlawful for the Collector or any person having administrative duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatsoever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a license, or pay a license tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof to be seen or examined by any person. All gross receipts, statements or estimates required by this chapter shall be confidential and are hereby declared not to be public records. Any authorized disclosure or use of such information by any officer, agent or employee of the City shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this Code in addition to any other penalties provided by law. Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent: 
(1)  The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another City official, employee or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter, or collecting taxes imposed hereunder; 
(2)  The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, Federal or State officials, or the tax officials of another City or County, if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or court of law, upon subpoena; 
(3)  The disclosure of information and results of examination of records of particular taxpayers, to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any license tax liability of the particular taxpayers to the City; 
(4)  The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself or herself, or to his or her successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the times included in the measure of any tax paid, any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties; 
(5)  The disclosure of the names and business addresses of persons to whom licenses are currently issued, and the general type or nature of their business; 
(6)  The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary to the City Council in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files an appeals claim for tax-exemption, license reinstatement, refund of forfeited taxes or bonds, compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him or her by the City for license taxes, or when acting upon any other matter; 
(7)  The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the City. 
(e)  Payments, statements, etc., made by mail; effect. When the last day of the month in which the business tax is due falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or State or national holiday, payment of the business license tax may be made without penalty on the first working day of the succeeding month. For the purpose of this section, postmarks shall be accepted as the date of payment made, provided the transmitting envelope contains a post office cancellation indicating not later than the date due or in the case of a weekend or holiday, not later than the first following working day. 
Whenever any other payment, statement, application, report or other communication received by the Collector is received after the time prescribed by this chapter for the receipt thereof, and whenever the Collector is furnished sufficient proof that the payment, statement, application, report, request or other communication was in fact deposited in the United States mail prior to the time prescribed for the receipt thereof, the Tax Collector shall regard such payment, statement, report, request or other communication as having been timely received. 
(f)  Penalty for violation. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-2 of this Code. 
(g)  Continuing violations. The carrying on of any business without complying with the requirements of this chapter is a separate violation of this Code for each and every day that such business is carried on. 
(h)  Appeals from actions of Business License Officer. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Business License Officer with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue any license may appeal such decision. 
(i)  Taxes a debt to City; Actions for collection of taxes. The amount of any license tax, penalty, or interest, or any combination thereof, imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent taxes, penalty, interest, or charge due hereunder. 
(j)  Remedies cumulative. All remedies and enforcement measures provided to the City by this chapter shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more such remedies by the City, or its duly authorized officers, shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, whether such remedy is provided by this chapter or otherwise. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.24. - Tax-exempt status. 
(a)  Disabled veterans. Every person who has been honorably discharged from military service of the United States and who is exempted from the payment of business license tax by statute of the State may distribute circulars, hawk, peddle, and vend any goods, wares or merchandise owned by him or her, except spirituous, malt, vinous or other intoxicating liquor, without payment of this license tax; subject however to the restrictions, limitations, regulations and conditions hereinafter set forth. 
(1)  Every applicant must furnish a certificate of physical disability executed by a qualified physician or submit equivalent evidence of disability. 
(2)  A license, when issued, is subject to the following conditions: 
(i)  Said license shall not be defaced, mutilated, disfigured or otherwise altered subsequent to its issuance, and failure to comply herewith is grounds for revocation of said license and for refusing its renewal or the issuance of a new license thereafter. 
(ii)  It is nontransferable and for the exclusive use of the licensee named. 
(iii)  Should a license be found in the possession of one other than the licensee named, it shall be surrendered to the Collector and revoked. Neither the licensee named nor the holder thereof shall thereafter be entitled to hold a license under the provisions of this section. 
(iv)  The licensee named must identify himself or herself whenever required to do so by any City police officer, or any authorized agent of the Collector. 
(v)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than the licensee named to use or have in his or her possession any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(vi)  It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase or transfer any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section or for any person to transfer or convey the certificates mentioned in this section to any other person for the purpose of securing a license as herein provided. 
(b)  Nonprofit organizations. 
(1)  Nonprofit organizations in general. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to require the payment of a license tax to conduct any business, occupation or activity or require the payment of any license tax from any institution or organization which currently has or is eligible for an exemption from the payment of federal income taxes under Section 501 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code as amended from time to time and/or exemption from the payment of State income taxes under Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701 et seq. as amended from time to time. An institution or organization claiming a license fee exemption under this section has the burden of furnishing to the Collector such information as the Collector may require to support the claim or eligibility for exemption. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve an institution or organization which is eligible for or claims to be eligible for exemption from payment of a business license tax from the requirement to obtain a business license as provided in this Code. 
(2)  Business license required; exceptions. Any person, institution or organization claiming exemption from the payment of a business license tax shall, nevertheless, apply to the Collector for a business license in the same manner, and at the same time as is required in this chapter of all other persons applying for a business license and shall be subject to the same procedures for enforcement and to the same penalties as provided herein. 
(c)  Special events; community promotion. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to require the payment of a license tax to conduct any business, occupation or activity that in the opinion of the City shall provide community promotion activities such as but not limited to: festivals, farmer's markets. 
(d)  Tax-exempt licenses; limitations. 
(1)  Every license issued without payment of the usual tax shall be stamped "Tax-Exempt" upon its face. 
(2)  Any license issued as tax-exempt shall be subject to suspension and revocation by the Collector in the event that it is determined by the Collector that the applicant is not entitled to exemption. All such suspensions and revocations shall be made after notice and right to a hearing pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)  Any license issued as tax-exempt shall be void and shall afford no defense in any civil or criminal prosecution if any material statement contained in the application, statement of facts or any other document or representation made to the Collector in claiming the exemption is false or fraudulent. 
(4)  No tax-exempt license may be transferred or loaned. 
(5)  Upon uncertainty, for lack of information or otherwise, as to the entitlement of any organization or activity to a tax-exempt license, the Collector may require the filing of a verified report of all funds received and disbursed by any licensee. Upon demand such licensee shall file said report in the form and detail as required by the Collector. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.25. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Conflicts with Federal or State law. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting or carrying on any business exempt from business license tax by virtue of the constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or the State of California. 
(b)  Filing for exemptions. 
(1)  Any person claiming an exemption from licensing requirements under this chapter shall file a sworn statement with the Collector stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed. In the absence of such a statement substantiating the claim, such person shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed herein. 
(2)  The Collector shall, upon a proper showing contained in the sworn statement, and in such supplement thereto as may be required by the Collector, issue a license to the person claiming exemption under this section without payment to the City of the license tax required herein. 
(c)  Business licensing; specified exemptions. 
(1)  A business license shall not be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects whenever the receipts of any such activity are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent purpose within the City. 
(2)  A business license shall not be required for any nonprofit institution, corporation, organization, or association organized or conducted for nonprofit purposes only, when the receipts derived are to be used wholly for the benefit of the organization, and, except for wages paid to employees of such organization, not in whole or part for the private gain of any person within the nonprofit organization. This exemption shall not apply to promoters employed by nonprofit institutions, corporations, organizations, or associations. 
(3)  Any person age 16 or under whose annual gross receipts from any and all business activities is $2,500 or less. 
(4)  When a business, otherwise exempt pursuant to this section, is conducted by a nonexempt person on behalf of such business, the exemption shall be applicable only with regard to the exempt business and shall not be applicable with regard to the nonexempt person. 
(d)  Business licensing; specified exclusions. Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the terms hereof shall not be deemed to apply or construed to require the payment of a license tax by any of the following persons: 
(1)  Banks and savings and loan banks, including national banking associations, Federal credit unions, and financial corporations, to the extent that a City may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of Article XIII, Section 27 of the State Constitution. 
(2)  Insurance companies or associations engaged in the sale and servicing of insurance and their direct agents, including bailbond agents and life agents, but not including brokers or bailbond brokers or life and disability insurance analysts or insurance solicitors to the extent that a City may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of Article XIII, Section 28 of the State Constitution. 
(3)  Any governmental agency or subdivision and the employees thereof, to the extent they are engaged in the business of such governmental agencies or subdivisions. 
(4)  Motor vehicle carriers, or household goods carriers operating under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California or any public transportation system in the City whose definite permanent points of origin and/or termination lie outside of the legal limits of the City to the extent that a City may not levy a license tax upon them pursuant to Public Utilities Code § 4301 et seq. 
(5)  Any day care facility where not more than six people are cared for on a full or part-time basis, to the extent that a City may not levy a license tax upon them pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 1523. 
(6)  Any residential care facility where not more than six people are cared for on a full or part-time basis, to the extent that a City may not levy a license tax upon them pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 566.2. 
(7)  Any rental of residential real estate where the ownership of the property consists of one individual, one partnership, combination of partnerships, or corporation owns or controls three or less units on one parcel, three or less units on separate parcels, or combination thereof. 
(8)  Any garage sale held on property used for residential purposes. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.26. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Radio broadcasting, television broadcasting; soliciting advertising therefor. Any person engaged in transaction and carrying on activities related to the generation of electromagnetic waves, within the City for the purpose of commercial broadcasting by radio transmission or television transmission shall pay an annual business license tax. 
Any person engaged in transaction and carrying on activities related to the solicitation of advertising within the City for radio or television transmission in intrastate commercial broadcasting and not otherwise licensed under the provisions of this chapter and not having a regularly established place of business within the City shall pay an annual business license tax. 
(b)  Trucking and hauling; transportation of property; delivering or carrying of goods, wares or merchandise; exemptions and exceptions. 
(1)  Transportation of property. Every person whose business is that of operator of any vehicle used for the transportation of property for hire or compensation, and who in the course of that business uses the public streets and highways within the City to receive or discharge, pick up or deliver property within the City, shall pay a business tax. 
(2)  Delivering or carrying of goods, wares or merchandise. Every person who uses any vehicle over the public streets and highways of the City to receive or discharge property, or for delivering or carrying goods, wares or merchandise sold, let or handled by him or her in the course of this business within the City, and who is not otherwise specifically assessed a fee by other provisions of this chapter, shall pay a business tax. 
(3)  Exemptions and exceptions. The business tax imposed under the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person who is subject to tax under the Highway Carrier's Uniform Business License Tax Act, commencing with Public Utilities Code § 4301; nor shall the provisions of this section apply to the operation of any vehicle operated exclusively in interstate commerce. 
(c)  Telephone services. Every person engaged in the business of providing telephone services shall pay an annual business tax. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993) 
Sec.  3-4.27. Establishment of business categories. 
The business classification categories are as follows: 
(a)  Primary business categories. 
(1)  Administrative headquarters. 
(2)  Contractors. 
(3)  Manufacturing. 
(4)  Professions. 
(5)  Public utilities. 
(6)  Recreation and entertainment. 
(7)  Rental of residential property. 
(8)  Rental of nonresidential property. 
(9)  Retail. 
(10)  Services. 
(11)  Wholesaling. 
(b)  Special business categories. 
(1)  Itinerant merchants/peddlers. 
(2)  Special events. 
(3)  Transportation of persons and goods. 
(4)  Warehousing. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
Sec. 3-4.28. - Rates and schedules. 
The City Council shall establish fees, rates and schedules for business licenses as authorized by this chapter by appropriate implementing resolution establishing those rates and schedules for both primary business categories with gross receipts tax basis and for special business categories with flat fee or square footage tax basis. The referenced implementing resolution may be changed from time to time by appropriate action of the council amending the rate structures as established by the implementing resolution. The initial implementing resolution establishing the rates and schedules shall become effective with the effective date of the chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 01-93, eff. April 15, 1993)  
CHAPTER 6. - TAXATION  
Article 1. - Property Taxes 
 
Sec. 3-6.101. - Transfer of assessment and collection duties to County. 
The assessment and tax collection duties and the collection of assessments levied for municipal improvements, now performed by the Assessor and the Tax Collector of the City, are hereby transferred to the Assessor and the Tax Collector of the County for the purposes of assessment and collection of and for ad valorem property taxes which become a lien after January 16, 1967, and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable on and after July 1, 1967. 
(§ 2, Ord. 534, eff. January 16, 1967)  
Sec. 3-6.102. - Abolition of certain offices. 
The offices of City Assessor and City Tax Collector are hereby abolished as of July 1, 1967, and thereafter all duties performed by the City Assessor, other than the assessing of property in the City, are hereby transferred to and shall be performed by the City Clerk, and all duties performed by the City Tax Collector, other than the collection of ad valorem taxes on property which become a lien after January 16, 1967, and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable after July 1, 1967, are hereby transferred to and shall be performed by the City Clerk. 
(§ 3, Ord. 534, eff. January 16, 1967)  
Article 2. - Sales and Use Tax 
 
Sec. 3-6.201. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law" of the City. 
(§ 1, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)  
Sec. 3-6.202. - Rate. 
The rate of the sales tax and use tax imposed by the provisions of this article shall be as follows: 
(a)  0.9% to and including June 30, 1976; 
(b)  Effective July 1, 1976, 0.95% to and including June 30, 1977; 
(c)  Effective July 1, 1977, 0.975% to and including June 30, 1978; and 
(d)  Effective July 1, 1978, and thereafter, 1%. 
(§ 2, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974, as amended by § 1, Ord. 718, eff. April 14, 1976)  
Sec. 3-6.203. - Operative date. 
The provisions of this article shall be operative on January 1, 1974. 
(§ 3, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)  
Sec. 3-6.204. - Purpose. 
The Council hereby declares that the provisions of this article are adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes and directs that the provisions of this article be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
(a)  To adopt a sales and use tax law which complies with the requirements and limitations set forth in Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5; 
(b)  To adopt a sales and use tax law which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations set forth in Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5; 
(c)  To adopt a sales and use tax law which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor which can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the sales and use taxes of the State; and 
(d)  To adopt a sales and use tax law which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5, minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this article. 
(§ 4, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)  
Sec. 3-6.205. - Contract with State. 
Prior to the operative date of this article, the City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all the functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax law; provided, however, if the City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to such operative date, the City shall nevertheless so contract, and, in such a case, the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this article. 
(§ 5, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)  
Sec. 3-6.206. - Sales taxes. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate set forth in Section 3-6.202 of this article of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the City on and after the operative date of this article. 
(§ 6, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)  
Sec. 3-6.207. - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-State destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-State destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(§ 7, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)  
Sec. 3-6.208. - Use taxes. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this article for the storage, use, or other consumption in the City at the rate set forth in Section 3-6.202 of this article of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(§ 8, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)  
Sec. 3-6.209. - Adoption of State law provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5, all of the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of said code are hereby adopted and made a part of this article as though fully set forth in this article. 
(§ 9, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)  
Sec. 3-6.210. - Limitations on adoption of State law provisions. 
In adopting the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1, wherever the State is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the City shall be substituted therefor. Such substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of the provisions of this article; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use, or other consumption remains subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said provisions of said Code; the substitution shall not be made in Revenue and Taxation Code § 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, or 6828; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Revenue and Taxation Code § 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in said Revenue and Taxation Code § 6203. 
(§ 10, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)  
Sec. 3-6.211. - Permits not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer pursuant to the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code § 6067, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by the provisions of this article. 
(§ 11, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)  
Sec. 3-6.212. - Exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
(b)  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5 by any city and county, county or city in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this article. 
(c)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(d)  In addition to the exemptions provided in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the store, use or other consumption of other tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(e)  The storage or use of tangible personal property and the transportation or transmission of persons, property or communications or in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or in the manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California shall be exempt from the tax due under this article. 
(§ 12, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974 as amended by § 1, Ord. 930, eff. January 1, 1984)  
Sec. 3-6.213. - Exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
(b)  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5 by any city and county, county or city in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this article. 
(c)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
(d)  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
(e)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government. 
(f)  In addition to the exemptions provided in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(§ 13, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974 as amended by § 2, Ord. 930, eff. January 1, 1984)  
Sec. 3-6.214. - Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of Section 3-6.213 of this article shall become operative on January 1 of the year following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an assessment ratio for State-assessed property which is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code § 401, at which time the provisions of Section 3-6.212 of this article shall become inoperative. 
(b)  In the event the provisions of Section 3-6.213 of this article become operative, and the State Board of Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for the State-assessed property, which ratio is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by the provisions of said Revenue and Taxation Code § 401, the provisions of Section 3-6.212 of this article shall become operative on the first day of the month next following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time the provisions of said Section 3-6.213 shall be inoperative until the first day of the month following the month in which said Board again adopts an assessment ratio for State-assessed property, which ratio is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by the provisions of said Section 401, at which time the provisions of said Section 3-6.213 shall again become operative and the provisions of said Section 3-6.212 shall become inoperative. 
(c)  This section (Section 14 of Ordinance No. 675) is amended to the extent, and only to the extent, to make the same consistent with the provisions of this ordinance, and save and except to the extent necessary to make the same consistent with this ordinance, those provisions of Section 14 relating to the application of the provisions relating to Exclusions and Exemptions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(§ 14, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974 as amended by § 5, Ord. 930, eff. January 1, 1984)  
Sec. 3-6.215. - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, which amendments relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with the provisions of said Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5 shall automatically become a part of this article. 
(§ 15, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)  
Sec. 3-6.216. - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the State or the City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected under this article or Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5. 
(§ 16, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)  
Sec. 3-6.217. - Existing sales and use tax ordinances suspended. 
At the time this article goes into operation, the provisions of Ordinance Nos. 313, 449, and 489 shall be suspended and shall not again be of any force or effect until and unless for any reason the State Board of Equalization ceases to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax hereby imposed; provided, however, if for any reason it is determined that the City is without the power to adopt this article, or that the State Board of Equalization is without the power to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by this article, the provisions of Ordinance Nos. 313, 449, and 489 shall not be deemed to have been suspended but shall be deemed to have been in full force and effect at the rate of 0.9% continuously from and after July 15, 1963. Upon the ceasing of the State Board of Equalization to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by this article, the provisions of Ordinance Nos. 313, 449, and 489 shall again be in full force and effect at the rate of 0.9%. Nothing in this article shall be construed as relieving any person of the obligation to pay the City any sales or use tax accrued and owing by the reason of the provisions of Ordinance Nos. 313, 449, and 489 in force and effect prior to and including July 14, 1963. 
(§ 19, Ord. 675, eff. December 19, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)  
Article 3. - Real Property Transfer Tax 
 
Sec. 3-6.301. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Law of the City of Yuba City." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 6.7 (commencing with Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901). 
(§ 1, Ord. 545, eff. January 18, 1968)  
Sec. 3-6.302. - Tax imposed. 
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City shall be granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or her direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds $100 a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500 or fractional part thereof. 
(§ 1, Ord. 545, eff. January 18, 1968)  
Sec. 3-6.303. - Person responsible for payment. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of Section 3-6.302 of this article shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed, or issued. 
(§ 1, Ord. 545, eff. January 18, 1968)  
Sec. 3-6.304. - Debt security instruments exempted. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(§ 1, Ord. 545, eff. January 18, 1968)  
Sec. 3-6.305. - Governmental agencies exempted. 
The United States, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor. 
(§ 1, Ord. 545, eff. January 18, 1968)  
Sec. 3-6.306. - Bankruptcies and receiverships. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not apply to the making, delivering, or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
(a)  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
(b)  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in 11 U.S.C. § 205(m), as amended; 
(c)  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in 11 U.S.C. § 506(3), as amended; or 
(d)  Whereby a mere change in identity, form, or place of organization is effected. 
The provisions of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery, or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval, or change. 
(§ 1, Ord. 545, eff. January 18, 1968)  
Sec. 3-6.307. - Securities and Exchange Commission. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subsection (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if: 
(a)  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of 15 U.S.C. § 79k relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
(b)  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; and 
(c)  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(§ 1, Ord. 545, eff. January 18, 1968)  
Sec. 3-6.308. - Partnerships. 
(a)  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise if: 
(1)  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
(2)  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
(b)  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for the purposes of this article such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(c)  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article by reason of a termination described in subsection (b) of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(§ 1, Ord. 545, eff. January 18, 1968)  
Sec. 3-6.309. - Administration. 
The County Recorder shall administer the provisions of this article in conformity with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 6.7 and the provisions of any County ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(§ 1, Ord. 545, eff. January 18, 1968)  
Sec. 3-6.310. - Claims for refunds. 
Claims for the refund of taxes imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be governed by the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 1, pt. 9, ch. 5 (§ 5096 et seq.). 
(§ 1, Ord. 545, eff. January 18, 1968)  
Sec. 3-6.311. - Operative date. 
The provisions of this article shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the County pursuant to the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 6.7 (§ 11901 et seq.), on January 18, 1968, whichever is the later. 
(§ 1, Ord. 545, eff. January 18, 1968)  
Article 4. - Hotel/Motel Surcharge 
 
Sec. 3-6.401. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Hotel/Motel Surcharge." 
(§ 2, Ord. 05-00, eff. August 31, 2000)  
Sec. 3-6.402. - Surcharge imposed. 
There is hereby established and imposed a hotel/motel surcharge at the rate set forth in this article. 
(§ 2, Ord. 05-00, eff. August 31, 2000)  
Sec. 3-6.403. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "City" means the City of Yuba City. 
(b)  "Hotel/motel" shall mean any structure or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, for periods of 30 days or less, and includes, but is not limited to, any hotel, inn, bed and breakfast inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, which is used for the purpose of transient lodging or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
(c)  "Occupancy" shall mean the temporary use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or portion thereof, in any hotel/motel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
(d)  "Operator" shall mean the person who is the proprietor of the hotel/motel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this article and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this article by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
(e)  "Room rate" shall mean the hotel/motel consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a motel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
(f)  "Transient" shall mean any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel/motel shall be deemed to be transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. 
(§ 1, Ord. 05-00, eff. August 31, 2000)  
Sec. 3-6.404. - Surcharge; payment of surcharge by transient. 
(a)  For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel/motel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a surcharge in the amount of 10% of the rent charged by the operator. 
(b)  Said surcharge constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the City. The Transient shall pay the surcharge to the operator of the hotel/motel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the surcharge shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid surcharge shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel/motel. If for any reason the surcharge due is not paid to the operator of the hotel/motel, the Director of Administrative Services may require that such surcharge shall be paid directly to the Director of Administrative Services. 
(§ 1, Ord. 05-00, eff. August 31, 2000; § 1, Ord. 09-00, eff. January 18, 2001)  
Sec. 3-6.405. - Exemptions. 
No surcharge levied by this chapter shall be imposed upon: 
(a)  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City to impose the surcharge herein provided. 
(b)  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of Federal law or international treaty. 
(c)  Any person occupying a room pursuant to an emergency shelter grant from the Red Cross or similar organization as a result of a natural disaster such as fire or flood. 
No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefore made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the Director of Administrative Services. 
(§ 1, Ord. 05-00, eff. August 31, 2000)  
Sec. 3-6.406. - Collection and advertisement that surcharge not required prohibited. 
Each operator shall collect the surcharge imposed by this article to the same extent and at the same time as the room rate is collected from every transient. The amount of surcharge shall be separately stated from the amount of the room rate charged. No operator of a hotel/motel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the surcharge or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the room rate, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this article. 
(§ 1, Ord. 05-00, eff. August 31, 2000)  
Sec. 3-6.407. - Registration of motels and certificate. 
Within 30 days after commencing business, each operator of any hotel/motel renting occupancy to transients shall register the motel with the Director of Administrative Services and obtain from him or her a "hotel/motel registration certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
(a)  The name of the operator. 
(b)  The address of the hotel/motel. 
(c)  The date upon which the certificate was issued. 
(d)  "This Hotel/Motel Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Hotel/Motel Ordinance by registering with the Director of Administrative Services for the purpose of collecting from Transients the Hotel/Motel Surcharge and remitting said Surcharge to the Director of Administrative Services. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a Hotel/Motel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(§ 1, Ord. 00-05, eff. August 31, 2000)  
Sec. 3-6.408. - Reports and remitting of surcharge. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the Director of Administrative Services, make a return to the Director of Administrative Services, on forms provided by him or her, of the total room rates charged and received and the amount of surcharge collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the surcharge collected shall be remitted to the Director of Administrative Services. The Director of Administrative Services may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the surcharge and he or she may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All surcharges collected by operators pursuant to this article shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the Director of Administrative Services. 
(§ 1, Ord. 00-05, eff. August 31, 2000)  
Sec. 3-6.409. - Penalties for failure to remit sur-charge when due. 
(a)  Original delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any surcharge imposed by this article within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10% of the amount of the surcharge in addition to the amount of the surcharge. 
(b)  Continued delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 10% of the amount of the surcharge in addition to the amount of the surcharge and the 10% penalty first imposed. 
(c)  Fraud. If the Director of Administrative Services determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this article is due to fraud, a penalty of 25% of the amount of the surcharge shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(d)  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any surcharge imposed by this article shall pay interest at the rate of 1% per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the surcharge, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
(e)  Penalties merged with surcharge. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the surcharge required to be paid. 
(§ 1, Ord. 00-05, eff. August 31, 2000)  
Sec. 3-6.410. - Failure to collect and report surcharge; determination of surcharge due. 
If any operator fails or refuses to collect the surcharge imposed by this article and to make, within the time provided in this article, any report and remittance of the surcharge or any portion thereof required by this article, the Director of Administrative Services shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the surcharge due. As soon as the Director of Administrative Services procures such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any surcharge imposed by this article and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the surcharge, interest and penalties provided for by this article. In case such determination is made, the Director of Administrative Services shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed within ten days after the service or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the Director of Administrative Services for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the surcharge, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the Director of Administrative Services shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the Director of Administrative Services shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed in this section to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should be fixed for such surcharge, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified surcharge, interest, and penalties should not so be fixed. After such hearing, the Director of Administrative Services shall determine the proper surcharge to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such surcharge, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3-6.411. 
(§ 1, Ord. 00-05, eff. August 31, 2000)  
Sec. 3-6.411. - Appeals. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Director of Administrative Services with respect to the amount of such surcharge, interest, and penalties, if any, may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days of the serving or mailing of the determination of surcharge due. The City Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the City Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(§ 1, Ord. 00-05, eff. August 31, 2000)  
Sec. 3-6.412. - Records to be kept for three years. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any surcharge imposed by this article to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such surcharge as he or she may have been liable for the collection of a payment to the City, which records the Director of Administrative Services shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(§ 1, Ord. 00-05, eff. August 31, 2000)  
Sec. 3-6.413. - Refunds. 
(a)  Whenever the amount of any surcharge interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this article, it may be refunded as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section provided a claim in writing therefore, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Director of Administrative Services within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Director of Administrative Services. 
(b)  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against surcharges collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the Director of Administrative Services that the person from whom the surcharge has been collected was not a transient, provided that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of surcharge so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
(c)  A transient may obtain a refund of surcharges overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section, but only when the surcharge was paid by the transient directly to the Director of Administrative Services, or when the transient having paid the surcharge to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the Director of Administrative Services that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the surcharge. 
(d)  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(§ 1, Ord. 00-05, eff. August 31, 2000)  
Sec. 3-6.414. - Actions by City to collect surcharge. 
Any surcharge required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this article shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such surcharge collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this article shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount. 
(§ 1, Ord. 00-05, eff. August 31, 2000)  
Sec. 3-6.415. - Violation of provisions a misdemeanor. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefore by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other date required by the Director of Administrative Services or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign, or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination or any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. 
(§ 1, Ord. 00-05, eff. August 31, 2000)  
CHAPTER 7. - FUNDS  
Article 1. - Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund 
 
Sec. 3-7.101. - Created. 
To comply with the provisions of Streets and Highways Code div. 1, ch. 1, art. 5, § 196, there is hereby created in the City treasury a special fund to be known as the "Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund." 
(§ 1, Ord. 544, eff. December 6, 1967)  
Sec. 3-7.102. - Deposits. 
All moneys received by the City from the State pursuant to the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code of the State for the acquisition of real property or interest therein, or for engineering, or for the construction, maintenance, or improvement of streets or highways by the City shall be paid into the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund. 
(§ 2, Ord. 544, eff. December 6, 1967)  
Sec. 3-7.103. - Expenditures. 
All moneys in the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to, the provisions of Streets and Highways Code div. 1, ch. 1, art. 5, §§ 194 through 202. 
(§ 3, Ord. 544, eff. December 6, 1967)  
Article 2. - Delegation to City Treasurer Authority to Invest City Funds and Deposit Securities 
 
Sec. 3-7.201. - Delegation. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Government Code §§ 53607 and 53608, the authority to invest and reinvest money of the City, to sell or exchange, securities so purchased, and to deposit such securities for safekeeping is hereby delegated to the City Treasurer. 
(§ 1, Ord. 735, eff. February 2, 1977)  
Sec. 3-7.202. - Investments. 
The City Treasurer is hereby authorized to purchase, at their original sale or after they have been issued, securities which are permissible investments under Government Code §§ 53601 and 53635, as such sections now read or may hereafter be amended, from money in his or her custody which is not required for the immediate necessities of the City and as he or she may deem wise and expedient and to sell or exchange for other eligible securities and to reinvest the proceeds of the securities so purchased. 
(§ 1, Ord. 735, eff. February 2, 1977)  
Sec. 3-7.203. - Redemptions. 
From time to time the City Treasurer shall redeem the securities in which City money has been invested pursuant to Section 3-7.202 of this article so that the proceeds may be applied to the purposes for which the original purchase money was designated or placed in the City treasury. 
(§ 1, Ord. 735, eff. February 2, 1977)  
Sec. 3-7.204. - City bonds. 
Bonds issued by the City and purchased pursuant to Section 3-7.202 of this article may be canceled either in satisfaction of sinking fund obligations or otherwise; provided, however, such bonds may be held uncanceled and, while so held, may be resold. 
(§ 1, Ord. 735, eff. February 2, 1977)  
Sec. 3-7.205. - Reports. 
The City Treasurer shall make a monthly report of all such investments to the Council. 
(§ 1, Ord. 735, eff. February 2, 1977)  
Sec. 3-7.206. - Deposits. 
The City Treasurer is hereby authorized to deposit for safekeeping with a trust company, or with a State or national bank located within the State, or with the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, or any branch thereof located within the State, or with any Federal Reserve Bank, or with any State or national bank located in any city designated as a reserve city by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System the securities in which City money has been invested pursuant to Section 3-7.202 of this article; provided, however, the City Treasurer shall take from such trust company or bank a receipt for the securities so deposited and shall not be responsible for such securities delivered to and receipted for by such trust company or bank until such securities are withdrawn therefrom by the City Treasurer. 
The City Treasurer is further authorized to deposit such funds in all legal depositories as provided for by the laws of the State, specifically including savings and loan associations. 
(§ 1, Ord. 735, eff. February 2, 1977)  
Article 3. - Establishment of Trust Fund to Provide Self-Funded Group Benefit Plan 
 
Sec. 3-7.301. - Create. 
The purpose of this article is to create in the City treasury a special fund to be known as the "Employee Benefits Funds," to accumulate and disperse money for self-funded programs. 
The City Council will by resolution determine the programs and level of benefits. 
(§ 1, Ord. 972, eff. 4-15-85)  
Sec. 3-7.302. - Deposits. 
All money appropriated for programs authorized by the City Council to be self-funded, such as health, life, vision, dental, unemployment and related benefits, and all contributions from current and retired employees for these same purposes, and the amounts that may be earned on such funds on deposit, or from the operation of the benefit plan shall be deposited with the "Employee Benefits Funds." 
(§ 1, Ord. 972, eff. 4-15-85)  
Sec. 3-7.303. - Expenditures. 
Expenditures within the Employee Benefits Fund shall consist of the payment of employee benefits and expenses for administration of the programs and maintenance of adequate City reserves. 
The disbursement of money from this fund shall follow the same procedures as for all other City obligations. 
The Director of Finance shall be responsible for the accounting of all receipts and disbursements. 
The funds shall remain in the name and title of the City and shall not be held in any way as collateral securing any other obligation of the City of Yuba City. 
(§ 1, Ord. 972, eff. 4-15-85)  
Article 4. - Establishment of Internal Service Fund for the Purpose of Providing Payment of Claims and Associated Costs Relating to the General Liability Obligations of the City 
 
Sec. 3-7.401. - Create. 
The purpose of this article is to create in the City treasury a special fund to be known as the "General Liability Fund," to accumulate and disperse money for general liability obligations. 
The City Council will by motion determine the programs and level of payments. 
(§ 1, Ord. 977, eff. July 31, 1985)  
Sec. 3-7.402. - Deposits. 
All money appropriated for programs authorized by the City Council and the amount that may be earned on such finds on deposit shall be deposited with the "General Liability Fund." 
(§ 1, Ord. 977, eff. July 31, 1985)  
Sec. 3-7.403. - Expenditures. 
Expenditures within the General Liability Fund shall consist of the payment of general liability obligations of the City and expenses for administration of the programs and maintenance of adequate City reserves. 
The disbursement of money from this fund shall follow the procedures of other City obligations. 
The City Council will by resolution determine additional procedures in the disbursement of money. 
The Director of Finance shall be responsible for the accounting of all receipts and disbursements. 
The funds shall remain in the name and title of the City and shall not be held in any way as collateral securing any other obligation of the City of Yuba City. 
(§ 1, Ord. 977, eff. July 31, 1985)  
Article 5. - Cash Handling Guidelines 
 
Sec. 3-7.501. - Delegation. 
The City of Yuba City assigns responsibility to the Administrative Services Director ("Director") for the receipt, safekeeping, investment, and payment of all City funds. In addition, the Director is authorized to promulgate rules and procedures for the receipt, handling and deposit by City officers and employees ("officers") of City moneys into the City treasury. The Director or his/her designee shall provide training, technical assistance and other support to City departments in performing financial functions. Prior to their employment or upon direction of the Director, officers of the City who receive cash (currency, coin, checks, electronic payments, etc.) in the normal course of their employment shall be certified by the Administrative Services Department as a City Cash Handler. 
(§ 1, Ord. 009-05, eff. August 4, 2005)  
Sec. 3-7.502. - Certification. 
As a condition to certification or maintenance of certification as a City Cash Handler, the Director shall require that officers of the City who receive cash (currency, coin, checks, electronic payment, etc.) in the normal course of their employment complete a course of instruction or training and/or pass an examination on the secure processing of moneys, the City Treasurer's rules, procedures and applicable departmental rules, and thereafter take refresher instruction or training at periodic intervals or when the need arises. 
(§ 1, Ord. 009-05, eff. August 4, 2005)  
Sec. 3-7.503. - Deposits. 
Officers of the City who receive cash (currency, coin, checks, electronic payments, etc.) in the normal course of their employment shall immediately deliver the same to the Administrative Services Department (Finance Division) before 12:00 noon of the next business day, unless otherwise authorized by the Director. Any employee who fails to deposit City moneys with the Administrative Services Department (Finance Division) before 12:00 noon, may be liable to the City for double the amount of the deposit, and may be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination. 
(§ 1, Ord. 009-05, eff. August 4, 2005)  
CHAPTER 8. - USER FEE RECOVERY SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 3-8.01. - Finding and intent. 
(a)  Pursuant to Article XIIIB of the California Constitution, it is the intent of the City Council to recover costs reasonably borne from fees, charges and regulatory license fees levied to provide regulations, products or services. 
(b)  The fee recovery system set forth in this chapter provides a mechanism for ensuring that fees adopted by the City for regulations, products or services rendered do not exceed the reasonable estimated cost for providing regulations, products or services for which the fees are charged. 
(c)  The adoption of this chapter is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code § 21080 et seq.), because it approves and sets forth a procedure for determining fees for the purpose of meeting the operating expenses of City departments, as set forth in Public Resources Code § 21080(b)(8). 
(§2, Ord. 003-07, eff. April 19, 2007)  
Sec. 3-8.02. - Delegation of authority and direction to City Manager. 
(a)  The City Manager is hereby delegated the authority and directed to provide documents to the City Council to implement its herein enumerated policy to adjust fees and to recover the percentage of costs reasonably borne as established hereby, in providing the regulation, product or service. 
(b)  The City Manager is hereby delegated authority to issue policies defining terms; setting out administrative, fee collection, and financial procedures; definitions, and establishing effective dates of all fees set by the City Council by resolution. 
(c)  "Costs reasonably borne" shall be as defined in Section 3-8.03. In adjusting fees, the City Manager shall act in an administrative and ministerial capacity and shall consider only the standards and criteria established by this chapter, and the procedures set hereby and by applicable State law. All policies issued hereunder shall comply in all respects with this chapter, and the schedules of fees as set by the City Council by resolution. 
(d)  The City Manager shall annually adjust the fee schedule to be effective July 1 to ensure that the recovery of the below listed percentage of costs is occurring. The fee schedule shall be adjusted for the next succeeding year by the same percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers (CPI), as reported by the California Division of Labor Statistics, published in February of the current year, over the CPI which was published in February of the prior year. 
(e)  The City Manager shall annually, or as otherwise provided by this chapter, by May 1 or at least 60 days before the effective date of any fees adjusted pursuant to this section, make available to the public appropriate data indicating the cost, or estimated cost required to support the fees and charges for which adjustments are proposed. 
(§2, Ord. 003-07, eff. April 19, 2007)  
Sec. 3-8.03. - "Costs reasonably borne" defined. 
"Costs reasonably borne," as used and ordered to be applied in this chapter, are to consist of the following elements: 
(a)  All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to salaries, wages, overtime, employee fringe benefits, services and supplies, maintenance and operation expenses, contracted services, special supplies, and any other direct expense incurred. 
(b)  All applicable indirect costs including, but not restricted to, building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance and operations, communications expenses, computer costs, printing and reproduction, vehicle expenses, insurance, debt service, and like expenses when distributed on an accounted and documented rational proration system. 
(c)  Fixed asset recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of fixed assets, and additional fixed asset expense recovery charges calculated on the current estimated cost of replacement, divided by the approximate life expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the difference between historical value depreciation not previously recovered and reserved in cash and the full cost of replacement, also shall be calculated and considered a cost so as to recover such unrecovered costs between historical cost and cost of replacement over the remaining life of the asset. 
(d)  General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the City Council, City Attorney, City Manager, City Clerk, City Treasurer, Economic Development, Administrative Services Department, Human Resources Department, and all other staff and support service provided to the entire City organization. Overhead shall be prorated between tax-financed services and fee-financed services on the basis of said percentage so that each of taxes and fees and charges shall proportionately defray such overhead costs. 
(e)  Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each department head and his or her supporting expenses as enumerated in subsection (a), subsection (b), subsection (c) and subsection (f) of this section. 
(f)  Debt service costs, consisting of repayment of principal, payment of interest, and trustee fees and administrative expenses for all applicable bond, certificate, or securities issues or loans of whatever nature or kind. Any required coverage factors or required or established reserves beyond basic debt service costs also shall be considered a cost if required by covenant within any securities ordinance, resolution, indenture or general law applicable to the City. 
(§2, Ord. 003-07, eff. April 19, 2007)  
Sec. 3-8.04. - Cost recovery percentages. 
(a)  The City Manager, Assistant City Manager of Administrative Services and each City department head, under the direction of the City Manager, shall periodically review the fees that are set by the City Council resolution to ensure that recovery of the following percentages of costs reasonably borne is occurring. 
City Areas of Fee Generation 	Percentage of Costs Reasonably Borne to be Recovered 
01 	Community Development 	100% 
02 	Public Works 	100% 
03 	Police 	100% 
04 	Fire 	100% 
05 	Utility Services 	100% 
06 	Administrative Services 	100% 
07 	Recreation Programs 	40 to 60% 
08 	Animal Services 	Up to 100% 
 
(b)  All applicable fees set by City Council resolution pursuant to this chapter shall take effect sixty (60) days after the passage of such resolution. 
(§2, Ord. 003-07, eff. April 19, 2007)  
Sec. 3-8.05. - Statutory public meetings. 
Pursuant to Government Code §§ 66016 and 66018, the City Clerk shall cause notice to be provided as set out in Government Code § 6062a, and the City Council shall receive at a regularly scheduled meeting oral and written presentations concerning fees proposed to be increased/decreased or added, other than those fees adjusted by the City Manager as provided in this chapter. Such notice, oral and written presentation, and public meeting shall be provided prior to the City Council taking any action or any new or increased fees. 
(§2, Ord. 003-07, eff. April 19, 2007)  
Sec. 3-8.06. - Provision of data. 
Pursuant to the California Government Code, at least ten days prior to any public hearing set out herein, the City Manager shall make available to the public appropriate data indicating the cost, or estimated cost required to support the fees and charges for which changes are proposed to be made or fees imposed. The City Manager also shall provide a summary of the present fee schedules and those proposed at any such public hearing. A general explanation of such changes also shall be provided and published per the requirements of Government Code §§ 6062a and 66016. 
(§2, Ord. 003-07, eff. April 19, 2007)  
Sec. 3-8.07. - Appeal to City Council. 
(a)  Any person who feels that any fee determined and set is in excess of the percentage of costs reasonably borne to be recovered as set out in this chapter, or that such fee adjustment is not otherwise in compliance with this chapter, may appeal, in writing to the City Council before the effective date of any such adjustment. 
(b)  No fee for which a timely appeal has been filed shall take effect until heard by the City Council. Such appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next ensuing Council meeting after receipt of such appeal, and heard at the next ensuing Council meeting. 
(§2, Ord. 003-07, eff. April 19, 2007)  
CHAPTER 9. - DOWNTOWN YUBA CITY BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 3-9.010. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Act" shall mean the parking and business improvement Area Law of 1989, Streets and Highways Code § 36500 et seq. 
(b)  "Activities" shall mean and include, without limitation: promotion of public events which benefit businesses in the District. 
(c)  "Assessment" shall mean a levy for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, installing, or maintaining improvements and promoting activities which will benefit the businesses located and operating within the District. 
(d)  "Associate member" shall mean a business owner located outside the BID boundaries that participates by paying an associate member assessment. 
(e)  "Billing period" shall mean the time between January 1 of any year and December 31 of the same year. 
(f)  "District" shall mean the parking and business improvement area established pursuant to Section 3-9-020 of this Code. 
(g)  "Financial business" shall mean banks, savings and loan institutions, credit unions, and other related businesses. 
(h)  "Fiscal year" shall mean January 1 to and including December 31 of the same year. 
(i)  "Improvements" shall mean the acquisition, construction, installation, or maintenance of any tangible property with an estimated useful life of five years or more, including, without limitation: parking facilities, benches, trash receptacles, street lighting, decorations, parks and fountains. 
(j)  "Lodging business" shall mean and include, without limitation, hotels, motels, inns, recreational vehicle parks, bed and breakfast inns, and other similar businesses. 
(k)  "Professional business" shall mean and include attorneys, architects, accountants, engineers, surveyors, physicians, dentists, optometrists, chiropractors and others in a medical/health service field, consultants, real estate brokers, financial advisors, laboratories (including dental and optical), hearing aid services, artists and designers, and similar businesses. 
(l)  "Retail, restaurant and service business" shall mean and include businesses that buy and resell goods such as clothing stores, shoe stores, office supplies, businesses that sell prepared foods and drinks, general office, news and advertising media, printers, photographers, personal care facilities and outlets, contractors/builders, service stations, repairing and servicing businesses, renting and leasing businesses, utilities, vending machine businesses, household finance companies, theaters and entertainment-oriented businesses, and other similar businesses not otherwise defined in the other categories. 
(§ 1, Ord. 06-98, eff. August 19, 1998)  
Sec. 3-9.020. - Establishment of Business Improvement District and boundaries of District. 
A Parking and Business Improvement Area is hereby established pursuant to the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1989, Streets and Highways Code § 36500 et seq. This District shall be called the Downtown Yuba City Business Improvement District. There shall be two benefit zones within the District, based upon the degree of benefit to be derived from the improvements and activities to be provided within the benefit zones as provided in the Act. The boundaries of the District and the benefit zones within the District are shown on the attached map and described in the form of assessor's parcel numbers in Exhibit A. 
(§ 1, Ord. 06-98, eff. August 19, 1998)  
Sec. 3-9.030. - Establishment of Advisory Board; agreement; amendments to the Act. 
The elected officers of the Downtown Yuba City Business Association shall serve as an Advisory Board to the City Council, and shall make recommendations to the City Council on the expenditure of revenues derived from the levy of assessments pursuant to this chapter, on the classification of businesses, and on the method and basis of levying the assessments. Persons owning businesses within the boundaries of the District shall be qualified to serve as members of the Advisory Board. The Board may appoint a director who is an associate member. Any and all voting within the District regarding election of persons to serve on the Advisory Board, matters concerning the conduct of the advisory board, or any actions of the advisory board shall be based on one vote per assessed dollar of the assessment made pursuant to this chapter. Only businesses which are current in the payment of their assessments shall be entitled to participate in any such vote. 
(§ 1, Ord. 06-98, eff. August 19, 1998)  
Sec. 3-9.040. - Establishment of assessment; exclusion from assessment. 
(a)  Commencing January 1, 1999, all businesses, trades, and professions located within the District shall pay an annual assessment in the following amounts, depending on the benefit zone in which the business is located, the classification of the business, and number of employees the business employs: 
Business Type 	Business Size 
Number of Employees 	Annual Assessment Zone 
		A 	B 
Retail, Restaurant and Service 	Small 	1—4 	$385 	$180 
	Medium 	5—9 	$560 	$285 
	Large 	10+ 	$735 	$380 
Professional Business 			$350 	$180 
Lodging Business 			$560 	$285 
Financial Institutions 			$875 	$725 
 
Associate Members: Businesses outside the BID boundaries that would like to participate will be assessed $175. 
NOTE: Retail and restaurant businesses will be assessed on size which will be determined by number of employees, either full-time, or the equivalent made up of multiples of part-time employees. 
(b)  Property within the District boundaries used for residential purposes are exempt from assessment within the District. 
(c)  The assessment for any new business established within the District shall be due and payable on the date of issuance of the business license or on the date the business first opens to the public, whichever first occurs. Said initial assessment shall be prorated on the basis of the remaining fiscal year. Thereafter, annual assessments will be due and payable on January 1 of each year. 
(§ 1, Ord. 06-98, eff. August 19, 1998; § 1, Ord. 007-07, eff. May 31, 2007)  
Sec. 3-9.050. - Collection of assessment and refunds. 
(a)  The City shall bill and collect from all businesses, trades, and professions within the District all non-delinquent assessments authorized by this chapter. 
(b)  Except for the initial assessment for new businesses pursuant to Section 3-9.040(c) of this chapter, the businesses in the BID have the option to pay the annual BID assessment on a quarterly basis. The District shall be responsible for collecting all delinquent assessments. The District may impose late payment penalties on businesses that fail to timely pay their respective assessments at a rate of 10% per month. If the assessment remains unpaid 60 days after the date of delinquency, the District may commence any action it deems appropriate or necessary to recover the delinquent assessments and late payment penalties. Any business which is delinquent in payment of its assessment shall be liable for all costs of collection of the delinquent assessment. 
(c)  The City shall pay any costs the City incurs for the process of billing and/or collecting the non-delinquent assessments for the Business Improvement District. 
(d)  No refund upon termination of business within the business improvement district. The business assessments under the terms of this chapter are not refundable upon termination of a business or for any unused portion or term of the assessment year. 
(§ 1, Ord. 06-98, eff. August 19, 1998; § 2, Ord. 007-07, eff. May 31, 2007)  
Sec. 3-9.060. - Purpose and use of assessment. 
Revenue from the assessments levied in the District shall be used to fund improvements and activities to promote the District. Revenue from the assessments levied in the District shall not be used to provide improvements or activities which do not promote the District or for any purpose other than the purposes specified in the Act and the resolution of intention of the City Council concerning establishment of the District. 
(§ 1, Ord. 06-98, eff. August 19, 1998)  
Sec. 3-9.070. - Voluntary contributions to the District. 
(a)  The City or Advisory Board may accept voluntary contributions to the District's account by any person, business, or entity. The boundary of the District shall not be modified as a result of any voluntary contribution. A business which contributes voluntarily to the District shall not be considered a part of the District. 
(b)  Upon a specific finding by the Advisory Board that the District would derive a benefit from the participation of a business which has voluntarily contributed to the District's account may participate in specified programs of the District for the billing period in which the voluntary contribution is made. 
(§ 1, Ord. 06-98, eff. August 19, 1998)  
Sec. 3-9.080. - Annual report to the City Council; conduct of hearing; levy of assessment. 
(a)  The Advisory Board shall prepare, on or before December 1, a report for each fiscal year for which assessments are to be levied and collected to pay the costs of the improvements and activities described in the report. The Advisory Board shall file the report with the City Clerk and shall specify the name of the District, the fiscal year to which the report applies, and, with respect to that fiscal year, shall contain all of the following: 
(1)  The improvements and activities to be provided for that fiscal year. 
(2)  An estimate of the cost of providing the improvements and the activities for that fiscal year. 
(3)  The method and basis of levying the assessment in sufficient detail to allow each business owner to estimate the amount of the assessment to be levied against his or her business for that fiscal year. 
(4)  The amount of any surplus or deficit revenues to be carried over from a previous fiscal year. 
(5)  The amount of any contributions anticipated to be made from sources other than assessments levied pursuant to this part. 
(b)  The Advisory Board's report may propose changes, including, but not limited to, the boundaries of the District of any benefit zones within the District, the basis and method of levying the assessments, and any changes in the classification of businesses. If such changes are proposed in the report, the report shall also include a detailed description of any such proposed changes. 
(c)  After the filing of the report, the City Council shall adopt a resolution of intention to levy an annual assessment for that fiscal year, and shall comply with the Act in preparing the resolution, setting the matter for a public hearing on the levy of the proposed assessment for that fiscal year, publishing notice of the public hearing, and conducting the public hearing. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council may adopt a resolution confirming the report as originally filed, or as modified by the City Council. The adoption of the resolution shall constitute a levy of an assessment for the fiscal year referred to in the report. 
(§ 1, Ord. 06-98, eff. August 19, 1998)  
Sec. 3-9.090. - District revenues not to offset City services. 
The City shall not use or require the Advisory Board to use District revenues to offset City expenditures for capital improvement projects in the District and maintenance of City property and public works, including, without limitation, public property, sidewalk, street and restroom cleaning and maintenance, and tree maintenance. The City shall not diminish the level or standard of maintenance or capital improvement projects in the District solely because of the existence of District revenues. 
(§ 1, Ord. 06-98, eff. August 19, 1998)  
Sec. 3-9.100. - Public parking. 
The District's revenues, whether generated by assessment or voluntary contribution, shall not be used to acquire and/or construct public parking within the District, unless such use of the revenues is specifically approved by a majority vote of the business owners in the District as set forth in Section 3-9.030. 
(§ 1, Ord. 06-98, eff. August 19, 1998)  
Sec. 3-9.110. - Modification or disestablishment of the District. 
(a)  The City Council may modify the boundaries of the District, the boundaries of the benefit zones, the amount, basis or method of levy of the assessments, and any improvements or activities to be funded with revenues derived from the levy of assessments. Any modifications shall be made pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Act. 
(b)  The City Council may disestablish the District as set forth in the Act. Any action to disestablish the District shall be taken pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Act. 
(c)  Upon the disestablishment of the District, any remaining revenues derived from the levy of assessments, or any revenues derived from the sale of assets acquired with the revenues, shall be refunded to the owners of the businesses then located and operating within the District as required by the Act. 
(§ 1, Ord. 06-98, eff. August 19, 1998)  
TITLE 4. - PUBLIC SAFETY  
CHAPTER 2. - BLINKER LIGHTS (To Be Enacted)  
CHAPTER 4. - FIRE DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT 
 
Sec. 4-4.01. - Interference prohibited. 
Every person who shall willfully, maliciously, or negligently injure or damage any fire engine, hose cart, fire hose, or fire apparatus of any kind belonging to the City, or who shall tie, hitch, or fasten any horse, team, or animal to any fire hydrant, or who shall drive, haul, or cause any wagon, automobile, or other vehicle or thing to be driven or hauled over, on, or across any fire hose in use at any fire or fire drill shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(§ 1, Ord. 24)  
CHAPTER 5. - FIRE PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 002-17 , § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 5, §§ 4-5.01—4-5.03, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 5 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from § 2, Ord. 006-13, eff. Jan. 1, 2014. 
 
Sec. 4-5.01. - Adoption of the International Fire Code. 
That a certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuba City, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, as approved by the California Building Standards Commission, with State amendments known as the 2016 California Fire Code, including Appendix Chapters B, C, D, E, F, and G, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Yuba City, in the State of California regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said fire code on file in the office of the City of Yuba City are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 4-5.02 of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 002-17 , § 2, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 4-5.02. - Revisions to the 2015 International Fire Code. 
The following sections of the International Fire Code and adopted appendices are hereby revised as follows: 
Section 101. Add Section 101.6 Plan Review. 
101.6 Plan Review. The Chief, or his duly authorized representative, shall review all plans for construction of buildings or remodels, other than one or two family dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any condition liable to cause fire or endanger life from fire or panic or any violation of this Code, State laws and regulations, and any other local ordinances which may be under his jurisdiction. 
Section 101. Add Section 101.7 Fees. 
101.7 Fees. The Fire Chief may establish a schedule of fees, as approved by the City Council, to be charged and collected for plan checking, required inspection services, and for the issuance of permits pursuant to Section 105 of this Code. IN ADDITION, THIS SCHEDULE MAY INCLUDE A FIRE SERVICE FEE TO BE CHARGED to any person, firm, corporation or business that through negligence, violation of the law, or as a result of carelessness, is responsible for the cause of any fire service response to the scene of such an incident. A copy of the fee schedules shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk and the Office of the Fire Marshal and shall be available for public inspection. 
Section 103.2. Delete section 103.2. 
Section 106. Add Section 106.2.1.1 Fire Clearance Inspection. 
Fire Clearance Inspection. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a business unless a fire clearance inspection has been made and such businesses are in compliance with all Fire Department requirements. 
Section 108. Delete Section 108 and replace with the following: 
Board of Appeals. Whenever the Chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of said International Fire Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of said code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the Fire Chief to the Building Board of Appeals established by the provisions of Chapter 9 of Title 7 of this Code within thirty (30) days after the date of the decision appealed. 
Section 109. Delete Section 109.4 and replace with the following: 
Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or said International Fire Code, or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement or specification or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall separately for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. 
Exception: 
Those sections of the International Fire Code which have been adopted by the State of California (California Fire Code) shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable in accordance with Section 109.4.0.1. 
Section 109.4.0.1 is hereby added to the Fire Code to read as follows: 
Section 109.4.0.1 California Fire Code Violations. 
Persons operating or maintaining an occupancy, premises or vehicle subject to this code who allow a hazard to exist or fail to take immediate action to abate a hazard on such occupancy, premises or vehicle when ordered or notified to do so by the Chief shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Section 109. Add Section 109.4.1.1 as follows: 
Abatement of Hazards. In situations where immediate abatement of a fire or life hazard or other potentially hazardous condition is required, the Chief shall have the authority to abate such hazard immediately. 
This may include, but is not limited to, confiscation of flammable liquids, fireworks, removing hazardous wiring and adapters, temporary closure of commercial occupancies, extinguishing illegal fires and any other similar hazards, determining no smoking, and ceasing operation of any type of apparatus that may be a danger to life or property. Costs of abatement shall become a lien upon the property affected. All affected persons shall be notified of action taken as soon as possible. 
Section 111.4. Delete Section 111.4 and replace with the following: 
Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine as specified in section 109. 
Section 202. Add to Section 202 "Definitions" as follows: 
Jurisdiction. Shall be held to mean the City of Yuba City. 
Nuisance. Nuisance is an act, thing or condition involving combustible material in an unsafe manner that is not maintained in a reasonable manner to reduce flame-spread capabilities. 
Temporary. Shall mean any use for a period of less than 90 days. 
Section 503.4.1. Delete Section 503.4.1 and replace with the following: 
Traffic calming devices. Speed bumps, speed humps, dips or similar devices are prohibited in any public or private fire access road or parking area without written approval of the Fire Chief, Chief of Police and Director of Public Works. 
Section 505. Add Section 505.1.1 as follows: 
In addition, any business conducted in a commercial occupancy which affords vehicular access to the rear through any driveway, alleyway, or parking lot shall also display the same numbers/letters on the rear of the building. At the main entrance driveway to each multiple dwelling complex there shall be positioned, where responding emergency units can easily read it from the street, an illuminated diagrammatic representation of the complex which lists the unit addresses thereof. 
Section 903.2. Delete Sections 903.2 through 903.2.11, except Sections 903.2.1.5, 903.2.4.1, and 903.2.7.1, and replace with the following: 
Requirements for approved automatic sprinkler systems. 
The Fire Code as currently adopted and as hereinafter adopted is amended to require approved automatic fire sprinklers as set forth in the Fire Code and related Standards as adopted by the City based upon the classification of occupancy and hazard which shall be in addition to the following: 
(a)  Other provisions of this Code or of any other Code of the City of Yuba City to the contrary notwithstanding, approved automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements. 
(1)  All buildings hereinafter constructed when the total floor area meets or exceeds three thousand six hundred (3600) square feet. 
(2)  All multi-family dwellings. For the purposes of this Chapter, multi-family dwellings shall be identified as three (3) or more dwelling units in the same building or structure. 
(3)  Buildings of three (3) or more stories, as defined by the California Building Code, regardless of height or square footage. 
(4)  Buildings that are thirty (30) feet or more in height regardless of square feet. Height assessment shall be determined as outlined by the Building Code. 
(5)  In any existing building or structure upon a change of use of occupancy which is more intense and/or increases the potential of a fire or life safety hazard as determined by both the Fire Chief and Building Official in which the total floor area meets or exceeds three thousand six hundred (3600) square feet. 
(6)  In any existing building or structure when additions thereto will increase the total floor area of three thousand six hundred (3600) square feet or more. 
(7)  In any existing building or structure to which additions are made where the total floor area of building currently meets or exceeds three thousand six hundred (3600) square feet. 
(8)  In any existing building or structure where the total floor area meets or exceeds three thousand six hundred (3600) square feet when repairs or alterations thereto within any twelve (12) month period exceed twenty-five (25%) percent of the value of the building or structure. For the purposes of this Chapter, the building or structure shall have its value determined by multiplying the total square footage of the building or structure by the Building Standards Square Foot Valuator (most current edition) as published by the International Code Council, or its equivalent as selected by the Fire Chief. Value shall be determined by the building official or his designee during the permit process. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
The following shall be excepted from the requirements of this section: 
(1)  Buildings and structures for which permits have previously been obtained, but which have not yet been occupied, unless any approved automatic fire sprinkler system would otherwise be required by this or other City adopted Code. 
(2)  In buildings or structures when, in the opinion of the Building Official and with the concurrence of the Fire Chief, the installation of any automatic fire sprinkler system would be detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of the public. 
(3)  Buildings which are constructed in accordance with the Building Code as Type I-A (fire resistive) and Type II-A (fire resistive) and have less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of total floor area. 
(4)  In existing buildings where the total floor area exceeds three thousand six hundred (3600) square feet, a twenty-five (25%) percent addition up to a maximum total floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet will be permitted; but at least a five (5%) percent increase will be allowed. In either case, the addition shall be separated by a two-hour fire wall as defined in the Building Code. 
(5)  Existing buildings, where the total floor area is ten thousand (10,000) square feet, or greater, may increase their floor area by five (5%) percent or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is greater, when the area being added is separated by a two hour fire wall, as defined in the Building Code. 
(6)  If existing construction is to be altered, where the total floor area exceeds three thousand six hundred (3600) square feet and the alteration provides no greater threat to life or property by fire as determined by unanimous decision of the Fire Chief, Chief Building Official, and City Manager. The basis of the decision shall be made upon the change proposed meeting the intent of the current Building and Fire Codes in providing fire protection equivalent to a fire sprinkler system. 
(c)  Fire Walls: 
For the purposes of this section, fire walls used to eliminate the requirement for automatic fire sprinklers as herein required shall be four (4) hour fire walls with no openings as defined in the Building Code as adopted by the City of Yuba City. 
Section 903.3.1.2. Delete Section 903.3.1.2. 
Section 903.4.2. Modify Section 903.4.2 as follows: 
In the first sentence, delete the word "audible" and replace with "combination horn/strobe." 
Section 5602. Add Section 5602 as follows: 
Fireworks—Exception. 
It shall not be unlawful to sell within the City those fireworks as are defined and classified as "safe and sane fireworks" in the State Fireworks Law (Sections 12500, et seq. of the Health and Safety Code) during that time period beginning at 12:00 noon on June 28 and ending at 12:00 noon on July 6 of that same year. 
Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell "safe and sane fireworks" within the City without having first applied for and receiving a City permit. 
Prerequisite for permit issuance. 
(a)  No permit to sell fireworks shall be issued to any person, except nonprofit organizations or corporations organized primarily for veteran, patriotic, welfare, civic betterment or charitable purposes. 
(b)  Each such organization shall have its principal and permanent meeting place within Sutter County limits and shall have been organized and established in an area which is presently within the limits for a minimum of one (1) year continuously preceding the filing of the application for the permit. 
(c)  No organization shall submit more than one (1) application for permit to sell fireworks within the City of Yuba City. Submittal of more than one (1) application shall be grounds for denial of all applications. 
Fireworks permit. 
The number of available permits which includes any permits issued pursuant will be limited to one (1) per two thousand (2,000) population based on the latest survey available to the City of Yuba City. If necessary, a lottery system will be used to fill permit vacancies. Only one (1) permit to sell fireworks pursuant to this chapter shall be issued to an eligible applicant. 
Permit application. 
(a)  All applications for permits to sell fireworks shall be in writing to the Fire Chief. Applications may be filed beginning March 1 of each year up to and including March 31 of same year, at which time the filing period for that year will close. Applications shall set forth the proposed location of the fireworks stand being applied for, and other information as may be required by the Fire Chief. 
(b)  Any person, firm, corporation, or organization applying for a permit to sell fireworks shall furnish to the Yuba City Fire Department a policy of public liability and property damage insurance. This policy shall have no deductible, with a limit of bodily injury of not less than one million ($1,000,000) dollars and a limit of property damage not less than one million ($1,000,000) dollars. The City of Yuba City and its agents and employees shall be named as coinsureds on the policy. 
(c)  Applicants for such permits shall be notified by April 15 of each calendar year by the Fire Chief of the approval or disapproval of such applications for such permit. All organizations whose permits have been approved shall have up to and including July 1st of that year to pick up such permit. 
(d)  Every application for a permit shall be accompanied by the established permit fee for the sales of fireworks. The permit fee will be refunded if the application is not approved. 
Fireworks stand. 
All retail sales of "safe and sane" fireworks shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and the sale from any other building or structure is hereby prohibited. Temporary stands shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  No fireworks stand shall be located within fifty (50') feet of any other building or within one hundred (100') feet of any gasoline pump or distribution point or within one hundred (100') feet of any other fireworks booth, unless separated by a roadway four (4) lanes wide or greater. 
(b)  Fireworks stands need not comply with the provisions of the Building Code of the City; provided, however, that all stands shall be erected under the supervision of the Fire Inspector, who shall require that stands be constructed in a manner which will reasonably insure the safety of attendants and patrons; and provided further that any electrical installations shall comply with all applicable codes. 
(c)  Each stand shall be provided with two (2) two and one-half (2½) gallon "water type" (minimum rating 2A) fire extinguishers in good working order and easily accessible for use in case of fire. 
(d)  No stand shall have a floor area in excess of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. 
(e)  Each stand shall have at least two (2) exits. Each stand in excess of forty (40') feet in length shall have at least three (3) exits spaced approximately equidistant apart; provided, however, that in no case shall the distance between exits exceed twenty-four (24') feet. Exit doors shall be not less than twenty-four (24'') inches wide and six feet and two (6'2'') inches in height and shall swing in the direction of exit travel. 
Operation of stand. 
(a)  No person shall sell fireworks to any person under the age of eighteen (18). 
(b)  Sale of fireworks shall begin no earlier than 12:00 noon on June 28th and shall not continue after 12:00 noon on July 6th of the same year. 
(c)  No person other than the permittee organization shall operate the stand for which the permit is issued or share or otherwise participate in the profits of the operation of such stand. 
(d)  No person other than the individuals who are members of the permittee organization or the wives, husbands, parents or adult children of such members shall sell or otherwise participate in the sale of fireworks at such stand. 
(e)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall sell or participate in the sale of fireworks. 
(f)  Each stand shall have an adult watchperson in attendance while the stand is being used for the sale, display or storage of fireworks. In lieu of a night watchperson, a Class IV magazine or equivalent, as approved by the Chief, may be used to store fireworks. 
(g)  All fireworks shall be retained at the approved location. In no event shall unsold fireworks be removed from the approved location to any other place without written approval of the Fire Chief. 
(h)  Stands may not be located on public or residential property. 
General requirements for permittees. 
All weeds and combustible material shall be cleared from the location of the stand, including a distance of at least twenty-five (25') feet surrounding the stand. 
"NO SMOKING" signs shall be prominently displayed on and in the fireworks stand. 
No fuel-powered generator or similar equipment shall be allowed within fifty (50') feet of a fireworks stand. 
Section 5602.2. Add Section 5602.2 as follows: 
Dangerous Fireworks—Prohibition. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, dangerous fireworks are those fireworks specified as such in the State Fireworks Law, Section 12505 of the California Health and Safety Code, and such other fireworks as may be determined to be dangerous by the State Fire Marshal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or responsible party to possess, sell, use or discharge dangerous fireworks unless a permit authorizing such possession, sale, use or discharge has been issued by the Fire Chief to the person or responsible party using, selling, discharging or found in possession of said fireworks, and unless such person is in possession of a valid pyrotechnic operator's license issued by the Office of the State Fire Marshal. The Fire Chief may establish reasonable rules and regulations for governing issuance of a firework permit and may issue the same subject to payment of a fee as established by the City Council from time to time. 
Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Enforcement officer" means any City officer, employee, or law enforcement officer of the City designated by the Municipal Code or the City Manager to enforce any provision of the Municipal Code or any Code adopted by the City, and includes the City's Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, Building Official, Development Services Director, enforcement officer, and their respective designees. Whenever an enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of any provision of this code determines that a violation has occurred, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to any person responsible for the violation. 
"Property" means private property, rented residential premises, or rented commercial residences; including, but not limited to, a home, yard, or field, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether or not occupied as a dwelling and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. 
"Residence or other private property" means a home, yard, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, other dwelling unit, a hall or meeting room, or commercial property, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling, party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. 
"Responsible party" includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  The person(s) who owns, rents, leases, or otherwise has possession of the residence or other private property; 
2.  The person(s) in immediate control of the residence or other private property; and 
3.  The person(s) who organizes, supervises, sponsors, conducts, allows, controls, or controls access to the illegal discharge or illegal storage of fireworks. 
If the residence or other private property is rented or leased, the landlord or lessor is not covered by this section unless they fall within the category of persons described under paragraph 2 or 3 of this definition. A landlord or lessor can only be held responsible under paragraph 3 of this definition if he or she has knowledge that fireworks are being discharged or illegally stored on the property without obtaining a permit therefor from the Fire Chief. 
Violations and Penalties. 
(a)  Misdemeanor. Any person or responsible party who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Administrative Citation. An administrative citation may be issued by an enforcement officer to any person or responsible party who violates any of the provisions of this section pursuant to the procedures as set forth in Chapter 6, Title 1 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(1)  All violators and responsible parties shall be subject to an administrative fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for the first violation; and a fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for any subsequent violation. 
(2)  The imposition of administrative fines shall be limited to persons or responsible parties who possess, sell, use or discharge or seizure of 25 pounds or less of dangerous fireworks. 
(3)  Administrative fines collected pursuant to this section shall not be subject to Health and Safety Code § 12706. 
Penalties Not Exclusive. 
Nothing in this section shall be intended to limit any of the penalties provided for under the California Health and Safety Code or Penal Code with regard to the sale, use, possession, delivery, storage, and/or transportation of dangerous fireworks. The penalties set forth herein are intended to be nonexclusive and are intended to be in addition to any other remedies provided in the Yuba City Municipal Code or any other law, statute, ordinance or regulation. 
Section 5603. Add Section 5603 as follows: 
Limits for the storage of explosives and blasting agents. 
(a)  The manufacture of explosives shall be prohibited within the City limits. 
(b)  The storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited within the City limits. 
Exception: 
Small arms ammunition and primers, smokeless powder and black sporting powder when all the requirements of Title 19 C.C.R. have been met. 
The Chief is authorized to limit the quantity of explosive material permitted at any location. 
Sections 5704.2.9.6.1 and 5706.2.4.4 
The limits referred to in Section 5704.2.9.6.1 and 5706.2.4.4 in which the storage of Class I and II liquids in above ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited, as hereby established as the City limits. 
Exception: 
Above ground storage of Class I, Class II, and Class III flammable/combustible liquids in tanks outside of buildings in A, AH, M-1, M-2, C-3 and CM zones as defined in Title 8 of the Yuba City Municipal Code shall be allowed if they comply with all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Individual tank capacity shall not exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons. 
(2)  Aggregate installation capacity per parcel shall not exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons. 
(3)  Tanks and dispensing unit shall be protected against physical damage by installation of four (4) inch concrete filled pipes, spaced not more than four (4) feet between posts on center, set not less than three (3) feet deep in concrete footings of not less than a fifteen (15) inch diameter, with tops of the posts not less than four (4) feet above ground and posts located not more than twelve (12) inches from the tank. 
(4)  All above ground tanks shall be permanently anchored in a manner that will prevent floating in times of flooding. 
Section 6104.2. 
The limits referred to in Section 6104.2 restricting the storage of over 2000 gallons of liquefied petroleum gas is hereby established as the City limits. 
Exception: 
Existing facilities having either single containers or multiple containers with aggregate capacity of over 2000 gallons of liquefied petroleum gas will be allowed to have their use contained until such time as the tank(s) are not used for a period of ninety (90) days. 
Other than required modifications necessary to bring the facility into compliance with safety regulations, there shall be no expansion of any existing facility within the City limits. 
Section D103.5. Delete Section D103.5 and replace with the following: 
Security Gates. The installation of security gates is prohibited without the written approval of the Fire Chief. All security gate installations shall comply with the following security gate installation standards. 
(a)  Scope. Where a new gate or barrier is installed on a fire access roadway, it shall be authorized by the Chief and meet the minimum requirements of this section. Private driveways on lightly traveled streets, as determined by the Yuba City Fire Department, serving one single-family residence may be exempted from the scope of this section. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, certain terms are defined as follows: 
1.  Authority having jurisdiction is the Yuba City Fire Department. 
2.  Security Gates and Barriers shall mean a gate, crossbar, door or other obstructive device which is utilized for the purpose of restricting, controlling or obstructing entry or exit by motor vehicles or pedestrians to or from a private roadway and which is not manned on a twenty-four hour, seven day per week basis by a person capable of providing immediate access to a police or fire safety vehicle or person; 
3.  Private Street or Roadway shall mean any roadway (not dedicated as public right-of-way) that is owned and maintained by abutting property owners, or association of property owners that is utilized for the purpose of providing vehicular or pedestrian access to a subdivision, apartment complex, condominiums or other residential development or wild land, excluding off- street parking areas, driveways, and driveways to off-street parking areas. 
4.  Private Driveway - A private way for vehicular travel that provides access from an off-street parking area to a public or private drive. 
5.  Ultimate Edge of Right-of-Way is the line furthest from the centerline of the street that has been approved by the City and recorded on the parcel map for existing or future street improvements. 
(c)  Permit. A permit issued by the Yuba City Fire Department to design and install any secured access gate system shall be obtained and approved in writing prior to installation. 
(d)  Submittals. A minimum of five (3) complete sets of information shall be submitted to the Yuba City Fire Department and shall include the following: 
1.  Approved verification of 100% Concurrence of Property Owners. The applicant shall provide, with the gate application, verification that all existing property owners served by gate installation agree to its installation and operation. 
2.  A site plan of the property and a site detail of each gate location, drawn to scale (1"=10', 1"=20', or 1"=40'), indicating or showing: 
a.  Plans for gates over 6 feet in height shall bear the stamp of a structural engineer and must be accompanied by a Yuba City Building Permit Number; 
b.  Contractor's company name, address, phone number and a contact person; 
c.  Exact locations of the entry to the property; 
d.  Property lines; 
e.  Fire Hydrants, fire department connections; 
f.  Location of the "ultimate edge of right-of-way"; 
g.  Location of the existing edge of pavement or gutter line; 
h.  Building footprints, including doors, walkways and fire control room doors; parking spaces and landscape affected; 
i.  Proposed fence, pedestrian gates, and vehicle gates; 
j.  Existing vehicular access; 
k.  Proposed location of Knox key switch / Knox box (es); and 
l.  Physical address. 
3.  Product specifications shall be provided that include: 
a.  Method of operation; 
b.  UL listing numbers of equipment used; and 
c.  Manufacturers specification sheets for electrical gate controller. 
4.  Maintenance. Emergency access gates and barriers shall be maintained and may include: 
a.  Batteries required for operation of the system during power failure; 
b.  Lubrication of moving parts and hinges per manufacturers specifications; and 
c.  Any subsequent attention required to maintain the original list of frequencies for emergency operation of the gate in the controller. 
5.  Plan review and inspection fees will be collected per approved fee schedule. 
(e)  Minimum Requirements. 
1.  Access. 
a.  All gates shall be UL 325 compliant. 
b.  Gates shall not be installed within a required turning radius of a fire access roadway. 
c.  Access for single direction traffic shall be unobstructed 16 feet wide and 13', 6" high. 
d.  Access for bi-directional traffic shall be unobstructed 20' wide and 13', 6" inches high. 
e.  Swinging gates for single direction traffic shall swing in the direction of vehicle travel. 
f.  Swinging gates for bi-directional traffic shall swing into the property being entered. 
g.  All gates shall be accessible from the driving lane nearest the edge of the street by turning radii of at least 38' inside and 58' outside 
h.  After passing through a gate, the nearest curb of any cross street shall be no less than 40 feet. 
i.  Private driveways serving one single-family residence on moderate and heavily traveled streets shall: 
(1)  Meet the setback requirements of this section. If existing conditions prevent gate installation with 40' of clearance to the face of the gate, a letter documenting an acceptable alternative that would facilitate emergency ingress without endangering emergency response personnel and apparatus will be required for review and approval by the Chief; 
(2)  Meet the operational requirements of electrically operated gates. 
2.  Operation of Gates. 
a.  All gates shall be electrically operated for entry and exit by an approved fire department method. 
b.  Wiring for electrical gates shall be provided by AC current, underground installation. A miscellaneous electrical permit is required by the Yuba City Building Department. 
c.  Electrically operated gates shall fail to the open position when the power is off. They shall remain open until power is restored. 
3.  Manual gates or barriers may be approved on a case-by-case basis for nighttime security of business property. 
a.  They shall be constructed in a manner that reflects good construction practices acceptable to the Yuba City Fire Department. 
b.  They shall be accessible by means of an approved fire department padlock (Knox.) or by the installation of an approved key box (Knox.). 
c.  Approved manual gates or barriers across emergency access roadways shall be provided with an 18-gauge metal sign in the center of and on both sides of the gate that shall read, "'FIRE LANE- NO PARKING." Letters shall be red on a white background and be a minimum of 3 inches high with a half inch stroke. 
d.  Gates to close off a fire lane behind strip malls/stores in order to minimize dumping and vandalism shall be approved with (Knox) padlock access. 
4.  Prohibitions. 
a.  Direction-limiting devices, such as fixed tire spikes, are prohibited. 
b.  The total number of vehicle access control devices or systems, through which emergency vehicles must pass to reach any address shall not exceed one. 
5.  Pedestrian Gates. All vehicle gates obstructing pedestrian access to a public way (street) shall have an approved pedestrian gate installed within 10 feet of the vehicle gate. 
a.  Gates shall be handicap accessible and comply with exit door requirements of the Building Code. 
b.  An approved key box (Knox) shall be installed at least 48 inches above grade on the outside of the gate. It shall be provided with a key to open the pedestrian gate. 
c.  No pedestrian gate shall be located in the median between two vehicle gates. 
Exception: Private driveways serving one single-family residence are exempt from this requirement. 
(f)  Installation Approval. The Yuba City Fire Department shall inspect all gates for proper installation and operation prior to activation or use. 
(g)  Additional Requirements. Because of the delays caused by vehicle access control devices or systems, additional fire protection requirements may be applied based on other access limitations, such as narrow or winding streets or dead-end streets without an approved turnaround available for fire apparatus. 
Other than the obstruction and the reduced width controlled within this standard, no other requirement of the Yuba City Fire Department shall be adversely affected by the placement of any vehicle access control device or system in any required fire apparatus access road. 
Fire department approval does not waive any requirement by other authorities having jurisdiction. 
Section D103.6.2. Delete the reference to 32 feet and replace with "less than 36 feet." 
( Ord. No. 002-17 , § 2, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 007-17 , §§ 1, 2, 5-16-2017)  
Sec. 4-5.03. - Findings. 
The City Council finds that the following regulations as contained in this chapter are necessary to mitigate unique local climatic conditions and impose substantially the same requirements as are contained in the international model industry codes. The unique local conditions as found and determined are as follows: 
Yuba City is located in the northern portion of the Central Valley. The area is bounded to the north by the Siskiyou Mountains, the west by the Coastal Mountains, the east by the Sierra Nevada Mountains, and the south by the Delta region. These geographical factors, and the area's proximity to the Pacific Ocean, combine to determine weather and wind conditions that influence the area and can create a particularly hazardous fire situation. 
Four weather conditions routinely present themselves which can result in extremely dangerous fire situations that could result in widespread conflagration. The four conditions are temperature, relative humidity, wind and fog. 
Temperatures in the Yuba City area during the summer months are in the 90 degree Fahrenheit range with high temperatures of 100 degrees being very common. 
Low relative humidity is a very important weather condition, which can intensity fire behavior. When relative humidities fall below 30%, the potential for fire spread is significantly increased. A recent review of data available from the National Weather Service of a recent 38-month period revealed that the Yuba City area experienced 403 days when the relative humidity was recorded at or below 30%. 
Wind velocity directly contributes to flame spread and the potential for conflagration. Winds, in combination with relative humidities below 30%, contribute to "drying out" fuels. The Yuba City area is subject to strong north winds which are usually very drying in nature. A review was made of the days with relative humidity at or below 30% and winds of ten miles per hour or more using the same 38-month period as was previously mentioned. Of the 403 days of 30% or below relative humidity, 197 days also had winds that equaled or exceeded ten miles per hour. 
The weather conditions described above have a direct influence on fire behavior. High temperatures, low humidities and wind, singularly and in combination, produce a potentially explosive fire situation. 
In addition to the weather conditions described above, the Yuba City area also experiences very dense fog conditions in the wintertime. The presence of dense fog poses significant response problems to emergency response vehicles. Obviously, if dense fog is present, response speeds must be reduced. This reduction in response speed results in longer response times. The longer it takes the fire department to arrive, the larger the fire grows. Research, using the same 38-month period mentioned above, was done to determine how many days of heavy fog the Yuba City area experienced. Heavy fog was defined as one-fourth of a mile visibility or less. The data revealed that during the 38 months reviewed, heavy fog occurred on 103 days. It is important to note that the fog prone months of November and December were missing for two of the three years reviewed. 
As a result of these findings of fact on local climatic conditions within the Yuba City area, the City Council finds that the fire code provisions and the automatic sprinkler requirements herein established by this chapter are considered "reasonable and necessary modifications" as provided for in California Health and Safety Code sections 18941.5(b) and 17958 et seq. Because of these serious concerns as reflected in the foregoing findings of fact, it is important that for the effective protection of the citizenry and property within the City limits of the City of Yuba City from the ravages of fire and the reduction of the potential for community-wide conflagration that the ordinance from which this chapter derives be enacted. Only with the enactment of these regulations can the reduction of the potential for community-wide conflagration and the protection of the citizenry and property within this jurisdiction be realized. 
( Ord. No. 002-17 , § 2, 1-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 6. - PARKING METERS (To Be Enacted)  
CHAPTER 7. - POLICE AUXILIARY (To Be Enacted)  
CHAPTER 8. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT CODE  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 4-8.010. - Purpose and intent. 
The City Council has determined that the enforcement of the Yuba City Municipal Code throughout the City is an important public service and is vital to the protection of the public's peace, health, safety and quality of life. The Council has also determined that the imposition of an administrative penalty and abatement program is an appropriate method of enhancing and promoting the maintenance of real property, improving the livability, appearance, and the social and economic conditions of the community, and will ensure that the real properties do not reach such a state of deterioration or disrepair as to cause the depreciation of the value of the surrounding neighborhood or be materially detrimental to nearby properties and improvements. This chapter defines unlawful property conditions and provides uniform procedures for issuing administrative penalties, ordering abatement proceedings, conducting administrative hearings, and is in addition to all other administrative, civil, or criminal remedies that may be pursued by the City to address any violation of the Municipal Code. Use of this chapter as a remedy shall be at the sole discretion of the City. 
(§ 3, Ord. No. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.020. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(a)  "Abate" shall mean action to terminate, stop, cease, repair, rehabilitate, replace, demolish, correct, or otherwise remedy nuisance activity, condition, premises or conduct by such means and in such manner as to bring the activity, condition, premises, or conduct into compliance with the laws or regulations of the City of Yuba City and/or the State of California or in such manner as is necessary to promote the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  "Abatement costs" shall mean the actual costs paid or incurred by the City in connection with the matter, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Costs of investigation; 
(2)  Personnel costs; 
(3)  City overhead incurred in the preparation for any hearing and appearing at the hearing itself; 
(4)  Fees paid to a hearing officer; 
(5)  Costs incurred for all inspections and reinspections necessary to enforce any order issued under this chapter; 
(6)  Costs of preparation of notices, specifications, and contracts and inspecting the work performed under contract; 
(7)  Costs of mailing and printing notices and documents; 
(8)  The cost, including staffing costs, expended or incurred by the City in abating the conditions or violations pursuant to any order under this chapter; 
(9)  The cost of repairing, securing, demolishing, or otherwise abating a building or structure; 
(10)  The cost of title reports, placing or removing liens and closing the file, and any other related administrative costs. 
(c)  "Administrative penalties and abatement order" shall mean a written order issued by the Administrative Hearings Board or a Hearing Officer following an administrative hearing on the subject of a violation of a provision of the Municipal Code. 
(d)  "City Manager" shall mean the City of Yuba City's City Manager, or duly authorized designee of the City Manager. 
(e)  "Combustible materials" shall mean materials that are readily ignitable, free-burning, or that will ignite through contact with flames of ordinary temperatures and includes combustible decorative materials, combustible fibers, combustible liquids, and combustible waste material as those terms are defined in the California Fire Code adopted by the City. 
(f)  "Compliance order" shall mean a written notice of violation of a provision of the Yuba City Municipal Code, which may include an order to carry out remedial actions to correct the violation or abate the condition that is the subject of the violation. 
(g)  "Dangerous building" shall mean any building or structure that has one or more of the conditions or defects described in Section 4-8.150 of this chapter. 
(h)  "Enforcement officer" shall mean any City officer, employee, or agent of the City designated by the Municipal Code or the City Manager to enforce particular provisions of the Municipal Code or any Code adopted by the City, and includes the City's Fire Chief, Building Official, Director of Community Development, enforcement officer, and their respective designees. 
(i)  "Hearing Board" shall mean three or more hearing officers, as defined in this chapter. 
(j)  "Hearing Officer" shall mean an individual that meets or exceeds minimum qualification criteria established by the City Manager for training and experience in the subject matters of this chapter. Hearing Officers assigned to conduct hearings under this chapter shall be selected by the City Manager in a manner that does not create a risk that the Hearing Officer will be rewarded with future remunerative employment for decisions favorable to the City. 
(k)  "Immediately dangerous building" shall mean any building or structure that has been so damaged by fire, infestation, seismic disturbance, or by any other cause, including neglect, to the extent that its structural integrity is irreparably damaged or destroyed and is in imminent danger of collapsing or where the condition of the structure poses an immediate and present threat to life, health or safety of the public, such that, in the opinion of the enforcement officer, is of such a nature that it must be abated without delay. 
(l)  "Immediately dangerous condition" shall mean a condition on any property that, in the opinion of the enforcement officer, is of such a nature as to be imminently dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the public, and that would subject any person to potential harm of a serious nature unless abated without delay. 
(m)  "Junk" shall mean any cast-off, damaged, discarded, junked, obsolete, salvaged, scrapped, unusable, worn-out or wrecked object, thing or material composed in whole or in part of asphalt, brick, carbon, cement, plastic or other synthetic substance, fiber, glass, metal, paper, plaster, plaster of paris, rubber, terra cotta, wool, cotton, cloth, canvas, organic matter, or other substance, having no substantial market value or requiring reconditioning in order to be used for its original purpose. 
(n)  "Junk yard" shall mean any property on which any junk is abandoned, bailed, bartered, bought, brought, bundled, deposited, disassembled, disposed of, exchanged, handled, kept packed, processed, scattered, shipped, sold, stored or transported, regardless of whether or not such activity is done for profit. 
(o)  "Owner" shall mean the owner of record of real property, occupant, lessee, sublessee, interested holder in real property, or homeowners' association, as the case may be. For purposes of this chapter, a homeowners' association that exercises management and/or control over a common area shall be deemed an owner of the area over which such control is exercised. Exercising control includes but is not limited to ownership, maintenance, easements and/or assessing fees on property owners pursuant to agreements, deeds or recorded documents. 
(p)  "Person" or "persons" shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, receiver, limited liability company, trust, estate, cooperative, association, or any other entity. 
(q)  "Property" shall mean any real property and/or improvements thereon, as the case may be, including but not limited to, an area designated as a common area within a condominium or similar project. 
(r)  "Public nuisance" shall mean any property, building, or structure that has one or more of the conditions or defects described in Section 4-8.130 of this chapter. 
(s)  "Responsible party" shall mean any person in charge of the premises or location where the Code violation exists as well as any person responsible for causing or maintaining the violation, and includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  The person who owns the property where the violations exist; 
(2)  The person in charge of the premises where the violation exists; 
(3)  The person using the premises when the violation exists; 
(4)  If any such person is a minor, the parent or guardians of such minor shall be the responsible party; 
(5)  If the person is a corporation or limited liability company, any senior officer of that corporation or limited liability company shall be a responsible party; 
(6)  If the person is a partnership, joint venture, cooperative, or association, any partner or member of the joint venture, cooperative, or association shall be a responsible party; 
(7)  If the person is a trust, any trustee shall be a responsible party; 
(8)  If the person is an estate, the administrator of the estate shall be a responsible party; or if the person is a business entity, the manager or on-site supervisor where the violation exists shall be a responsible party. 
(t)  "Rubbish" shall mean and includes all waste, refuse and rejected matter, whether animal, vegetable or mineral, manufactured or natural, including but not limited to; cast away furniture, packing materials, construction waste, dry manure, debris, tree or shrub trimmings, or other matter that could constitute or increase a fire hazard. 
(u)  "Substandard building" shall mean any building or structure that has one or more of the conditions or defects described in Section 4-8.120 of this chapter. 
(v)  "Weeds" shall mean and include plants that bear seeds of a downy or winged nature; sagebrush, chaparral, manzanita, berry bushes, bamboo, and any other brush that can become a fire hazard to the property or adjacent property; poison oak; and dry grass, grass or weed stubble, dry or dead brush or shrubs. 
(§ 3, Ord. No. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.030. - Code requirements and responsibility for property maintenance. 
(a)  All buildings, structures, and properties that are required to be repaired, demolished, secured, or otherwise abated under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the requirements and standards set forth in the Yuba City Municipal Code or any other code adopted by the City. 
(b)  All buildings, structures, and properties within the scope of this chapter and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection in accordance with and in the manner provided by applicable provisions of the Yuba City Municipal Code or any other code adopted by the City. 
(c)  Every responsible party who owns, controls or is in possession of premises within the City is required to maintain such premises in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of the Municipal Code or any other code adopted by the City. Any responsible party who fails to do so shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each day such violation continues. 
(§ 3, Ord. No. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.040. - Alternative actions. 
The administrative procedures provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any other procedure or legal remedy provided for in the Yuba City Municipal Code or by State law for the abatement of nuisance related activities, premises, conditions or conduct. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City from commencing alternative administrative, civil, or criminal proceedings to abate or penalize a nuisance under applicable civil, criminal, or Municipal Code provisions as an alternative to the proceedings set forth in this chapter. 
(§ 3, Ord. No. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.050. - Civil actions—Private parties. 
(a)  Any property owner or tenant of property within 500 ft. of an immediately dangerous building, an immediately dangerous condition, a dangerous building, a substandard building or a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter, is declared to be damaged thereby. 
(b)  Any such party may institute a civil action against the property owner or lessee, sublessee, or occupant who creates or maintains an immediately dangerous building, an immediately dangerous condition, a dangerous building, a substandard building or a public nuisance to obtain damages and/or require compliance with the requirements of the Yuba City Municipal Code or any other code adopted by the City. Damages shall include actual damages, costs, attorney's fees, and a civil penalty of up to $500 in addition thereto. 
(c)  Nothing in this provision shall be construed to limit any other right or remedy otherwise available in law or equity to any party, nor shall this provision in any way limit the City's right to enforcement under any other provision of this Code nor shall it create a duty or obligation on the part of the City. 
(§ 3, Ord. No. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.060. - Imposition of administrative penalty for Code violation. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of the Municipal Code may be subject to the assessment of administrative civil penalties pursuant to the procedures provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Administrative civil penalties may be directly assessed by means of an administrative penalties and abatement order issued under this chapter. Administrative civil penalties may be collected as special assessments, recorded as a lien upon and against real property, or recovered by legal action brought by the City. 
(c)  Administrative civil penalties for violations of the Municipal Code shall be assessed at a daily rate determined by the Administrative Hearings Board or a Hearing Officer pursuant to the criteria listed in Section 4-8.300 of this chapter. The maximum rate shall be $2,500 per violation. The maximum amount of administrative civil penalties shall not exceed $100,000 per parcel or structure for any related series of violations. 
(d)  For the purposes of this chapter, each and every day a violation of any provision of the Municipal Code exists constitutes a separate and distinct violation. 
(§ 3, Ord. No. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.070. - Penalties and costs for property condition violation. 
(a)  Any party who has maintained an immediately dangerous building, an immediately dangerous condition, a dangerous building, a substandard building, or a public nuisance may be subject to penalties following an administrative hearing conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The cost of abatement, including all reasonable administrative and engineering costs incurred by the City as a result of the abatement, as well as any penalties imposed in connection with the abatement, may be collected as a special assessment against, or made a lien against, the property upon which the immediately dangerous building, immediately dangerous condition, dangerous building, substandard building, or public nuisance was located in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(§ 3, Ord. No. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.080. - Abatement, repair and demolition fund. 
(a)  The City Council shall establish a special revolving fund to be designated as the abatement, repair, and demolition fund. Payments shall be made out of the fund upon the demand of the enforcement officer to defray the costs and expenses that may be incurred by the City in doing or causing to be done the necessary work of abatement, repair, demolition or securement pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  The City Council may at any time transfer to the abatement, repair and demolition fund, out of any money in the general fund or applicable enterprise fund of the City, such sums as it may deem necessary to expedite the performance of the work of abatement, repair, demolition or securement, and any sum so transferred shall be deemed a loan to the abatement, repair, and demolition fund and shall be repaid out of the proceeds of the collections provided for in this chapter. All funds collected under the proceedings in this chapter shall be paid to the City Treasurer who shall credit the same to the abatement, repair and demolition fund. 
(§ 3, Ord. No. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.090. - Service of notices. 
(a)  All written notices required to be given under the provisions of this chapter shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  By personal delivery; or 
(2)  By deposit in the United States Mail, in a sealed envelope postage prepaid, addressed to the person at his or her last-known business or residence address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll, or to any other reliable address known by the enforcement officer. Service by mail shall be deemed completed on the date of mailing. 
(b)  Where personal service or service by mail upon a person cannot be made despite a diligent effort, a copy of the notice shall be conspicuously posted at the property where the public nuisance is occurring. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provision in this section, service by regular mail may be made to any person at any address authorized or requested by such person. 
(d)  The failure of any person to receive any notice required under this chapter and properly served, mailed, or posted under this chapter shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. 
(§ 3, Ord. No. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Article II. - Unlawful Conditions 
 
Sec. 4-8.100. - Unlawful property conditions. 
It is unlawful for any responsible party to maintain such property in any condition that violates the provisions of the Yuba City Municipal Code including, but not limited to, the conditions described in this chapter. Any condition meeting the description of a "blighted conditions," "substandard building," "public nuisance," "dangerous building," "immediately dangerous building," or "immediately dangerous condition," as these terms are defined in this chapter, is declared to be a public nuisance, and is subject to administrative enforcement under this chapter. Such procedures shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the City from imposing fines or penalties or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. 
(§ 3, Ord. No. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.110. - Authority to enter, inspect and abate property. 
For the purposes of this chapter, any enforcement officer shall have the power to enter onto any public or private property within the City of Yuba City in order to determine the existence of a violation of any provision of the Municipal Code and to make any inspection, examination, or survey as may be necessary to perform enforcement duties. Any enforcement officer shall also have the power to abate any building or premises whenever necessary to secure compliance with, or prevent violation of any provision of this chapter. All entries, inspections, examinations, surveys and abatements shall be done in a reasonable manner. If an owner, occupant, or agent refuses to grant permission to enter, inspect or abate, the enforcement officer shall seek an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to Civil Procedure Code §§ 1822.50 through 1822.59, as may be amended from time to time. 
(§ 3, Ord. No. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.120. - Substandard buildings specified. 
Any building or structure, or any portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guest room, or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the following conditions to the extent that it endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof shall be deemed and is declared to be a substandard building and a public nuisance. 
(a)  Inadequate sanitation. Inadequate sanitation shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Lack of, or improper, water closet, lavatory, bathtub, or shower in a dwelling unit, lodging house, or congregate residence; 
(2)  Lack of, or improper, water closets, lavatories, and bath tubs, or showers per number of guests in a hotel; 
(3)  Lack of, or improper, kitchen sink; 
(4)  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit, lodging house, hotel, or congregate residence; 
(5)  Lack of adequate heating facilities; 
(6)  Lack of, or improper operation of, required ventilating equipment; 
(7)  Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by the Yuba City Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the City; 
(8)  Room and space dimension less than required by the Yuba City Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the City. However, a condition that would require displacement of sound walls or ceilings to meet height, length, or width requirements for ceilings, rooms, and dwelling units shall not by itself be considered sufficient existence of dangerous conditions making a building a substandard building, unless the building was constructed, altered, or converted in violation of such requirements in effect at the time of construction, alteration or conversion; 
(9)  Lack of required electrical lighting; 
(10)  Dampness of habitable rooms; 
(11)  Infestation of insects, vermin, or rodents; 
(12)  General dilapidation or improper maintenance; 
(13)  Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system; 
(14)  Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as determined by the enforcement officer. 
(b)  Structural hazards. Structural hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations; 
(2)  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports; 
(3)  Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
(4)  Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that split, lean, list, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
(5)  Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
(6)  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members that sag, split, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
(7)  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
(8)  Fireplaces or chimneys that list, bulge, or settle due to defective material or deterioration; 
(9)  Fireplaces or chimneys that are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety. 
(c)  Nuisances. Any nuisance as defined in this Code, State law, or common law. 
(d)  Hazardous wiring. Hazardous wiring includes all wiring not installed, maintained or used in conformance with the Yuba City Municipal Code, the California Building Code, the California Electrical Code, or any other code adopted by the City. Except as provided in any Federal, State, or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, hazardous wiring shall not include wiring that conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and that has been adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and is being used in a safe manner. 
(e)  Hazardous plumbing. Hazardous plumbing includes all plumbing not installed, maintained or used in conformance with the Yuba City Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the City. Except as provided in any Federal, State, or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, hazardous plumbing shall not include plumbing that conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and that has been adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and that is free of cross-connections and siphonage between fixtures. 
(f)  Hazardous mechanical equipment. Hazardous mechanical equipment includes all mechanical equipment, including vents, not installed, maintained or used in conformance with the Yuba City Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the City. Except as provided in any Federal, State, or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, hazardous mechanical equipment shall not include mechanical equipment that conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and that has been adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and is being used in a safe manner. 
(g)  Faulty weather protection. Faulty weather protection shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster; 
(2)  Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors; 
(3)  Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering; 
(4)  Broken, rotted, split, or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings. 
(h)  Fire hazard. Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste, or vegetation which, in the opinion of the Building Official or Fire Chief, is in such a condition as to cause a fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause, shall be deemed to be a fire hazard. 
(i)  Faulty materials of construction. Faulty materials of construction shall include all materials of construction except those that are specifically allowed or approved by Yuba City Municipal Code, the California Building Code, and any other code adopted by the City, and that have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition. 
(j)  Hazardous or unsanitary properties. Hazardous or unsanitary properties shall include those properties on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials, and similar materials or conditions that, in the opinion of City Officials or the Health Officer, constitute fire, health or safety hazards. 
(k)  Unsafe building. Any building or portion thereof that is determined to be an unsafe building due to inadequate maintenance or any other reason, in accordance with the Yuba City Municipal Code, the California Building Code, the California Fire Code or any other code adopted by the City. 
(l)  Inadequate exits. 
(1)  Inadequate exits includes all buildings or portions thereof not provided with adequate exit facilities as required by the Yuba City Municipal Code, the California Building Code, the California Fire Code, or any other code adopted by the City. Except as provided in any Federal, State, or local law, or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, inadequate exits shall not include those buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and that have been adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and increased in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy. 
(2)  When an unsafe condition exists through lack of, or improper location of exits, additional exits may be required to be installed. 
(m)  Inadequate fire-protection or firefighting equipment. Inadequate fire-protection or firefighting equipment includes all buildings or portions thereof that are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by the Yuba City Municipal Code, the California Building Code, the California Fire Code, or any other code adopted by the City. Except as provided in any Federal, State, or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, inadequate fire-protection or firefighting equipment shall not include those buildings or portions thereof that conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy. 
(n)  Improper occupancy. Improper occupancy includes all buildings or portions thereof occupied for living, sleeping, cooking, or dining purposes that were not designed or intended to be used for such occupancies. 
(o)  Inadequate structural resistance. Inadequate structural resistance includes all buildings or portions thereof not constructed with adequate structural resistance to horizontal forces as required by the Yuba City Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the City. Except as provided in any Federal, State, or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, inadequate structural resistance shall not include any building that conformed with all applicable laws at the time of its construction and that has been adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and is being used in a safe manner. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.130. - Public nuisances specified. 
It is declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, subleasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any property in this City to maintain such property in such a manner that any one or more of the following conditions or activities are found to exist. 
(a)  The keeping, storage, depositing, or accumulation on the property of any personal property that is within the view of persons on adjacent or nearby real property or the public right-of-way when such personal property constitutes visual blight, reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, is offensive to the senses, or is detrimental to nearby property or property values. For purposes of this section, "personal property" includes, but is not limited to, junk as defined in Section 4-8.020 of this chapter; abandoned, wrecked or dismantled automobiles, and recreational vehicles; abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or not seaworthy boats or vessels; automotive parts and equipment; appliances; furniture; containers; packing materials; scrap metal; wood; building materials; rubbish and debris. Wood and building materials being used or to be used for a project of repair or renovation for which an active building permit is in existence may be stored for such period of time as is necessary to expeditiously complete the project. Upon finalization, expiration or cancellation of the permit, the wood and building materials of any nature for the project must be immediately removed. 
(b)  The keeping, storage, depositing or accumulation on the property of any dead grass, weeds, brush, combustible materials, or rubbish of any kind in such a manner as to constitute a fire hazard, or any manure, dead animals, decayed vegetables, offal, or other similar matter that is in the view of persons on adjacent or nearby real property or the public right-of-way when such items constitutes visual blight, a danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public, reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses or is detrimental to nearby property or property values. 
(c)  The keeping, storage, depositing or accumulation of dirt, sand, gravel, concrete or other similar materials that constitutes visual blight or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or is offensive to the senses or is detrimental to nearby property or property values. 
(d)  The operation of a junk yard or automobile dismantling yard, except in an industrial zone pursuant to a use permit. 
(e)  Any dangerous, unsightly or blighted condition that is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(f)  Any condition in violation of Chapter 12 of Article 4 (Animals) of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(g)  Any condition in violation of Title 4 (Health and Safety) of the Yuba City Municipal Code or in violation of the California Fire Code. 
(h)  Any condition in violation of Title 7 (Building Regulations) of the Yuba City Municipal Code, or in violation of the California Building Code, the Uniform Housing Code, the California Electrical Code, the California Plumbing Code or the California Mechanical Code. 
(i)  Any condition in violation of Title 8 (Zoning) of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(j)  Any condition specified in the Yuba City Municipal Code as a public nuisance. 
(k)  Any condition recognized in law or in equity as constituting a public nuisance. 
(l)  The maintenance of the exterior of any vacant or unoccupied building or the interior of any such building that is readily visible from any public street or adjacent parcel of property in a state of unsightliness so as to constitute a blighted condition detrimental to the property values in the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(m)  The draining or allowing or suffering to be drained any sewage into or onto the ground of any property, whether or not occupied or improved, except that sewage may be properly disposed of in an adequate private sewage disposal system as otherwise permitted by law. 
(n)  Any unimproved real property, or improved but unoccupied real property, that has become a dumping ground for litter, garbage, junk, debris, discarded vehicles, vehicle parts, and any real property which has been subject of two or more written requests by the City to remove litter, garbage, junk, debris, discarded vehicles, vehicle parts from the property within a 12-month time period or which has been subject to abatement action on one or more occasions by the City. Once proceedings have been commenced pursuant to this chapter to declare property a public nuisance under this subsection, no such property shall be deemed to be in compliance with this chapter solely because such property thereafter becomes occupied. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.140. - Blighted property. 
Any property on which there exists any one or more of the following conditions or activities is a blighted property for the purposes of this chapter: 
(a)  Abandoned building or structure. 
(1)  A building or structure that is not being inhabited, occupied or used, and is unsecured. For purposes of this section, a building or structure is unsecured when the public can gain unimpeded or undeterred entry without the consent of the owner. 
(2)  A partially constructed, reconstructed, or demolished building or structure upon which work is abandoned. 
(b)  Attractive nuisance. Property which is in an unsecured state so as to potentially constitute an attraction to children, a harbor for vagrants, criminals, or other unauthorized persons, or so as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful act. 
(c)  A building or structure that is in a state of disrepair. 
(1)  Exterior wall and/or roof coverings that have become deteriorated and do not provide adequate weather protection. 
(2)  Broken or missing windows or doors that constitute a hazardous condition or a potential attraction to trespassers. 
(3)  Building exteriors, walls, fences, and retaining walls that are broken, deteriorated, or substantially defaced to the extent that the disrepair visually impacts neighboring property or presents an endangerment to public safety; and driveways or walkways that are broken, deteriorated, or substantially defaced to the extent that the disrepair presents an endangerment to public safety. For purposes of this subsection, defacing includes, without limitation, writings, inscriptions, figures, scratches or other markings commonly referred to as "graffiti." 
(4)  Building exteriors, walls, fences, or retaining walls on which any painted surface is peeling, disintegrating, or sloughing-off to the extent that the disrepair visually impacts neighboring property or presents an endangerment to public safety. 
(d)  Property inadequately maintained. 
(1)  Overgrown, diseased, dead or decayed trees, weeds, or other vegetation that: 
(i)  Constitute a fire hazard or a condition considered dangerous to the public health, safety and general welfare; 
(ii)  Are likely to harbor rats, vermin, and other nuisances; or 
(iii)  Detract from the property values of neighboring properties. 
(2)  Landscaping that is not installed or maintained as required by this Code or any permit issued pursuant to this Code. 
(3)  Solid waste, which by reason of its location and character either detrimentally impacts the surrounding neighborhood or community, or which is allowed or permitted to be transported by wind or otherwise onto or upon a public street, alley, or sidewalk. For purposes of this subsection, solid waste means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid waste material including without limitation garbage, rubbish, demolition and construction wastes, industrial wastes, vegetable and animal solid and semisolid wastes, reusable or recyclable material, bulky goods, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. 
(4)  Substantial accumulation of dirt, litter, or debris in vestibules or doorways of residential, commercial or industrial buildings. 
(5)  Any swimming pool, pond, or other body of water that is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered, or not otherwise maintained resulting in the water becoming polluted water. For purposes of this subsection, "polluted water" means water which contains bacterial growth, including algae, remains of rubbish, refuse, debris, papers, and any other foreign matter or material or deleterious substance which, because of its nature or location, constitutes an unhealthy or unsafe condition or water which is defined as "polluted water" or other similar term under State or Federal law. 
(e)  Property that creates a dangerous condition. 
(1)  Land having a topography, geology or configuration which, as a result of grading operations or improvements to such land, causes erosion, subsidence, unstable soil conditions, or surface or subsurface drainage problems so as to pose a threat to or be injurious to adjacent properties. 
(2)  Any condition or object maintained on private property that obscures the visibility to the public of public streets or public street intersections to such a degree as to constitute a hazard. Such conditions include without limitation vehicles, landscaping, vegetation, fencing and signs. 
(3)  Conditions that due to their accessibility to the public may prove hazardous or dangerous, including without limitation: 
(i)  Unused and broken equipment; 
(ii)  Abandoned wells, shafts or basements; 
(iii)  Hazardous or unprotected pools, ponds, or excavations with barriers and/or fences that are dilapidated and unsafe; 
(iv)  Structurally unsound fences, walls or structures; 
(v)  Machinery that is inadequately secured or protected; 
(vi)  Lumber, trash, fences, solid waste or debris that may prove a hazard for the public. For purposes of this subsection, solid waste is defined as set forth in subsection (d)(3) of this section; 
(vii)  Storing or keeping chemicals, gasoline, motor oil, or other substances that may prove a hazard to the public. 
(f)  Signage conditions. 
(1)  Signs that have not been maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-5.6303 of this Code or are in a state of disrepair for a period of more than 30 days, including, without limitation, broken signs, signs with missing parts, panels, letters or light bulbs, signs with exposed wiring, or signs out of plumb. 
(2)  Signs that are unsafe, dangerous to the public, or a hazard to traffic. 
(3)  Prohibited signs as defined in Section 8-5.6305 of this Code. 
(4)  Defaced signs. For purposes of this subsection, defacing includes, without limitation, unauthorized, unrelated or offensive writing, inscriptions, figures, scratches, or other markings commonly known as graffiti. 
(g)  Parking, storing, or maintaining of the following items in areas zoned for residential uses or zoned unclassified and designated by the Yuba City general plan as residential: 
(1)  Any airplane or other aircraft, or any parts thereof, in the front yard. Airplane or other aircraft, or any parts thereof, may be stored in the side or back yards if such items are concealed by a fence. 
(2)  Any construction equipment, machinery, vehicles or material except as follows: 
(i)  Such items may be temporarily kept within or upon the property for and during the time such equipment, machinery, or materials are required for the construction or installation of improvements or facilities on the property for which all required permits have been obtained and are valid. 
(ii)  Such items may be kept in the side yard or rear yard areas if such items are used for the maintenance of the property or facilities on the property and if such items are concealed by a fence, shrubbery or other similar means. 
(3)  Any commercial equipment, machinery, vehicles, or material not authorized by a valid City permit when such items constitute visual blight, reduce the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or are detrimental to nearby property or property values. Commercial equipment, machinery, vehicles, or material not otherwise authorized by a valid City permit may be kept in the side yard or rear yard areas if such items are used for the maintenance of the property or facilities on the property and if such items are screened by a fence, shrubbery, or other similar means. 
(4)  Special mobile equipment as defined in Vehicle Code § 575 or a utility trailer or boat and/or boat trailer for a period of time in excess of 72 consecutive hours in front yard areas or in side yard or rear yard areas not screened by a fence, shrubbery or similar means. 
(i)  Any parking, keeping or storing of such items in the side yard or rear yard area shall be either in an accessory building constructed, located, and used in accordance with the provisions of this Code or in an area concealed by a fence, shrubbery, or other similar means. In addition, 1,500 square ft., or at least 60% of the remaining rear yard area, whichever is less, must be maintained as usable outdoor recreational space. 
(ii)  No such item shall be parked, stored or kept within five ft. of any required exit, including exit windows. 
(iii)  For purposes of this subsection, an item is unlawfully parked, kept or stored in any area for a period of time in excess of 72 consecutive hours when either the item has not been removed from such area for an intervening period of time in excess of 72 consecutive hours, or the item has been parked, kept or stored during the intervening period of time upon any public street. 
(5)  Any refrigerator, washing machine, sink, stove, heater, boiler, tank, or any other household equipment, machinery, furniture, appliance or appliances, or any parts of any of the listed items, for a period of time in excess of 72 consecutive hours. For purposes of this subsection, an item is unlawfully kept or stored in any area for a period of time in excess of 72 consecutive hours when either the item has not been removed from such area for an intervening period of time in excess of 72 consecutive hours, or the item has been parked, kept or stored during the intervening period of time upon any public street. This subsection does not prohibit the following: 
(i)  Machinery installed in the rear setback areas for household or recreational use. 
(ii)  Furniture designed and used for outdoor activities. 
(iii)  Any item stored or kept within an enclosed storage structure or unit. For the purpose of this subsection, a storage unit is a prefabricated enclosure which is not required to have a building permit and is not permanently affixed to the ground, but which is not on wheels or mobile. 
(6)  Storing or keeping packing boxes, lumber, dirt, solid waste, and other debris, except as allowed by this Code for the purposes of construction, in any areas visible from public property or neighboring properties for a period of time in excess of 72 consecutive hours. For purposes of this subsection, "solid waste" is defined as set forth in subsection (d)(3) of this section. For purposes of this subsection, an item is unlawfully kept or stored in any area for a period of time in excess of 72 consecutive hours when either the item has not been removed from such area for an intervening period of time in excess of 72 consecutive hours, or the item has been kept or stored during the intervening period of time upon any public street. 
(h)  Permit requirement. Any use which does not have all permits pursuant to Title 7 of this Code or where such permits have lapsed or have been revoked or where such use is not in compliance with such permits. 
(i)  General conditions. 
(1)  Any condition that is detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, or that constitutes a nuisance under any other City ordinance, State law or common law; 
(2)  Any condition of deterioration or disrepair that has a substantial impact on neighboring properties. 
(j)  Exceptions. This chapter shall not prohibit the following: 
(1)  A vehicle or part thereof that is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  A vehicle or part thereof that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property on which is conducted the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard which is a legal nonconforming use. This exception shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than this chapter. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.150. - Dangerous buildings specified. 
Any building or structure that has one or more of the following conditions or defects shall be deemed to be a dangerous building when such conditions or defects endanger the life, health, property, or safety of the occupants or the public. 
(a)  Whenever any door, aisle, hallway, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(b)  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, hallway, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit is so warped, buckled, worn, loose, torn, or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(c)  Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than 1½ times the working stress or stresses allowed in the Yuba City Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the City for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(d)  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the Yuba City Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the City for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(e)  Whenever any portion or member of a building or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(f)  Whenever any portion of a building or any member, appurtenance, or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached, or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of two-thirds of that specified in the Yuba City Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the City for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the Yuba City Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the City for such buildings. 
(g)  Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled, or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction. 
(h)  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is likely to partially or completely collapse because of: 
(1)  Dilapidation, deterioration or decay; 
(2)  Faulty construction; 
(3)  The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; 
(4)  The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or 
(5)  Any other cause. 
(i)  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(j)  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base. 
(k)  Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50% damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings. 
(l)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children or a harbor for vagrants or criminals. 
(m)  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists, or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the Yuba City Municipal Code, the California Building Code, the California Fire Code, any other code adopted by the City, or any law or ordinance of this State or City relating to the condition, location, or structure of buildings. 
(n)  Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member, or portion, less than 50% or in any supporting part, member, or portion less than 66%, of the (1) strength, (2) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or (3) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height, and occupancy in the same location. 
(o)  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction, or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, insects, rodents, pests or other vectors, or otherwise, is determined by the Building Official or Health Officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(p)  Whenever the Fire Chief has determined that a building, structure, or the premises thereof constitute a fire hazard for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible, explosive, or otherwise hazardous materials; 
(2)  Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment for handling or using combustible, explosive, or otherwise hazardous materials; 
(3)  Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, waste paper, boxes, shavings, or other highly flammable materials; 
(4)  Accumulations of dust or waste material in air conditioning or ventilating systems, or accumulations of grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts; 
(5)  Obstructions to or upon fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire; 
(6)  Other conditions, including, but not limited to, want of repairs, lack of adequate exit facilities, required automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment, which create a hazardous condition. 
(q)  Whenever any building or structure, because of lack of fire-resistive construction, or other cause, is determined by the Building Official or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard to life, health or property. 
(r)  Whenever any building or structure, because of faulty electrical wiring or other cause, is determined by the Building Official or Fire Chief to be an electrical or fire hazard to life, health or property. 
(s)  Whenever any building or structure, because of faulty gas connections, heating apparatus or water and sewer systems, or other cause, is determined by the Building Official or Fire Chief to be a hazard to life, health or property. 
(t)  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is vacant, unoccupied, or abandoned for a period in excess of six months such that the building or portion thereof is an attractive nuisance or hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(u)  Whenever any well, septic tank, or other excavation appurtenant to any existing or demolished structure has been abandoned. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Article III. - Abatement Procedure 
 
Sec. 4-8.160. - Compliance order—Any violation. 
(a)  Whenever an enforcement officer determines that any property is maintained in violation of the Municipal Code, he or she may serve on the responsible party a written compliance order. The compliance order shall contain: 
(1)  The date and location of the violation; 
(2)  The section of the Code violated and a description of the violation; 
(3)  The actions required to correct the violation(s); 
(4)  The time period after which administrative penalties will begin to accrue if compliance with the order has not been achieved; in matters related to weed abatement orders or for conditions which constitute actual or potential fire hazards, the time period after which administrative penalties will begin to accrue if compliance is not achieved shall not exceed seven calendar days; 
(5)  An explanation of the consequences of noncompliance with the compliance order and a description of the hearing procedure and appeal process. 
(b)  Service of the compliance order shall be made as set forth in Section 4-8.090 of this chapter. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.170. - Compliance order—Substandard buildings, public nuisances and blighted conditions. 
In addition to the information required by Section 4-8.160 of this chapter, the compliance order shall contain: 
(a)  A statement that the enforcement officer has found the building to be substandard, with a description of the conditions found to render the building substandard; and/or 
(b)  A statement that the enforcement officer has found that the property constitutes a public nuisance with a description of the conditions that constitute the public nuisance; and/or 
(c)  A statement that the enforcement officer has found that the property contains a blighted condition with a description of such conditions. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.180. - Compliance order—Dangerous buildings. 
In addition to the information required by Section 4-8.160 of this chapter, the compliance order shall contain: 
(a)  A statement that the enforcement officer has found the building to be dangerous, with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous under the provisions of Section 4-8.150 of this chapter. 
(b)  A statement that the building must be repaired or demolished at the option of the owner within the following time limits: 
(1)  If the owner elects to repair the building, all required permits for repair shall be secured therefor and the work physically commenced within 30 calendar days from the date of the compliance order and completed within such time as the enforcement officer shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances; or 
(2)  If the owner elects to demolish the building, all required demolition permits shall be secured, and demolition commenced, not later than 30 calendar days from the date of the order, and that demolition be completed within such time as the enforcement officer shall determine is reasonable. 
(c)  A statement advising that if, prior to compliance, the building or conditions in the building or on the property becomes an immediately dangerous building or immediately dangerous condition as defined in this chapter, the City may abate the immediately dangerous building as provided for such buildings or conditions in this chapter. 
(d)  A statement advising that if any required repair or demolition work is not commenced or completed within the time specified, the enforcement officer: 
(1)  May order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed if the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property, or safety of the public or its occupants, or if the City's Building Official determines that repair or demolition of the building or structure cannot be accomplished without making it immediately dangerous to life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants; 
(2)  May order the immediate disconnection of hazardous utility services (electricity, gas, sewer or water); and 
(3)  May proceed to repair, secure, or demolish the building and charge the costs thereof against the property and its owner. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.190. - Summary abatement of immediately dangerous buildings and conditions. 
(a)  Whenever an enforcement officer has inspected or caused to be inspected any building or structure and has found and determined that such building or structure is an "immediately dangerous building" as defined in Section 4-8.020 of this chapter, the immediately dangerous building may be summarily abated and removed by the City without prior notice to any person who owns or occupies the building or structure. 
(b)  Whenever an enforcement officer has inspected or caused to be inspected any property and has found and determined there exists on such property an "immediately dangerous condition" as defined in Section 4-8.020 of this chapter, the immediately dangerous condition may be summarily abated and removed by the City without prior notice to any person who owns or occupies the property. 
(c)  The enforcement officer may summarily abate the immediately dangerous building or immediately dangerous condition in any reasonable manner that he or she determines will eliminate the immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public. Reasonable means to abate the immediately dangerous building or immediately dangerous condition include, but are not limited to, demolition, weed and dead vegetation removal, repairing, boarding to City specifications, securing, fencing and vacating. If it is practical to do so, prior to summarily abating the immediately dangerous building or condition, the Building Official shall obtain approval of the City Attorney or his or her representative. 
(d)  At any time after the initiation of summary abatement procedures pursuant to this section, any person interested in or affected by summary abatement procedures performed may make written and oral objections regarding whether the action to summarily abate was proper and whether any ongoing summary abatement procedures should continue. Upon such request, the City Manager shall schedule an abatement hearing to be conducted in accordance with Sections 4-8.230 through 4-8.280 of this title as soon as practicable. During the scheduling and pendency of any hearing requested pursuant to this section, the enforcement officer's order shall remain in full force and effect unless or until such time that it is modified by the Administrative Hearings Board or a Hearing Officer. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.200. - Notice of pendency of action. 
Concurrent with service of the compliance order as provided for in Section 4-8.090 of this chapter, the enforcement officer shall record a notice of pendency of action with the County Recorder. The enforcement officer shall instruct the County Recorder to record the notice and index it in the property index as well as in the name of each owner of record as shown in the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, and/or as known to the enforcement officer. The notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF PENDENCY OF ACTION 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that pursuant to Yuba City Municipal Code Chapter _______, an administrative abatement action was commenced on ________, by the City of Yuba City against the property described herein and the action is now pending. 
The action alleges that the property is in violation of Yuba City Municipal Code Chapter in that it constitutes a [dangerous building, substandard building, blighted condition, or public nuisance] and that such [dangerous building, substandard building, blighted condition, or public nuisance] must be abated. 
As of the date of commencement of the abatement action, the name and address of the record owner of the property described herein is: 
___________ 
___________ 
___________ 
The real property against which the abatement action is pending is that certain real property commonly known as ___________, Assessor Parcel Number _____, and more particularly described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
CITY OF YUBA CITY 
Dated: ________ 
___________ 
Name of Enforcement Officer 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.210. - Notice of final disposition. 
The enforcement officer shall record a notice of final disposition of action within 15 calendar days following the earlier of the following dates: (1) the date the enforcement officer verifies both voluntary compliance with the compliance order and payment of all accrued costs to which the City is entitled pursuant to this chapter; or (2) the date of final resolution of the action. The notice of final disposition of action shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF FINAL DISPOSITION
OF ACTION 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT pursuant to Yuba City Municipal Code Chapter 4-8.: Final disposition has been reached in the administrative action referenced in that notice of pendency of action recorded on ________, in Book _____, at Page _____, of the Official Records of Sutter County, California. 
The City of Yuba City does hereby withdraw the above-referenced notice of pendency of action. 
The above-referenced notice of pendency of action affected that certain real property commonly known as ___________, Assessor Parcel Number _____, and more particularly described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
CITY OF YUBA CITY 
Dated: ________ 
___________ 
Name of Enforcement Officer 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.220. - Request for hearing upon failure to comply. 
(a)  The enforcement officer shall request that an administrative penalties and abatement hearing be set when the responsible party fails to comply with the terms of the compliance order. Failure to comply includes failure to commence and complete corrections by the established deadlines, and failure to refrain from continuing violations of the Municipal Code. 
(b)  The administrative penalties and abatement hearing shall be conducted by a Hearing Officer pursuant to Section 4-8.240 of this chapter unless the City Manager appoints a Hearing Board to conduct the hearing pursuant to Section 4-8.230 of this chapter. 
(c)  The Administrative Hearings Board or Hearing Officer has continuing jurisdiction over the subject matter of an administrative appeal hearing for the purposes of granting a continuance, ensuring compliance with a compliance order, modifying a compliance order, or where extraordinary circumstances exist, granting a new hearing. 
(d)  The administrative penalties and abatement hearing shall provide a full opportunity for the responsible parties subject to a compliance order to object to the order's determination that a violation has occurred; that the violation has continued to exist or has recurred; that the person is responsible for creating, maintaining, or fostering the violation; or that the condition constituting the violation should be abated in accordance with the compliance order. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.230. - Hearings conducted by the Administrative Hearings Board. 
(a)  The Chairperson of the Administrative Hearings Board, or the Vice-Chairperson in the Chairperson's absence, shall set the date for the administrative penalties and abatement hearing, and for any other hearing held before the Board under the provisions of this chapter. The hearing date shall be not less than 15 calendar days nor more than 60 calendar days from the date of the notice of hearing, unless the person setting the hearing determines the matter is urgent or good cause exists for an extension of time, except that in matters related to weed abatement orders or for conditions which constitute actual or potential fire hazards, the matter is deemed to be urgent and the hearing date shall be set no less than seven calendar days from the notice of hearing, unless good cause exists for an extension of time. 
(b)  The Board shall serve the notice of hearing upon the person whose property is the subject of the hearing. Service shall be made pursuant to Section 4-8.090 of this chapter at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing, unless the matter is deemed urgent, in which case service shall be made six calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice of hearing shall contain the time, date, and place at which the hearing will be conducted, along with a statement of the consequences of failure to appear at the hearing, as identified in Section 4-8.270 of this chapter. 
(c)  The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the rules governing the conduct of administrative hearings as defined in Section 4-8.240, below. 
(d)  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at a hearing, the board shall vote to take appropriate action. Such action shall be taken only upon a motion approved by at least two members of the Board. After voting, the Board's Chairperson shall inform the parties of the Board's decision, and appoint a member of the Board to prepare a written order that meets the requirements of Section 4-8.280 of this chapter. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.240. - Hearings conducted by Hearing Officer. 
(a)  The Hearing Officer shall set the date for the administrative penalties and abatement hearing, and for any other hearing required by this chapter. The hearing date shall be not less than 15 calendar days nor more than 60 calendar days from the date of the notice of hearing, unless the Hearing Officer determines the matter is urgent or good cause exists for an extension of time, except that in matters related to weed abatement orders or for conditions which constitute actual or potential fire hazards, the matter is deemed to be urgent and the hearing date shall be set no less than seven calendar days from the notice of hearing, unless good cause exists for an extension of time. 
(b)  The City Manager or his or her designee shall serve the notice of hearing upon the person whose property is the subject of the hearing. Service shall be made pursuant to Section 4-8.090 of this chapter at least 14 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing, unless the matter is deemed urgent, in which case service shall be made six calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice of hearing shall contain the time, date, and place at which the hearing will be conducted, along with a statement of the consequences of failure to appear at the hearing, as identified in Section 4-8.270 of this chapter. 
(c)  The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the following rules: 
(1)  Administrative hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. Irrelevant, immaterial, and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded, but all other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs shall be admissible, whether or not such evidence would be admissible in a trial in the courts of this State. Fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. The procedure and format of the administrative hearing shall follow the procedures promulgated by the City Manager. 
(2)  The alleged violator has the right to represent himself or herself, or to be represented by anyone of his or her choice. 
(3)  Any party to the hearing shall be given the opportunity to testify, cross-examine witnesses, and present evidence as to the existence of the cited violation or as to whether or not the cited person is the responsible party. 
(4)  The Hearing Officer may inquire of any witness testifying at the hearing. The alleged violator or his or her representative, if any, and the officer presenting the City's case before the Hearing Officer, shall be permitted to inquire of any witness testifying at the hearing. All parties to the hearing shall be permitted to present brief opening and closing statements. 
(5)  At the request of either party, for good cause shown, the Hearing Officer may continue any hearing and issue a subpoena in accordance with the provisions of the California Administrative Procedures Act to compel the production of documents or the attendance of a third party witnesses, if the compelling of such information is relevant, material and deemed necessary for the Hearing Officer to reach a decision. However, subpoenas shall not be requested for or issued as a means to compel testimony or the production of documents from the City or any of its employees or officers, or from the responsible party. It is unlawful for any person to refuse to obey a subpoena issued by a Hearing Officer, if such subpoena has been judicially validated by a court. Failure to obey a subpoena which has been judicially validated constitutes contempt and may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor. 
(6)  The City bears the burden of proof at an administrative enforcement hearing to establish the existence of a violation of the Municipal Code. 
(7)  The standard of proof to be used by the Hearing Officer in deciding the issues at an administrative hearing is by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(8)  Continuances for good cause may be granted on the motion of any party or upon the Hearing Officer's own motion. The Hearing Officer may request additional information from any party prior to issuing a written decision. 
(9)  All hearings shall be recorded onto audiotape or any other electronic format that ensures an accurate record of the meeting. The proceedings at the hearing may also be reported by a certified shorthand reporter if such reporter is provided by the responsible party at his or her own expense. 
(10)  All hearings and proceedings shall be open to the public. 
(d)  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at a hearing, the Hearing Officer shall prepare a written order that meets the requirements of Section 4-8.280 of this chapter. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.250. - Scope of hearing. 
(a)  The Administrative Hearings Board or Hearing Officer, as applicable, shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, including, but not limited to, the testimony of the responsible party, City personnel, neighbors, witnesses, or other interested parties, and may consider staff reports or other written materials, on any of the following issues: 
(1)  Whether the responsible party caused or maintained a violation of the Municipal Code as stated in the compliance order. 
(2)  Whether the person or persons named in the compliance order are responsible parties. 
(3)  Whether the method of abatement described in the compliance order is appropriate. 
(4)  The amount of administrative penalties and interest to be assessed. 
(5)  Whether the responsible party has complied with a previous order of the Administrative Hearings Board or a Hearing Officer pursuant to this chapter. 
(6)  The amount of abatement costs. Abatement costs may include scheduling and processing of the hearing and all subsequent actions related to the hearing. 
(b)  The compliance order and any additional report submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.260. - Inspection of property. 
The Administrative Hearings Board or the Hearing Officer, as applicable, may, with the owner(s) consent, inspect the building or premises involved in the hearing prior to, during, or after the hearing, provided that: 
(a)  Notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made; 
(b)  The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection; 
(c)  The Board or Hearing Officer shall state for the record during the hearing, or file a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record, upon completion of the inspection, the material facts observed and the conclusion drawn from the inspection; and 
(d)  Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by Board or the Hearing Officer either for the record during the hearing or by filing a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.270. - Failure to appear for hearing. 
The failure of any person subject to a compliance order pursuant to this chapter to appear at the administrative penalties and abatement hearing shall constitute an admission of the facts in the compliance order and shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.280. - Findings and order. 
(a)  At the conclusion of a hearing held pursuant to this chapter, the Administrative Hearings Board or Hearing Officer, as applicable, shall prepare a written order. The order shall address each issue in dispute and contain findings of fact for each such issue. The findings shall be supported by evidence received at the hearing. Orders shall be issued as follows: 
(1)  For an administrative penalties and abatement hearing, a written administrative penalties and abatement order as described in Section 4-8.290 of this chapter. 
(2)  For a hearing conducted to determine compliance with an administrative penalties and abatement order, a determination regarding whether such compliance has been achieved. 
(3)  For an abatement hearing, a determination regarding whether the abatement costs submitted by the enforcement officer shall be confirmed, rejected or modified, and/or whether an action to summarily abate was proper. 
(b)  All orders issued in accordance with this section shall be served on the parties to the hearing within 15 days of the hearing in accordance with Section 4-8.090 of this chapter. In matters deemed urgent, the Administrative Hearing Board or the Hearing Officer, as applicable, shall issue and serve the written order within 24 hours following the conclusion of the hearing, unless good cause exists for an extension of time. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any contrary provision in this Municipal Code, decisions of the Hearing Board and Hearing Officer are final decisions of the City which shall not be appealable to the City Council. If the administrative penalties and abatement order contains the imposition of administrative penalties, any person aggrieved by such order may obtain judicial review of the order by filing a petition for review with the Sutter County Superior Court within 20 calendar days of service of the administrative penalties and abatement order, in accordance with the time lines and provisions set forth in Government Code § 53069.4. Enforcement of any order made pursuant to this chapter shall be stayed during the pendency of a properly and timely filed petition for review. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Article IV. - Penalty and Abatement Orders 
 
Sec. 4-8.290. - Administrative penalties and abatement order. 
(a)  An administrative penalties and abatement order shall address each contested violation in the compliance order, and contain findings of fact for each such violation. The findings shall be supported by evidence received at the hearing. 
(b)  An administrative penalties and abatement order shall affirm, reject, or modify the terms of the compliance order. The administrative penalties and abatement order may impose or order any or all of the following: 
(1)  Administrative penalties; 
(2)  An order to abate the nuisance within a specific time; in matters related to weed abatement orders or conditions which constitute actual or potential fire hazards, the specific time within which to abate the nuisance shall not exceed seven calendar days; 
(3)  Administrative costs, including, but not limited to, costs of investigation, staffing costs incurred in preparation for the hearing and the hearing itself, and costs for all reinspections necessary to enforce the compliance order; 
(4)  Interest on the penalties and costs imposed at the legal rate from the date of the order. 
(c)  The administrative penalties and abatement order shall also state that if the responsible party fails, refuses, or neglects to abate the condition constituting the violation within the time set forth therein, the City may abate the condition at the expense of the responsible party, and the expense thereof recovered by way of special assessment or lien on the property. 
(d)  The administrative penalties and abatement order shall be served upon any responsible party and the enforcement officer pursuant to Section 4-8.090 of this chapter. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.300. - Administrative penalties. 
(a)  In determining the amount of the administrative civil penalties to be assessed, the Administrative Hearings Board or any Hearing Officer may consider some or all of the following factors: 
(1)  The duration of the violation; 
(2)  The frequency of recurrence of the violation; 
(3)  The seriousness of the violation; 
(4)  The history of the violation; 
(5)  The responsible party's conduct; 
(6)  The good faith effort by the responsible party to comply; 
(7)  The economic impact of the penalty on the responsible party; 
(8)  The impact of the violation upon the community; 
(9)  Any other factors that justice may require. 
(b)  Administrative penalties imposed shall accrue from and after the date specified in the compliance order and shall cease to accrue on the date the violation is corrected as determined by the enforcement officer. Administrative penalties may be suspended for any period of time during which the violator has filed for necessary permits and such permit applications are actively pending before the City, State, or other appropriate agency. 
(c)  The City Manager may establish a penalty schedule for use as a guideline in determining the amount of administrative civil penalties. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.310. - Requirement to abate. 
(a)  The public nuisance found to exist on the property shall be abated by having such property, building, or structures rehabilitated, repaired, or demolished within the time specified, and in the manner and means specifically set forth in any administrative penalties and abatement order issued by the Administrative Hearings Board or a Hearing Officer. 
(b)  Every person subject to an administrative penalties and abatement order shall comply with that order and with all applicable laws, permits, or other approvals of the Federal, State or local governments in any and all actions taken pursuant to or in order to comply with the order, including, without limitation, the payment of all applicable permit fees. 
(c)  Any such person who fails to comply with an administrative penalties and abatement order is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.320. - Failure to obey administrative penalties and abatement order—Dangerous conditions. 
(a)  Whenever the required abatement is not commenced or completed within the time limits prescribed in a compliance order or administrative penalties and abatement order and a building is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property, or safety of the public or its occupants, or if the City's Building Official determines that abatement of a building cannot be accomplished without making it immediately dangerous to life, limb, property, or safety of the public or its occupants, the Building Official shall order the building to be vacated pursuant to a notice to vacate. 
(b)  Every notice to vacate ordered shall be served pursuant to Section 4-8.090 of this chapter, and shall also be posted at or upon each exit of the building or upon any individual unit to be vacated in substantially the following form: 
DANGEROUS BUILDING 
DO NOT ENTER 
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY 
You are hereby ordered and required to vacate this building/premises on or before ________. 
The conditions that necessitate this order to vacate are as follows: ___________. It is a misdemeanor pursuant to Yuba City Municipal Code Sections 4-8.030 and 4-8.310 to occupy this building on or after the above date or to remove or deface this notice. 
Building Official 
City of Yuba City 
By ___________. 
(c)  Whenever a notice to vacate is posted, the enforcement officer shall specify in the notice and order to vacate the conditions that necessitate an immediate notice to vacate. 
(d)  No person shall remain in or enter any building, structure, or premises that have been so posted, except that entry may be made to abate the property or building under permit without the consent of the Building Official. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required abatement has been completed, and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the Yuba City Municipal Code and the California Building Code, if necessary. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(e)  The Building Official may permit occupancy of the building or individual units if the owner corrects those problems which pose an immediate danger to life, limb, property, and safety of the public or occupants. 
(f)  Whenever a notice to vacate has been posted and served in accordance with this subsection, the Building Official may order the immediate disconnection of any utility services determined to be hazardous by the Building Official. If the sewer service is ordered disconnected pursuant to this section, City water service to such building shall also be disconnected in order to prevent the accumulation of sewage on such premises. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail to disconnect utility services when ordered to do so pursuant to the provisions of this subsection. 
(g)  Prior to issuing a notice to vacate, the Building Official shall obtain approval of the City Attorney or his or her representative. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.330. - Interference with work prohibited. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to obstruct, impede, or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor, or authorized representative of the City, or with any person who owns or holds legal interest in a property on which a condition exists that has been ordered abated and/or vacated under the provisions of this chapter when such persons are engaged in the work of abating and/or vacating such property or condition pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or is performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.340. - Compliance report. 
If an enforcement officer determines that compliance with an administrative penalties and abatement order has been achieved, the enforcement officer shall notify the responsible party and file a report with the City Manager indicating that compliance has been achieved and the date of the City's final inspection of the property. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.350. - Compliance dispute—Hearing—Finality. 
(a)  If an enforcement officer does not file a compliance report pursuant to Section 4-8.340 of this chapter, any person subject to an administrative penalties and abatement order who believes that compliance has been achieved may request a compliance hearing by filing a written request for a hearing with the City Manager. 
(b)  The compliance hearing shall be conducted by the Administrative Hearings Board pursuant to Section 4-8.230 of this chapter, unless the City Manager appoints a Hearing Officer to conduct the hearing pursuant to Section 4-8.240 of this chapter. 
(c)  The Administrative Hearings Board or Hearing Officer, as applicable, shall determine whether compliance with the administrative penalties and abatement order has been achieved and, if so, when achieved. The determination shall be issued and served in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-8.280 of this chapter. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Article V. - Abatement by City 
 
Sec. 4-8.360. - Abatement of public nuisance by the City. 
(a)  If an enforcement officer determines that compliance with an administrative penalties and abatement order has not been achieved and the time for compliance has lapsed, the nuisance conditions may be abated by City personnel or by a private contractor. 
(b)  City personnel or a private contractor may enter upon private property in a reasonable manner as provided by law to abate the public nuisance as specified in the administrative penalties and abatement order. All entries and abatements shall be done in a reasonable manner. If an owner, occupant, or agent refuses permission to enter or abate, the enforcement officer shall seek an administrative inspection (and abatement) warrant pursuant to Civil Procedure Code §§ 1822.50 through 1822.59, as may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  When any abatement work is to be done pursuant to this section, the enforcement officer shall provide the final order or decision to the City Official responsible for the abatement and the work shall be accomplished by City personnel or by private contract after obtaining any necessary permits and in accordance with approved plans and specifications. 
(d)  If the responsible party abates the nuisance conditions before the City performs the actual abatement pursuant to the administrative penalties and abatement order, the City may still assess all abatement costs incurred by the City against the responsible party pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(e)  The cost of such abatement work may be made a lien against the property involved and made a personal obligation of the property owner. All administrative and actual costs incurred by the City in abating the violations may be assessed and recovered against the responsible party pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.370. - Sale of materials. 
(a)  In the event the City abates a building or property and the abatement consists in the removal of materials or demolition of a building or structure, the City may, at the City's sole discretion, sell the removed materials or materials contained in the demolished building or structure at public sale to the highest responsible bidder. The City shall notice the sale by publication at least five days prior to the date of the sale. The notice shall be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The notice by publication may occur either before or after the removal of the materials or demolition of the building or structure. 
(b)  Any moneys received from the sale of such removed materials or materials contained in the demolished building or structure shall be deducted from the expense of abatement. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.380. - Account of abatement costs. 
(a)  The enforcement officer shall keep an itemized account of all expenses incurred by the City in the abatement of a condition or nuisance under this chapter. 
(b)  The enforcement officer shall keep an itemized account of all revenue received by the City for any sale of materials pursuant to Section 4-8.370 of this chapter. 
(c)  Upon the completion of the work, the enforcement officer shall prepare a report, verified by the City official in charge of doing the work, specifying the following information: 
(1)  The work done in abating the condition or public nuisance, if any; 
(2)  The itemized and total cost of the abatement proceedings undertaken pursuant to this chapter; 
(3)  The itemized and total revenue received from any sale of materials pursuant to Section 4-8.370 of this chapter; 
(4)  The net expense of the abatement (gross expenses less the revenue from any sale of materials pursuant to Section 4-8.370); 
(5)  A description of the real property upon which the building or condition is or was located; 
(6)  The names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to Section 4-8.090 of this chapter; 
(7)  Notice of the time, date, and place when and where the Administrative Hearings Board or Hearing Officer, as applicable, will hear and pass upon the report, together with any objections or protests which may be filed by any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge, and shall confirm, reject, or modify the report and determine whether the charge shall be made a personal obligation of the property owner(s) and charged as a lien or special assessment against the property involved; 
(8)  A statement that an order issued by the Administrative Hearings Board or a Hearing Officer is a final decision, and is subject to judicial review pursuant to Civil Procedure Code § 1094.5. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.390. - Abatement hearing. 
(a)  The City Manager or his or her designee shall schedule an abatement hearing unless waived in writing by all responsible parties. The abatement hearing shall be conducted by the Administrative Hearings Board pursuant to Section 4-8.230 of this chapter, unless the City Manager appoints a Hearing Officer to conduct the hearing pursuant to Section 4-8.240 of this chapter. 
(b)  Service of the enforcement officer's report of abatement costs and the notice of the abatement hearing shall be made pursuant to 4-8.090 of this chapter. 
(c)  Service of the report and the notice shall be made at least ten calendar days prior to the date set for hearing. All costs associated with service of the report and notice shall be added to total costs to be reviewed by the Administrative Hearings Board or Hearing Officer. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.400. - Objection to abatement costs—Objection to summary abatement. 
(a)  Any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge of abatement costs may file written protests or objections with the enforcement officer at any time prior to the time set for the abatement hearing, or may make an oral objection at the hearing. Each written objection must contain a description of the property that is the subject of the protest and the grounds of such objection. The enforcement officer shall endorse on every such written objection the date it was received by him or her. The enforcement officer shall present such written objections to the Administrative Hearings Board or Hearing Officer, as applicable, at the time set for the hearing, and no other written objections shall be considered. 
(b)  No objection concerning actions of the enforcement officer, the Administrative Hearings Board, or any Hearing Officer, in ordering the abatement of the condition or nuisance, shall be heard at this time. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section, any person interested in or affected by summary abatement procedures performed in accordance with Section 4-8.180 of this Code may make written and oral objections regarding whether the action to summarily abate was proper and whether any ongoing summary abatement procedures should continue. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.410. - Confirmation, rejection or modification of abatement costs. 
(a)  On the date and time set for the hearing, the Administrative Hearings Board or Hearing Officer, as applicable, shall consider the abatement costs report of the enforcement officer together with any appropriately made objections, and shall confirm, reject, or modify the report by issuing a written abatement costs order. 
(b)  Where the hearing concerns summary abatement procedures performed in accordance with Section 4-8.180 of this chapter, the Administrative Hearings Board or Hearing Officer, as applicable, may determine whether or not the action to summarily abate was proper and whether any ongoing summary abatement procedures should continue, and may modify the abatement costs in any manner deemed appropriate. 
(c)  Decisions made pursuant to this section shall be issued and served in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-8.280 of this chapter. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Article VI. - Recovery of Penalties and Abatement Costs 
 
Sec. 4-8.420. - Recovery of penalties and costs. 
(a)  Administrative penalties and abatement costs shall be a debt to the City and subject to all remedies for debt collection as allowed by law. 
(b)  When a violation involves privately owned real property and the abatement costs and penalties are unpaid within the prescribed time set forth in the applicable order, the amount of such costs and penalties may be recorded as a lien upon and against the real property or collected as special assessments without further hearing, subject to the provisions of Section 4-8.430 or 4-8.440. 
(c)  In addition to any other means of enforcement, the City Attorney is authorized to bring a civil action against the responsible party for collection of administrative penalties and abatement costs in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.430. - Lien procedure. 
(a)  The City may make any unpaid abatement costs or unpaid administrative penalties a lien against the real property that was the subject of proceedings, an administrative penalties and abatement order issued in accordance with Sections 4-8.290 through 4-8.350 of this chapter or an abatement costs order issued in accordance with Section 4-8.360-410 of this chapter. 
(b)  Upon determination by the City Manager that the abatement costs and penalties contained in an administrative penalties and abatement order or an abatement costs order have not been satisfied in full within 90 calendar days of the date specified in the order, and the order has not been successfully challenged by a timely appeal for review before the superior court, the City Manager may prepare a nuisance abatement lien stating the name of the City of Yuba City as the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed; the total amounts due and owing; the date of the administrative penalties and abatement order or the abatement costs order; the street address, legal description, and assessor's parcel number of the subject property; and the name and address of the recorded owner of the property. A copy of the administrative penalties and abatement order or the abatement costs order shall be attached to and made a part of the lien. 
(c)  Prior to recording the nuisance abatement lien, the City Manager shall serve a copy of the lien on the property owner, along with notice to the property owner that a lien in the amounts stated in the nuisance abatement lien will be filed against the subject property in the office of the Sutter County Assessor-Recorder. 
(d)  The nuisance abatement lien shall be served in the same manner as summons in a civil action in accordance with Civil Procedure Code § 415.10 et seq. If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the lien may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in Sutter County. 
(e)  Following proper notice to the owner of record as provided in subsection (d) of this section, the nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded with the Sutter County Assessor-Recorder. Once recorded, the nuisance abatement lien shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions of Civil Procedure Code § 697.340 and may be extended as provided in Civil Procedure Code § 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive. 
(f)  A copy of the nuisance abatement lien shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
(g)  Interest at the legal rate per year shall accrue on the principal amount of the lien until satisfied pursuant to law. 
(h)  A lien pursuant to this section may be foreclosed by an action brought by the City for a money judgment. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.440. - Special assessment procedure. 
(a)  As an alternative to the procedure authorized by Section 4-8.430 of this chapter, the City may make any unpaid abatement costs or penalties a special assessment against the real property that was the subject of an administrative penalties and abatement order issued in accordance with Sections 4-8.290 through 4-8.350 of this chapter or an abatement costs order issued in accordance with Sections 4-8.368 through 4-8.410 of this chapter. 
(b)  Upon determination by the City Manager that the abatement costs and penalties contained in an administrative penalties and abatement order or an abatement costs order have not been satisfied in full within 90 calendar days of the date specified in the order, and the order has not been successfully challenged by a timely appeal for review before the superior court, the City Manager may prepare a notice of assessment lien stating the name of the City of Yuba City as the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed; the total amounts due and owing; the date of the administrative penalties and abatement order or the abatement costs order; the street address, legal description, and assessor's parcel number of the subject property; and the name and address of the recorded owner of the property. A copy of the administrative penalties and abatement order or the abatement costs order shall be attached to and made a part of the lien. 
(c)  The City Manager shall serve a copy of the notice of assessment lien on the property owner. Such notice shall be served by certified mail to the property owner. If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in Sutter County. The Tax Collector's power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive the notice. 
(d)  Upon service of the notice of assessment lien on the property owner, the City Manager shall cause a certified copy of the notice to be recorded with the Sutter County Assessor-Recorder, which shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular tax bill levied against the property in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes. The assessment lien shall be subordinate to all existing special assessment liens previously imposed upon the same property and paramount to all other liens except State, County, and municipal taxes with which it shall have parity. The assessment lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest due and payable thereon has been paid. 
(e)  The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the assessment relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrance for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the assessment shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
(f)  A copy of the notice of assessment lien shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
(g)  Interest shall accrue on the principal amount of the assessment until satisfied pursuant to law. 
(h)  The City may, subject to the requirements applicable to the sale of property pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code § 3691, conduct a sale of vacant residential developed property for which the payment of the assessment is delinquent. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
Sec. 4-8.450. - Satisfaction of lien or special assessment. 
For any lien or special assessment imposed under this chapter, once payment in full has been received by the City, the City Clerk shall either record a notice of satisfaction or provide the property owner or applicable financial institution with a notice of satisfaction so they may record such notice with the Sutter County Assessor-Recorder. The notice of satisfaction shall cancel the City's lien or special assessment. 
(§ 3, Ord. 005-09, eff. May 7, 2009)  
CHAPTER 9. - TRAFFIC  
Article 1. - Definitions 
 
Sec. 4-9.101. - Definition of words and phrases. 
(a)  The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this article. 
(b)  Whenever any words and phrases used herein are not defined herein but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.102. - Central Traffic District. 
The Central Traffic District shall consist of all streets and portion of streets defined as follows: 
(a)  Plumas Street from SR 20 to B Street; 
(b)  Bridge Street from Second Street to west City limits; 
(c)  Center Street from Plumas Street to Shasta Street; 
(d)  Shasta Street from SR 20 to Bridge Street; 
(e)  SR 20 from Market Street to west City limits; 
(f)  Cooper Avenue from SR 20 to B Street; 
(g)  Second Street from Bridge Street to C Street; 
(h)  Percy Avenue from B Street to Garden Highway; 
(i)  Live Oak Boulevard from SR 20 to the north City limits; 
(j)  Clark Avenue from B Street to south City limits; 
(k)  Garden Highway from Second Street to Percy Avenue; 
(l)  Reeves Avenue from Cooper Street to Plumas Street; 
(m)  Sutter Street from Bridge Street to SR 20; 
(n)  Gray Avenue from Charlotte Avenue to Franklin Avenue; 
(o)  Butte House Road from Gray Avenue to Stabler Lane. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.103. - City Council. 
"City Council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Yuba City. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.104. - Coach. 
"Coach" shall mean any public transit vehicle used as a common carrier of passengers. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.105. - Curb. 
"Curb" shall mean the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be marked by curbing construction, or not so marked; the word "curb" as herein used shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from median strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.106. - Divisional island. 
"Divisional island" shall mean a raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic, a median strip. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.107. - Gross weight. 
"Gross weight" shall mean the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.108. - Holidays. 
Within the meaning of this chapter, holidays are the 1st day of January, known as "New Year's Day"; the 12th day of February, known as "Lincoln's Birthday"; the last Monday in February, known as "Washington's Birthday"; the last Monday in May, known as "Memorial Day"; the 4th day of July, known as "Independence Day"; the 1st Monday in September, known as "Labor Day"; the 9th day of September, known as "Admissions Day"; the 4th Monday in October, known as "Veterans Day"; the last Thursday in November, known as "Thanksgiving Day"; and the 25th day of December, known as "Christmas." 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.109. - Loading zone. 
"Loading zone" shall mean the space reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or freight. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.110. - Official time standard. 
Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current use in this City. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.111. - Official traffic control devices. 
"Official traffic control devices" shall mean all signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of the City Council having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.112. - Ordinance. 
"Ordinance" shall mean the ordinance, rule, or regulation adopted by the City Council relating to the movement of traffic, and enforcement thereof. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.113. - Parkway. 
"Parkway" shall mean that portion of street right-of-way other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.114. - Passenger loading zone. 
"Passenger loading zone" shall mean the space reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles while receiving or discharging passengers. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.115. - Police officer. 
"Police officer" shall mean every officer of the Police Department of this City or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.116. - Push cart. 
"Push cart" shall mean a vehicle propelled by a person but not ridden upon. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.117. - Railroad train. 
"Railroad train" shall mean a diesel, electric, or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated on rails. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.118. - Traffic enforcement agency. 
"Traffic enforcement agency" shall mean the Police Department of this City. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.119. - Traffic engineering agency. 
"Traffic engineering agency" shall mean the Public Works Department of this City. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.120. - Vehicle Code. 
"Vehicle Code" shall mean the current Vehicle Code of the State of California. No action shall be taken by any officer or body of the City which is in violation of the Vehicle Code of the State of California. All signs, markings, and devices shall be in conformance with the requirements of the Vehicle Code. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Article 2. - Traffic Administration 
 
Sec. 4-9.201. - Police Department—Traffic administration. 
It shall be the responsibility of the Police Department to enforce the traffic regulations of this City and all of the State Vehicle Laws applicable to traffic in this City, to make arrests for violations of such regulations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the Public Works Department and other departments of the City in the administration of the traffic laws, and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the Police Department by this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.202. - Public Works Department—Traffic engineering. 
Traffic engineering shall be the responsibility of the Public Works Department. The Public Works Director as head of the department shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.203. - Powers and duties of Public Works Director—Delegation. 
It shall be the general duty of the Public Works Director to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analysis of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic survey of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other City officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this City. 
Whenever the Public Works Director is required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic control devices or signals, he or she may cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained. 
Whenever, by the provisions of this chapter, a power is granted to the Public Works Director or a duty imposed upon him or her, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by a person authorized by him or her. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.204. - Traffic accident reports. 
The Police Department and the Public Works Department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the Police Chief, the Public Works Director, and other persons as authorized by them. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.205. - Police Department and Public Works Department to submit annual traffic safety report. 
The Police Department and the Public Works Department shall prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the City Council. Such a report shall contain information on traffic matters in this City as follows: 
(a)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
(b)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; 
(c)  The plans and recommendations of the Police Department and the Public Works Department for future traffic safety activities. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.206. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
(a)  The Chief of Police, with the approval of the Public Works Director, is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this City and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulations shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(b)  The Public Works Director may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.207. - Traffic Committee. 
The City Council shall establish an advisory Traffic Committee consisting of the Chief of Police, the Public Works Director, and three members at-large to be appointed by the Mayor, with approval of the City Council. 
The members of the Traffic Committee shall select a chairperson from among the members of the Committee to direct all meetings. The Public Works Director shall act as the secretary of the Committee and prepare a written report of each meeting for the City Council. 
The terms of the appointive members of the Traffic Committee shall expire as follows: 
(a)  Two members—January 31 of each odd numbered year. 
(b)  One member—January 31 of each even numbered year. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; § 1, Ord. 003-03, eff. April 3, 2003)  
Sec. 4-9.208. - Duties of Traffic Committee. 
It shall be the duty of the Traffic Committee to suggest the most practicable means for coordinating the activities of all officers and agencies of this City having authority with respect to stimulate and assist in the preparation and publication of traffic reports; to receive complaints regarding traffic matters; and to recommend to the City Council of this City and to the Police Chief and the Public Works Director and other City officials ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations. Actions requiring City Council approval for implementation shall be recommended to the City Council in the written report of each meeting as required. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Article 3. - Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations 
 
Sec. 4-9.301. - Authority of Police and Fire Department officials. 
Officers of the Police Department and such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this chapter or the Vehicle Code. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.302. - Required obedience to traffic ordinance. 
It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this ordinance. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.303. - Unauthorized persons shall not direct traffic. 
No person other than an officer of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department or a person authorized by the Chief of Police or a person authorized by law or a person directed by an officer of the Police Department or member of the Fire Department shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signals, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the Public Works Director. Authorized "flagmen" are exempted from this section when within a construction or maintenance area. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.304. - Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers. 
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this City in their enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this City in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this chapter shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this chapter, constitute such interference or obstruction. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.305. - Exemptions to certain vehicles. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking, and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the Police or Fire Department, any public ambulance, or any utility vehicle, which ambulance or public utility vehicle has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code of the State in response to an emergency call. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his or her willful disregard of the safety of others. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicles of a City department or City franchised utility or cable communication company while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or to any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation, or delivery of United States mail. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Article 4. - Traffic Control Devices 
 
Sec. 4-9.401. - Authority to install traffic control devices. 
The Public Works Director, as authorized by the City Council, shall place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices upon streets as required under the Vehicle Code or the traffic ordinances of this City to make effective the provisions of the Code or the ordinances, and may place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained, such appropriate official traffic control devices as he or she may deem necessary properly to indicate and to carry out the provisions of the Code or the ordinances or to warn or guide traffic. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.402. - Official traffic control devices required for enforcement purposes. 
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this chapter for which official traffic control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate official traffic control devices are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.403. - Installation of traffic signals. 
(a)  The Public Works Director when authorized by the City Council shall install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
(b)  The Public Works Director shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by an engineering and traffic survey and his or her determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the Department of Transportation Traffic Manual. 
(c)  The Public Works Director shall erect and maintain at each signal-controlled intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.404. - Traffic lanes. 
The Public Works Director shall have authority to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.405. - Distinctive roadway markings. 
The Public Works Director is authorized by the City Council to place and maintain upon streets distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.406. - Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue traffic control devices. 
The Public Works Director is authorized by the City Council to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this section whenever he or she determines in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist. 
If the device was placed by order of a City Council motion, resolution, or ordinance, then a similar action by the City Council will be required before the device is removed, relocated, or operation discontinued, except in the event of an emergency as determined by the Public Works Director. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.407. - Traffic control devices—Hours of operation. 
The Public Works Director as authorized by the City Council shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this section. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.408. - Unauthorized painting of curbs. 
No person or agency unless authorized by the Public Works Director shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any ordinance or resolution of this City pertaining thereof. Any unauthorized painting of curbs shall be removed at the expense of the person or firm in violation of the regulation. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Article 5. - Speed Regulations 
 
Sec. 4-9.501. - State speed laws applicable. 
The State traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within this City except where the Public Works Director authorized by the City Council, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, determines that other speed limits shall be applicable on specified streets or in certain areas. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.502. - Authority of Public Works Director. 
(a)  Whenever the Public Works Director as authorized by the City Council determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that a speed other than 25 miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe upon any street other than a state highway otherwise subject to a prima facie limit of 25 miles per hour, he or she may declare a prima facie speed limit of 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, or 55 miles per hour or a maximum speed limit of 55 miles per hour, whichever is found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe. 
(b)  Speed limits established pursuant to this section shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon said street or highway. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.503. - Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
The Public Works Director is authorized by the City Council to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. This provision applies to all City streets except those controlled by the State Department of Transportation. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.504. - Designated. 
(a)  35 miles per hour. Based upon engineering and traffic surveys and based upon the authority contained in Vehicle Code § 22357 and Municipal Code Sections 4-9.501 and 4-9.502, the City Council hereby fixes and determines and declares a prima facie speed limit of 35 miles per hour on the following streets which prima facie speed limit of 35 miles per hour is found by the Council to most appropriately facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe. The declared prima facie speed limit of 35) miles per hour on the foregoing streets shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon said streets and shall not thereafter be revised, save and except upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey. 
(1)  Franklin Avenue between Highway 99 and Brown Avenue and between Percy Avenue and Garden Highway. 
(2)  East Onstott Road between Butte House Road and Northgate Drive. 
(3)  Percy Avenue between Morton Street to Garden Highway. 
(4)  Poole Boulevard between Civic Center Boulevard and Tharp Road. 
(5)  Lassen Boulevard. 
(6)  Tharp Road. 
(7)  Walton Avenue within the City limits between Bridge Street and Franklin Avenue. 
(8)  Bridge Street between Heiken to Cooper Avenue. 
(9)  Bridge Street between Gray Avenue to Walton Avenue. 
(10)  Gray Avenue between Colusa Highway south to the railroad tracks. 
(11)  Market Street, from 600 ft. south of Lynn Way to its northern terminus at Queens Avenue. 
(12)  West Onstott between Eden to Portofino Drive. 
(13)  Queens Avenue between Live Oak Boulevard east to Market Street. 
(14)  Stabler Lane between Butte House Road to Colusa Highway. 
(b)  45 miles per hour. Based upon engineering and traffic surveys and based upon the authority contained in Vehicle Code § 22357 and Municipal Code Sections 4-9.501 and 4-9.502, the City Council hereby fixes and determines and declares a prima facie speed limit of 45 miles per hour on the following streets, which prima facie speed of 45 miles per hour is found by the Council to most appropriately facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe. The declared prima facie speed limit of 45 miles per hour on the foregoing streets shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon said street and shall not thereafter be revised, save and except upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey. 
(1)  Garden Highway, from 370 ft. south of Lincoln Road to south City limits. 
(2)  Walton Avenue from Colusa Highway to Bridge Street. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  40 miles per hour. Based upon engineering and traffic surveys and based upon the authority contained in Vehicle Code § 22357 and Municipal Code Sections 4-9.501 and 4-9.502, the City Council hereby fixes and determines and declares a prima facie speed limit of 40 miles per hour on the following streets which prima facie speed limit of 40 miles per hour is found by the Council to most appropriately facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe. The declared prima facie speed limit of 40 miles per hour on the foregoing streets shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon said streets and shall not thereafter be revised, save and except upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey. 
(1)  Butte House Road between Civic Center Boulevard and the westerly City limits. 
(2)  Live Oak Boulevard, Northgate Drive north to City limits. 
(§ 1, 2, Ord. 921, eff. November 17, 1983; § 1, 2, Ord. 1038, eff. January 20, 1988; § 1, Ord. 1064, eff. October 19, 1988; § 1, Ord. 1068, eff. May 31, 1989; § 1, 2, Ord. 19-92, eff. September 17, 1992; § 1, 2, Ord. 06-93, eff. June 17, 1993; §§ 1, 2, Ord. 03-94, eff. June 16, 1994; §§ 1, 2, Ord. 09-94, eff. December 15, 1994; §§ 1-4, Ord. 10-99, eff. July 1, 1999)  
Article 6. - Stop and Yield Intersections 
 
Sec. 4-9.601. - Stop signs and yield signs. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the City designates and describes any street, or portion thereof, as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the Public Works Department shall erect and maintain stop signs. A stop sign shall be erected on each and every intersection of such through street, or portion thereof, so designated, at those entrances or other intersections where a stop is required, and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in the Vehicle Code of the State. 
It is further provided that whenever any ordinance or resolution of the City designates and describes any intersection at which vehicles are required to yield to oncoming traffic, the Public Works Department shall erect and maintain a yield sign at such intersection. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in the Vehicle Code of this State. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.602. - Through streets. 
The following streets are designated as through streets: 
(a)  Plumas Street from Queens Avenue to Del Norte Avenue, and from Del Norte Avenue to Colusa Avenue, and from Colusa Avenue through B Street; 
(b)  Bridge Street from Second Street to the west City limits; 
(c)  Shasta Street from Colusa Avenue to Bridge Street; 
(d)  Queens Avenue from its easterly terminus (junction with Market Street) to Live Oak Boulevard, from Live Oak Boulevard to El Dorado Lane, and from El Dorado Lane to Stabler Lane; 
(e)  Cooper Avenue from Colusa Avenue to B Street; 
(f)  Second Street from Sutter Street to B Street and from B Street through to Garden Highway; 
(g)  Percy Avenue from B Street to Garden Highway; 
(h)  Live Oak Boulevard from Colusa Avenue to the north City limits; 
(i)  Clark Avenue from the south City limits to Colusa Avenue and from Colusa Avenue to the north City limits; 
(j)  Garden Highway from Second Street to the south City limits; 
(k)  Reeves Avenue from Cooper Avenue through Walnut Street; 
(l)  B Street from Second Street to Gray Avenue; 
(m)  Gray Avenue from Franklin Avenue to Northgate Drive; 
(n)  Franklin Avenue from Garden Highway to Percy Avenue and from Percy Avenue to the west City limits; 
(o)  Forbes Avenue from Plumas Street to Cooper Avenue and from Clark Avenue to Gray Avenue; 
(p)  Butte House Road from Gray Avenue to the West City limits; 
(q)  Stabler Lane between Butte House Road and the north City limits; 
(r)  Railroad Avenue from the south City limits through Richland Road; 
(s)  Market Street from the north Colusa Avenue frontage road to its northerly terminus (junction with Queens Avenue); 
(t)  Wilbur Avenue from Garden Highway to B Street; 
(u)  Lincoln Road from the east City limits to the west City limits; 
(v)  West Onstott Frontage Road from Peach Tree Lane to the north City limits; 
(w)  East Onstott Frontage Road, Kenny Drive to the north City limits; 
(x)  Walton Avenue, south City limits to the north City limits; 
(y)  Civic Center Boulevard from Colusa Avenue to Butte House Road; and 
(z)  Northgate Drive, from East Onstott Frontage Road to Live Oak Boulevard. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982 as amended by § 1, Ord. 933, eff. February 2, 1984; § 1, Ord. 946, eff. April 4, 1984; § 1, Ord. 967, eff. March 6, 1985)  
Article 7. - Turning Movements 
 
Sec. 4-9.701. - Authority to place devices altering normal course for turns. 
The Public Works Director is authorized by the City Council to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.702. - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
The Public Works Director is authorized by the City Council to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.703. - Signal controlled intersections—Right turns. 
The Public Works Director is authorized by the City Council to erect appropriate signs prohibiting right turn against a red or "stop" signal at any intersection. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Article 8. - Stopping, Standing or Parking Restrictions 
 
Sec. 4-9.801. - Authority of Public Works Director. 
The Public Works Director is authorized by the City Council on the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, to prohibit, regulate, or limit stopping, standing, parking of vehicles and shall place and maintain official traffic control devices indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this article and the California Vehicle Code are applicable. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.802. - Public Works Director to designate "No Stopping" zones and "No Parking" areas. 
The Public Works Director is authorized by the City Council to determine the location of "No Stopping" zones and "No Parking" areas and shall place and maintain appropriate signs or markings indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this chapter and the California Vehicle Code are applicable. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.803. - Prohibited stopping, standing, or parking. 
No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle whether attended or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or official traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(a)  Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings. 
(b)  In any area where the Public Works Director determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property or would cause unusual delay to traffic, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(c)  In any area established by resolution of the City Council as a "No Parking" area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(d)  Within any parkway. 
(e)  On a public sidewalk or overhanging a public sidewalk. 
(f)  On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway on any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the effective time of such no parking. 
(g)  On a crosswalk, except that a bus engaged as a common carrier or a taxicab may stop in an unmarked crosswalk to load and unload passengers. 
(h)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent right-hand curb as may be indicated by a sign or red paint on the curb. 
(i)  Within a designated bicycle lane, when such lane is indicated by appropriate signs or markings. 
(j)  Along the edge of any highway, at any curb, or in any location in a publicly or privately owned or operated off-street parking facility, designated as a fire lane by the fire department with jurisdiction over the area in which the place is located. 
The designation shall be indicated: 
(1)  By a sign posted immediately adjacent to, and visible from, the designated place clearly stating in letters not less than one in. in height that the place is a fire lane; 
(2)  By outlining or painting the place in red and, in contrasting color, marking the place with the words "FIRE LANE," which are clearly visible from a vehicle; or 
(3)  By a red curb or red paint on the edge of the roadway upon which is clearly marked the words "FIRE LANE." 
(k)  In front of a public or private driveway, except that a bus engaged as a common carrier, school bus, or a taxicab may stop or load and unload passengers. 
(l)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, parked, or standing at the curb or edge of a highway, except for a school bus when stopped to load or unload pupils in a business or residence district where the speed limit is 25 miles per hour or less. 
(m)  In front of that portion of a curb which has been cut down, lowered, or constructed to provide wheelchair accessibility to the sidewalk and which is designated for wheelchair access by either a sign or red paint on the curb. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.804. - Registration. 
(a)  Unregistered vehicles. No person shall leave standing upon a street, highway or off-street public parking facility, any vehicle as defined in Vehicle Code div. 1 requiring registration, unless it is registered, in compliance with California Vehicle Code regulations. 
(b)  Display of month/year tabs. No person shall leave standing upon a street, highway or off-street public parking facility any vehicle defined in Vehicle Code div. 1 requiring registration, without proper display of the current month and year tabs specified in Vehicle Code § 5204. 
(Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995; § 1; Ord. 010-10, eff. September 16, 2010)  
Sec. 4-9.805. - Display of license plates. 
No person shall leave standing upon a City street or public parking facility any vehicle defined in Vehicle Code div. 1 requiring registration, without proper display of license plates, as defined in Vehicle Code § 5200. 
(Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.806. - Fire hydrants. 
No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle within 15 ft. of a fire hydrant except as follows: 
(a)  If the vehicle is attended by a licensed driver who is seated in the front seat and who can immediately move such vehicle in case of necessity. 
(b)  If the vehicle is owned or operated by a Fire Department and is clearly marked as a Fire Department vehicle. 
(Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.807. - Parking not to obstruct street traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten ft. of the width of the travel lane for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.808. - Parking in alleys. 
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten ft. of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.809. - Time limit parking zones. 
Time limit parking zones, including but not limited to times such as 20 minutes, one hour, 90 minutes, two hours, and three hours, etc., shall be indicated by appropriate curb markings and/or signs. No person shall park a vehicle for a period of time in excess of the posted limit. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995; § 2; Ord. 010-10, eff. September 16, 2010)  
Sec. 4-9.810. - All-night parking prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle on certain streets or portions thereof, when such streets are designated by appropriate signs for period of time longer than 20 minutes between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except on Sundays and holidays. The subject streets or portions thereof, are as follows: 
(a)  Plumas Street from Colusa Avenue to Bridge Street; 
(b)  Bridge Street from Plumas Street to Second Street; 
(c)  Center Street from Plumas Street to Shasta Street; 
(d)  Teegarden Street from Plumas Street to Rockholt Way; 
(e)  Church Street from Plumas Street to Walnut Street; 
(f)  Forbes Avenue from Plumas Street to Walnut Street; 
(g)  Scott Street from Plumas Street to 517 Scott Street; 
(h)  Second Street from Bridge Street to C Street; 
(i)  Shasta Street (west side) between the north property line of 666 Shasta Street and Bridge Street. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.811. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street or highway for the principal purpose of: 
(a)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(b)  Repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency for a period not exceeding 24 hours. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995; § 3; Ord. 010-10, eff. September 16, 2010)  
Sec. 4-9.812. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
The Public Works Director is authorized by the City Council to place appropriate signs and markings indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his or her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.813. - Driving or parking on public school grounds. 
No person shall drive any vehicle, nor shall any person stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the driveways, paths, parking facilities, or the ground of any public school unless consistent with the provisions and requirements as outlined in Vehicle Code § 21113. 
(Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.814. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
The Public Works Director is authorized by the City Council to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 ft., or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 ft. when such action is necessary to maintain an orderly flow of traffic. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 19, 1995; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.815. - Standing or parking on one-way roadways. 
In the event a street includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The Public Works Director is authorized by the City Council to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1995; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.816. - Unlawful parking—Peddlers, vendors. 
Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 5, Title 8, Article 53 Special Provisions for Mobile and Open Air Vending Operations, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise or food are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating car or vehicle, on any portion of any street within the City. 
(§ 1, Ord. 004-10, eff. May 17, 2010; § 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.817. - Parking space markings. 
The Public Works Director is authorized by the City Council to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces where required. Such markings shall be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.818. - Emergency parking signs. 
(a)  Whenever the Chief of Police, with the approval of the Public Works Director, determines that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private processions or assemblages, he or she is authorized by the City Council to place temporary signs indicating that the operation, parking, or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets or alleys. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and shall be removed immediately thereafter. 
(b)  Whenever the Public Works Director determines that parking should be prohibited to facilitate construction or maintenance operations on public streets or utilities, he or she is authorized to place such temporary signs as needed to prohibit the parking or standing of vehicles. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such operations and the Public Works Director shall remove such signs thereafter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.819. - Emergency tow-away authority. 
The Public Works Director or the Chief of Police are authorized by the City Council to cause the towing away of parked vehicles in any of the following cases: 
(a)  When in the way of emergency public construction activities; 
(b)  When necessary for emergency utility repairs; 
(c)  Other emergency activities. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.820. - Emergency tow-away—Responsibility for towing and impounding fees. 
If a vehicle is towed away from an area appropriately marked with emergency "NO PARKING" signs, the City's action is legal with towing charges and impounding fees to be paid by the owner of the subject vehicle. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.821. - Removal of certain vehicles from streets. 
(a)  Parking time limit. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any automobile, truck, motorcycle, bicycle or other vehicle to remain standing or parked on any public street or alley within the City for a period in excess of 120 consecutive hours. 
(b)  Procedure for removal. Whenever any person has violated the provisions of this article and such is made to appear either by the written or oral complaint filed with the Police Department by any resident or property owner within the City or by reason of any observation made by the Police Department that such a violation exists and it appears following investigation that such person has violated said provisions, the Police Department may proceed to remove the vehicle from the public street or alley all in accordance with Vehicle Code div. 11, ch. 10: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, roadway, or alley in such a position as to constitute an obstruction to the normal movement of traffic or in such a condition as to create a hazard to other traffic upon the street, roadway, or alley, the Police Department may proceed to remove such vehicle pursuant to the authority embodied in Vehicle Code § 22651 to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage designated or maintained by the Police Department of which the officer is a member, where the vehicle shall be placed in storage all as set forth in Vehicle Code § 22850. 
(2)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street or alley within the City, he or she shall follow the procedure set forth in Vehicle Code § 22651 dealing with procedure to remove and store vehicles, giving appropriate notice in writing or orally of such storage to both the vehicle's legal and registered owner within 48 hours thereof, excluding weekends and holidays, said notice to be mailed or personally delivered and to contain all of the information mandated by Vehicle Code § 22852. 
(3)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a roadway or alley as set forth in this section, he or she shall make every effort to ascertain the name of the registered and legal owner and in the event he or she does not know or is not able to ascertain the name of said owners or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as provided in Vehicle Code § 22852, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of 120 hours, the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of such removal by mail to the Department of Justice of Sacramento all in accordance with Vehicle Code § 22853. 
(c)  Authority of Police Department. As provided by Vehicle Code § 22651, the Police Department may remove any automobile, truck, motorcycle, bicycle or other vehicle which has been left parked or standing upon any street, highway, or alley for 120 or more consecutive hours. When vehicles are removed from the streets, highways or alleys within the City, in accordance with the provisions of this article, two considerations shall be given each vehicle removed so as not to create a hardship on the owner. 
First, within 48 hours after removal of the vehicle, excluding weekends, the Police Department will mail written notice to both the legal and registered owner in compliance with Vehicle Code § 22852. Secondly, the registered or legal owner of the vehicle will, in the written notice from the Police Department, be advised that they have a right to a post storage hearing as outlined in Vehicle Code § 22852. 
(d)  Post storage hearing. Pursuant to Vehicle Code § 22852 and following notice of such storage to the registered and legal owner of the vehicle, which notice shall specify that said owners are entitled to receive a post storage hearing in the event that request for hearing is made within ten days of the date appearing on said notice, and in implementation of the post storage hearing requirements, save and except for the Chief of Police, the Traffic Committee is hereby designated and appointed as the hearing officer authorized to conduct said post storage hearings, excluding weekends and holidays, whose function shall be to determine whether or not probable cause for the storage is established. In all other respects, the hearing shall be conducted giving either the registered or legal owner or their agents an opportunity to present such evidence as they deem appropriate on the issue of probable cause for the storage, likewise giving an opportunity to the officer causing the storage to present such evidence on that issue as he or she deems appropriate. Failure of either the registered, legal owner or their agent to request or to attend the scheduled hearing shall satisfy the post storage validity hearing requirements of Vehicle Code § 22852. Following the conclusion and the completion of the hearing, the Traffic Committee as the duly designated hearing officer shall determine the validity of the storage, i.e., whether or not probable cause for the storage has been established. 
(e)  Inapplicability of article. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the removal of vehicles abated under the abandoned vehicle abatement program and any ordinance of the City enacted pursuant to Vehicle Code §§ 22660 through and including 22668 inclusive and Vehicle Code § 22710 or to vehicles that have been impounded for investigation pursuant to Vehicle Code § 22655 or to vehicles removed from private property pursuant to any City ordinance enacted under the authority of Vehicle Code § 22658. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.822. - Removal of vehicles from private property. 
An owner or person in lawful possession of any private property may subsequent to notifying by telephone, or if impractical, by the most expeditious means available, the City police authorities, cause the removal of a vehicle parking on the private property nearest public garage if: 
(a)  There is displayed in plain view at all entrances to the property a sign not less than 17 in. by 22 in. in size with lettering not less than one in. in height prohibiting public parking thereon and indicating that vehicles will be removed at the owner's expense and containing the telephone number of the local traffic law enforcement agency. 
(b)  Where a vehicle is parked on a lot or parcel which is improved with a single-family dwelling, the owner or person in lawful possession of said property may, subsequent to notification by telephone, or if impractical, by the most expeditious means available, the City police authorities, cause the removal of a vehicle parked on said property to the nearest public garage. 
The person causing the removal of any vehicle on private property as aforesaid shall comply with the notice provisions provided by Vehicle Code § 22658(b) and/or the requirements of Vehicle Code § 22853(c). 
Nothing in this section shall limit or effect any right or remedy which the owner or person in lawful possession of private property may have by virtue of other provisions of law authorizing the removal of a vehicle parked upon private property. 
No person shall cause the removal of any vehicle from a privately owned and operated fee paid parking facility unit at least 12 hours after the expiration of the period for which the fee is paid for the vehicle. Such, however, shall not apply to any parking space or stall rented to a person and reserved or otherwise clearly marked or designated for the use of that person. 
Any owner or person in lawful possession of any private property causing the removal of a vehicle parked on that property shall be liable as provided for by Vehicle Code § 22658(e) for any storage or towing charges whenever there has been failure to post a sign if and as required by the provisions of this section. 
(§ 1, Ord. 948, eff. May 2, 1984; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.823. - Penalty assessments. 
(a)  Any violation of a regulation that is not a misdemeanor governing the standing or parking of a vehicle under the Vehicle Code, under any Federal statute or regulation, or under any provision of the Yuba City Municipal Code is subject to a civil penalty. A person shall not be subject to both a notice of parking violation and a notice to appear for the same violation. 
(b)  If a vehicle is unattended during the time of a parking, equipment or registration violation, the person authorized to enforce parking laws and regulations shall securely attach to a vehicle a notice of parking violation setting forth the violation. 
(c)  If a notice of parking violation is issued for a California Vehicle Code parking, equipment or registration violation, including but not limited to unregistered vehicles, current registration tags not properly displayed, and license plate not properly displayed, the penalty shall be in an amount established for that violation by the Uniform Bail and Penalty Schedule adopted by the Judicial Council, as that Schedule is amended from time to time. 
(d)  If a notice of parking violation is issued for violation of a provision of the Yuba City Municipal Code, the penalty shall be in the amount established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995; § 4, Ord. 010-10, eff. September 16, 2010)  
Sec. 4-9.824. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4-9.825. - Authority to appoint trained civilian volunteers to enforce parking violations. 
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to appoint trained civilian volunteers to enforce by the issuance of notices of parking violation parking restrictions of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(§ 5, Ord. 010-10, eff. September 16, 2010)  
Article 9. - Stopping for Loading and Unloading Only 
 
Sec. 4-9.901. - Public Works Director to designate loading zones and passenger loading zones. 
(a)  The Public Works Director is authorized by the City Council to determine the location of loading zones and passenger loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs or markings indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this article and the California Vehicle Code are applicable. 
(b)  Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs in said zones. Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday(s) and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or freight, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of freight more than 20 minutes. 
(c)  Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in said zones. White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday(s) and holidays and except as follows: 
(1)  When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at all times. 
(2)  When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.902. - Effect of permission to load or unload. 
(a)  Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of freight shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no effect for more than 20 minutes. 
(b)  The loading or unloading of freight shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. 
(c)  Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes. 
(d)  Within the total time limits above specified, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.903. - Public Works Director to designate public carrier stops and stands. 
The Public Works Director, when authorized by a resolution of the City Council, shall establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such streets in such places and in such number as determined to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate official traffic control devices. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.904. - Stopping, standing, and parking of buses and taxicabs regulated. 
(a)  The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein. The Hub Area Transit Authority is exempt from this regulation. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency. The Hub Area Transit Authority is exempt from this regulation. 
(c)  The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(d)  The Public Works Director is authorized to paint a red line and stencil with white letters "NO PARKING," together with the words "Bus Zone" upon the top or side of all curbs and places specified as a bus zone. 
(e)  Except as provided in Section 22500.5 of the California Vehicle Code (school bus provision), no person shall stop, stand, or park along any curb space authorized for the loading and unloading of passengers of a bus engaged as a common carrier in local transportation when indicated by a sign or red paint on the curb erected or painted by local authorities. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.905. - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus, or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Article 10. - Parallel and Angle Parking 
 
Sec. 4-9.1001. - Parallel parking. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked on a two-way street where there are adjacent curbs shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel and within 18 in. of the curb facing the direction of traffic. Where no curbs or barriers bound each roadway, parallel parking shall be required unless otherwise indicated. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a commercial vehicle when loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1002. - Signs or markings indicating angle parking. 
(a)  Whenever any ordinance of the City designates and describes any street, or portion thereof, upon which angle parking shall be permitted, the Public Works Department shall mark or sign such street indicating the angle at which vehicles shall be parked. 
(b)  When signs or markings are in place indicating angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(c)  Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive over the centerline of any street. 
(d)  Angle parking shall be permitted on the following streets: 
(1)  Plumas Street from Colusa Avenue to Bridge Street (both sides), except for a distance of 225 ft. south of Colusa Avenue on the east side and for a distance of 200 ft. south of Colusa Avenue on the west side; 
(2)  Shasta Street from Teegarden Avenue to Bridge Street (west side); 
(3)  Second Street from Bridge Street to B Street (both sides); 
(4)  Bridge Street from Yolo Street to Second Street (both sides); 
(5)  B Street from Second Street easterly to the levee (both sides); 
(6)  Plumas Street from Baptist Lane to a point 300 ft. southerly thereof (west side) and from Baptist Lane to Del Norte Avenue (both sides); 
(7)  Frederick Street from Clark Avenue to Marie Avenue (south side); 
(8)  Almond Street from Baptist Lane to Del Norte Avenue (east side); 
(9)  Sutter Street from Bridge Street to Fairman Street (both sides); and 
(10)  Del Norte Avenue from Shasta Street to Plumas Street (both sides); 
(11)  South side of Baptist Lane; 
(12)  East side of Chestnut Street, north of Colusa Avenue to the intersection of Alturas Street.  
Article 11. - Disabled Persons Parking 
 
Sec. 4-9.1101. - Disabled person signage. 
Every new or replacement sign installed on or after January 1, 1992, relating to parking privileges for disabled persons shall refer to "disabled persons" rather than "physically handicapped persons" or any other similar term, whenever such a reference is required on a sign. 
(Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.1102. - Parking for the disabled. 
It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle in any stall or space designated for disabled persons and disabled veterans in accordance with Section 22511.7 or 22511.8 of the California Vehicle Code, unless the vehicle displays a specification identification license place issued pursuant to Section 5007 of the California Vehicle Code or a distinguishing placard issued pursuant to Section 22511.55 or 22511.59 of the same code. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, block, or otherwise bar access to those parking stalls or spaces, except as provided for above. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle, including a vehicle displaying a special identification license plate pursuant to Section 22511.55 or 22511.59, in either of the following places: 
(1)  On the lines marking the boundaries of a parking stall or space designated for disabled persons or disabled veterans. 
(2)  In any area of the pavement within a parking lot or parking facility that is marked by crosshatched lines and is thereby designated for the loading and unloading of vehicles pursuant to any local ordinances. 
(c)  Section 4-9.1101. and all subsection contained therein apply to all off-street parking facilities owned or operated by the State, to all off-street parking facilities owned and operated by a local authority, and to any privately owned and maintained off-street parking facility. 
(Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.1103. - Parking rights for disabled. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code, vehicles displaying the distinguishing license plate or special placard shall be allowed to park for unlimited periods in blue curb and other timed parking zones. 
(b)  This section shall have no application to those zones in which the stopping, parking, or standing of all vehicles is prohibited or which are reserved for special types of vehicles. 
(c)  Parking zones for the physically disabled are subject to any temporary parking prohibitions, pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.1104. - On-street parking. 
The City Council, by resolution, may designate special "blue curb" parking spaces for the purpose of providing on-street parking for exclusive use by physically disabled persons. Vehicles not displaying disabled license plates or placards will be subject to citation. 
(Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.1105. - Off-street publicly-owned facilities. 
The City Council, by resolution, may designate parking stalls or spaces in City owned, City leased, or City controlled off-street parking facilities for exclusive use by physically disabled persons. 
(Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.1106. - Identification—On-street blue curb spaces. 
Blue curb spaces shall be indicated by blue paint on the curb edge of the paved portion of the street. 
(a)  For further identification, the International Symbol of Access may be painted on the blue curb in white followed by the word "ONLY," or the words "DISABLED PERSONS ONLY" may be used. 
(b)  For further identification, the International Symbol of Access may be posted on a sign directly in front of each such space with the wording DISABLED PERSONS PARKING ONLY. 
(c)  All signs shall be posted at an approximate height of 80 in. from the ground or sidewalk. 
(Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.1107. - Off-street/publicly owned facilities—Signage. 
Designation of "blue curb" parking stalls in publicly owned off-street parking facilities shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from same a sign consisting of the International Symbol of Access. 
(a)  In addition, a sign not less than 17 in. by 22 in. in size may be posted either at the entrance to the parking facility or immediately adjacent to and visible from the reserved stall(s), which states with lettering no less than one in. in height: 
(1)  "Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing license plates or placards issued for disabled persons will be issued citations"; or 
(2)  "Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing placards or license plates issued for disabled persons will be towed away at owner's expense. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed at (Address) or by telephoning Yuba City Police Department, 741-4660." 
(b)  All signs shall be posted at an approximate height of 80 in. from the ground. 
(Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.1108. - Off-street privately financed facilities. 
Designation of "blue curb" parking stalls in privately financed off-street parking facilities shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from same a sign consisting of the International Symbol of Access and symbol painted in the parking space in white towards the rear of the space. 
(a)  In addition, a sign not less than 17 in. by 22 in. in size may be posted either at the entrance to the parking facility or immediately adjacent to and visible from the reserved stall(s), which states with lettering no less than one in. in height: 
(1)  "Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing license plates or placards issued for disabled persons will be issued citations"; or 
(2)  "Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing placards or license plates issued for disabled persons will be towed away at owner's expense. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed at (Address) or by telephoning Yuba City Police Department, 741-4660." 
(b)  The person in lawful possession of the parking facility may then, and only after first contacting the Police Department, cause the removal of a violator's automobile from the stall to the nearest public garage. 
(c)  A sign must be posted at the entry to all off-street parking facilities to the effect that the facility is subject to public traffic regulations and control before a vehicle may be towed away pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(d)  All signs shall be posted at an approximate height of 80 in. from the ground. 
(Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Article 12. - One-Way Streets and Alleys 
 
Sec. 4-9.1201. - Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys. 
The Public Works Director, when authorized by the City Council, shall determine and designate one-way streets or alleys and shall place and maintain official traffic control devices giving notice thereof. No such designation shall be effective unless such devices are in place. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Article 13. - Regulating Trucks and Special Vehicles on Certain Streets 
 
Sec. 4-9.1301. - Gross weight limits. 
The Public Works Director, on the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, and when authorized by a resolution of the City Council, shall erect and maintain official traffic control devices on any streets or parts of streets to impose gross weight limits as prescribed by the California Vehicle Code. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.1302. - Truck restrictions. 
The Public Works Director, on the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, is authorized by the City Council to erect and maintain official traffic control devices on any streets or parts of streets to prohibit the operation of trucks exceeding a maximum gross weight of five tons. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.1303. - Size restrictions. 
The Public Works Director, on the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, is authorized by the City Council to erect and maintain official traffic control devices on any streets or parts of streets to impose vehicle size restrictions as prescribed by the California Vehicle Code. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.1304. - Excluding specified traffic. 
The Public Works Director, on the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, is authorized by the City Council to determine and designate those streets upon which shall be prohibited any class or kind of traffic which is found to be incompatible with the normal and safe movement of traffic and shall erect appropriate official traffic control devices giving notice thereof. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995)  
Sec. 4-9.1305. - Truck routes. 
(a)  The Public Works Director, when authorized by an ordinance of the City Council, shall appropriately sign and mark streets, or portions of streets, as a "truck route" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five tons. 
(b)  When any such truck routes are established and designated by appropriate signs and markings, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a gross weight limit of five tons shall drive on such routes and no other streets, except when necessary to traverse another street to a destination for the purpose of loading and unloading, but then only by such deviation from the nearest truck route as is necessary. The posting or marking of non-truck route streets shall not be required to prohibit travel by vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five tons except as otherwise provided in this paragraph. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the State or to the HubArea Transit Authority. 
(c)  The following streets, or portions of streets, are hereby declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of five tons: 
(1)  Market Street from the north Colusa Avenue Frontage Road to its northerly terminus (junction with Queens Avenue. 
(2)  Butte House Road from Tharp Road to the City limits. 
(3)  Sutter Street from Colusa Avenue to Second Street. 
(4)  Second Street from Sutter Street to B Street. 
(5)  Plumas Street from Bridge Street to B Street. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Cooper Avenue from Colusa Avenue to Bridge Street. 
(8)  Gray Avenue from Colusa Avenue to Forbes Avenue. 
(9)  Percy Avenue from B Street to Garden Highway. 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  Bridge Street from Second Street to Cooper Avenue. 
(12)  B Street from Second Street to Percy Avenue. 
(13)  Franklin Avenue from Highway 99 west to the City limits. 
(14)  Poole Boulevard from Tharp Road to Civic Center Boulevard. 
(15)  Civic Center Boulevard from the southerly terminus, south of Colusa Highway, to Poole Boulevard. 
(16)  Live Oak Highway from Colusa Avenue to the north City limits. 
(17)  Walton Avenue, that portion within the City limits. 
(18)  Queens Avenue from its easterly terminus (junction with Market Street) to Live Oak Boulevard. 
(19)  Franklin Avenue from Percy Avenue to Garden Highway. 
(20)  Garden Highway from Franklin Avenue to the south City limits. 
(21)  Forbes Avenue from Gray Avenue to Cooper Avenue. 
(22)  Lincoln Road from west City limits to east City limits. 
(23)  Railroad Avenue from Lincoln Road to south City limits. 
(24)  Bridge Street, that portion within the City limits between Highway 99 and Walton Avenue. 
(25)  West on Stott Frontage Road, that portion south of the Union Pacific Railroad tracks within the City limits. 
(26)  Tharp Road, that portion within the City limits between Butte House Road and Lassen Boulevard. 
(27)  Bogue Road, that portion within the City limits between Highway 99 and Garden Highway. 
(28)  Burns Drive, from Garden Highway to Putman Avenue. 
(29)  Epley Drive, from Garden Highway to Putman Avenue. 
(30)  Hassett Avenue, from Epley Drive to Burns Drive. 
(31)  Putman Avenue, from Epley Drive to Burns Drive. 
(32)  Harter Parkway, between Butte House Road and Highway 20. 
(33)  George Washington Boulevard, that portion within the City limits. 
(34)  Industrial Drive, in its entirety from the north intersection with George Washington Boulevard to the south intersection with George Washington Boulevard. 
(35)  Lassen Boulevard, between Tharp Road and Walton Avenue. 
(d)  No person shall drive a vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five tons upon any street not designated as a truck route or as permitted pursuant to this article. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; as amended by §§ 1, 2, Ord. 974, eff. July 3, 1985; § 1, Ord. 1027, eff. July 19, 1987; § 1, Ord. 1075, eff. September 6, 1989; § 1, Ord. 08-93, eff. July 15, 1993; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995; § 1, Ord. 002-03, eff. April 3, 2003; § 2, Ord. 003-12, eff. October 18, 2013)  
Sec. 4-9.1306. - Prohibited truck parking. 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 4-9.1305(c) of this article, relating to truck routes, no person shall at any time cause trucks or semitrailers to be parked upon any street not so designated as a truck route in accordance with Section 4-9.1305(c) of this article. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4-9.1305(c), the Council, by resolution, may designate on any truck route street, or portion of a truck route street, deemed to create an unsafe or hazardous condition, areas where the parking of trucks or semitrailers shall be prohibited. Upon such designation by resolution of the Council, and with the placement of signs prohibiting the parking of trucks and or semitrailers on any such truck route street, or portion thereof, the parking of trucks shall be prohibited. The posting or marking of non-truck route streets shall not be required to prohibit the parking of trucks on such streets. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982; Ord. 09-95, eff. October 19, 1995; § 3, Ord. 003-12, eff. October 18, 2012)  
Article 14. - Oversize Vehicle Parking 
 
Sec. 4-9.1401. - Oversize vehicles. 
An oversize vehicle is any vehicle, motorized or nonmotorized, that exceeds 25 ft. in length, or exceeds seven ft. in width, and/or exceeds seven ft. in height. Oversize vehicles shall include all buses, truck tractors, semi-trailers, motor trucks, trailers, campers, camp trailers, house cars, trailer coaches, and other equipment or machinery in excess of the above length, width, or height measurements. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1402. - Permitted parking areas for oversize vehicles. 
Oversize vehicles may be parked or stored on private property in all yard areas except the required front yard setback or any side yard abutting a street right-of-way. Semi-trailers, camp trailers, campers and/or house cars may be parked on the apron within the required yard setback located between the driveway and the side property line closest to the driveway if: 
(a)  The trailer or vehicle does not project over any property line; 
(b)  The trailer or vehicle does not block the passage of pedestrians on any public sidewalk; 
(c)  The parking or storage area has a paved or graveled surface; 
(d)  The area around said trailers and vehicles is kept clean and free of trash, debris and/or parts. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1403. - Prohibited oversize vehicles parking. 
(a)  No person shall park and leave standing upon any street or highway in a residential district for a period exceeding 24 hours: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle of a length in excess of 25 ft.; 
(2)  Any oversized vehicle used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation, or profit; 
(3)  Any vehicle designed and used or maintained for the transportation of property such as buses, motor trucks, trailers, semi-trailers, trailer coaches or truck tractors and similar vehicles of a width in excess of 90 in.; 
(4)  Any item of farm machinery or special purpose machinery. 
(b)  No oversize vehicle shall be parked diagonally at any time when the length of the vehicle creates an obstruction to the normal flow of traffic, or which causes a reduction in the width of the normally traveled portion of the roadway. 
(c)  The above prohibited vehicles may be parked upon such street or highway while loading or unloading persons and/or property; or when such vehicle is parked in connection with or in aid of, the performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which such vehicle is parked; or to perform repairs of an emergency nature on the motor vehicle itself, for a maximum of 120 consecutive hours. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1404. - Nonmotorized vehicle parking. 
No person shall park or leave standing a nonmotorized vehicle or camper regardless of width or length, when it has been detached from its motor vehicle on any street or highway in the City for a period exceeding 24 hours. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Article 15. - Miscellaneous Driving Rules 
 
Sec. 4-9.1501. - Stop when traffic obstructed. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1502. - Driving through funeral or other procession. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1503. - Drivers in a procession. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1504. - Funeral processions to be identified. 
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the Police Department. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1505. - Driving on new pavement. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking or when a sign is in place stating that the street, or any portion thereof, is closed. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1506. - Advertising vehicles. 
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle equipped with a sound amplifying or loud speaking device on any street or alley at any time without first receiving a special permit from the City Police Department. 
The Police Department shall issue permits only to those vehicles whose sound amplifying or loud speaking devices amplify sound at 65 decibels or less. Further, such permits shall authorize use of the sound amplifying or loud speaking devices only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., and further, use of the sound amplifying or loud speaking devices shall not be permitted within one block of schools or hospitals. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Article 16. - Pedestrians—Rights and Duties 
 
Sec. 4-9.1601. - Crossing at right angles. 
Except where otherwise indicated by a crosswalk or other official traffic control devices, a pedestrian shall cross a roadway at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1602. - Prohibited crossing. 
(a)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in the central traffic district. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any of the designated through streets. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1603. - Public Works Director to establish crosswalks. 
The Public Works Director is authorized by the City Council to establish, designate, and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway where in his or her opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1604. - Standing in roadway. 
No person shall stand in any roadway, other than in a safety zone or in a crosswalk, if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any public officer or employee of a public utility when necessarily upon a street in line of duty. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Article 17. - Regulations for Bicycles 
 
Sec. 4-9.1701. - Applicability of traffic laws. 
Traffic laws shall apply to persons riding bicycles. Every person riding a bicycle shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the State and of the City, except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no application, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter and in accordance with Vehicle Code § 21200. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1702. - Effect of regulations. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this article. 
(b)  The parent of any child or guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1703. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a public sidewalk except where sidewalk is a designated bikeway and signed accordingly. 
(b)  The Public Works Director, when authorized by the City Council, shall erect signs on any roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1704. - Emerging from alleys, driveways and buildings. 
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk or sidewalk area, and, upon entering a bicycle lane, shall yield the right-of-way to all bicycles approaching on such lane, and upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1705. - Bicycle paths—Establishment of signs. 
The Council may, by resolution, establish bicycle lanes, bicycle paths, or bicycle routes upon or adjacent to any street. When any such facility has been established, the Public Works Director is hereby authorized to erect or place signs upon any street or adjacent to any street in the City indicating the existence of a bicycle lane, path, or route and otherwise regulating the operation and use of vehicles and bicycles with respect thereto, so long as such signs and indications are consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1706. - Riding on roadways outside bicycle lanes or paths. 
Where a bicycle lane has been designated upon a roadway or a bicycle path has been designated adjacent to a roadway, no person shall ride upon such roadway except within such bicycle lane or path or except as otherwise permitted by the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1707. - Vehicles crossing paths and lanes. 
No person shall drive a vehicle upon or across a bicycle path or lane, except to enter or exit a driveway and except to park such vehicle or leave a parking space, to enter or leave the street, or to prepare for a turn; provided, however, in no case shall a motor vehicle be driven within a bicycle lane for a distance in excess of 100 ft. during the execution of such movement. No person shall drive upon or across a bicycle lane as permitted in this section, except after giving the right-of-way to all bicycles within the lane. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Article 18. - Railroad Trains 
 
Sec. 4-9.1801. - Railroad trains not to block crossings. 
No person shall operate any train in such a manner as to prevent vehicular use of any roadway or period of time in excess of five consecutive minutes except: 
(a)  When necessary to comply with signals affecting the safety of the movement of trains; 
(b)  When necessary to avoid striking any object or person on the track; 
(c)  When the train is in motion except while engaged in switching operations; 
(d)  When the train is disabled; 
(e)  When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the crossing; 
(f)  When necessary to comply with a governmental safety regulation; 
(g)  When directed by local law enforcement officers. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Article 19. - Traffic Site Obstructions 
 
Sec. 4-9.1901. - Poles, signs, fences, and slender encroachments. 
No poles, signs, fences, and other encroachments will be permitted which are placed so as to obstruct the reasonably safe sight distance of a motorist entering an intersection as determined by the Public Works Director. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Sec. 4-9.1902. - Trees and shrubs. 
Shrubbery or plants exceeding 30 in. in height and tree foliage lower than 84 in. in height may not be located in any street, side yard or a corner lot inside a sight distance triangle, measured at the back of sidewalk or right-of-way line if no sidewalk is provided on the subject lot as follows: 110 ft. along the primary street, 20 ft. along the intersecting street or alley from the projected intersection of the back of sidewalk or right-of-way of both streets and/or alleys. 
Notwithstanding the above prohibition, any aggrieved property owner or other person in possession of the subject property may seek an exception which would allow such vegetation or other plant material more than 30 in. in height and/or tree foliage lower than 84 in. in height to be located or remain within any street, side yard or corner lot inside the required sight distance triangle by filing an application for such exception with the City Traffic Committee. In the event the City Traffic Committee finds, upon such application, that no traffic hazard exists by allowing said vegetation to be located or remain within the required sight distance triangle, it may grant such exception upon such terms and/or conditions and the City Traffic Committee deems necessary to insure that no traffic hazard exists or will occur. In the event the City Traffic Committee denies such application for exception, such shall constitute a finding that said vegetation constitutes a nuisance which shall be abated and removed by the property owner or other person in possession of the subject property, and in the absence thereof, shall constitute an infraction and be the basis for the issuance of an appropriate citation under applicable provisions of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982 as amended by § 1, Ord. 929, eff. December 22, 1983)  
Sec. 4-9.1903. - Authority of the Public Works Director to abate traffic sight obstructions. 
The Public Works Director is authorized by the City Council to cause the abatement of traffic sight obstructions which he or she determines to be a public nuisance and/or safety hazard. The Public Works Director shall notify the legal owner of the subject property in writing to abate the traffic sight obstruction(s) within 30 calendar days. If corrections are not completed within the 30-day period, the Public Works Director is directed to have the necessary corrective work completed by either City forces or by contract with a private firm with the owner of the subject property responsible for all costs incurred, or a violation of this section may be penalized under the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1, Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(§ 1, Ord. 911, eff. October 7, 1982)  
Article 20. - Restricting Travel on Levees within the Corporate Limits of the City of Yuba City 
 
Sec. 4-9.2001. - Parking on levees prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate, stop, park or leave standing any vehicle upon any levee which is a unit of any flood control project within the corporate limits of the City of Yuba City except as hereinafter specifically permitted under Section 4-9.2005 and Section 4-9.2006. 
(Ord. 874, eff. June 17, 1981)  
Sec. 4-9.2002. - Speed limits where driving permitted. 
Driving and operating a vehicle shall be permitted in certain restricted areas on and over levee crown roadways and ramps where said ramps and roadways are specifically posted with signs indicating the areas over which said driving may take place. Provided, however, that driving over such levee crown roadways and ramps shall be done in such a manner as not to cause any damage to the levee or its structure, and in any case, at a speed not to exceed 15 miles per hour unless a higher speed is posted. 
(Ord. 874, eff. June 17, 1981)  
Sec. 4-9.2003. - Signs. 
It is hereby made the duty of the responsible levee district, reclamation district or Department of Water Resources of the State of California having jurisdiction over the particular levee involved to immediately provide signs reflecting said maximum speed limit and designating and posting the areas over which vehicles may be operated under the provisions of this chapter reflecting that it is unlawful to operate vehicles except within the designated areas. 
(Ord. 874, eff. June 17, 1981)  
Sec. 4-9.2004. - Vehicle defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, vehicle is a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway excepting a device moved by human power. 
(Ord. 874, eff. June 17, 1981)  
Sec. 4-9.2005. - Excepted vehicles. 
This chapter shall not apply to levee maintenance vehicles and equipment operated by or under the supervision of the various levee districts, reclamation districts, County of Sutter, City of Yuba City, or State of California. 
(Ord. 874, eff. June 17, 1981)  
Sec. 4-9.2006. - State, County and City highways excepted. 
This chapter shall not apply to levees on which there exists State, County or City highways. 
(Ord. 874, eff. June 17, 1981)  
Sec. 4-9.2007. - Permitted travel—Designated persons. 
Where levees are closed to the public, each responsible levee district, reclamation district or Department of Water Resources shall specifically authorize and designate property owners adjacent to levees who must have necessary access over those adjacent levees to service adjacent pumping plants or to pass to and from adjacent properties which are not served by public highways and when so designated said adjacent property owners are hereby authorized to pass over these closed levees. Such authorized use shall be done in such a manner as not to cause any damage to the levee or its structure and in any case at a speed not to exceed 15 miles per hour unless a higher speed is posted. 
(Ord. 874, eff. June 17, 1981)  
Sec. 4-9.2008. - Violations and penalty. 
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding 20 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 874, eff. June 17, 1981)  
Sec. 4-9.2009. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article which is reasonably separable from the remaining portion of this chapter, if for any reason held to be) invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this article being herein expressly declared that this article and each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase thereof would have been adopted irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 874, eff. June 17, 1981)  
Article 21. - Skateboards, Roller Skates and In Line Skates 
 
Sec. 4-9.2101. - Prohibitions on sidewalks or streets. 
It shall be unlawful to ride or propel any skateboard, roller skate or in line skate upon any sidewalk or street so as to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(§ 2, Ord. 12-93, eff. October 21, 1993)  
Sec. 4-9.2102. - Prohibitions on private property. 
It shall be unlawful to ride or propel any skateboard, roller skate or in line skate upon or across any privately owned property without the consent of the owner. This section shall not be enforceable unless the private property owner posts a sign stating "No Skating" at all clearly defined entryways to the property referencing this section; provided, however, that the posting of a sign shall not be required for this section to apply to single family residential property. 
(§ 2, Ord. 12-93, eff. October 21, 1993)  
Sec. 4-9.2103. - Prohibitions on public property. 
It shall be unlawful to ride or propel any skateboard, roller skate or in line skate upon any public property if the property owner posts a sign at all clearly defined entryways to the property that prohibits that conduct and references this section. 
(§ 2, Ord. 12-93, eff. October 21, 1993)  
Sec. 4-9.2104. - Applicability of signs. 
Any sign posted pursuant to Section 4-9.2101 through and including Section 4-9.2103 which prohibits roller skating shall be deemed to also prohibit in line skating, roller skating and skateboarding unless the sign otherwise provides. 
(§ 2, Ord. 12-93, eff. October 21, 1993)  
Sec. 4-9.2105. - Endangerment of property, safety or well-being of any person. 
It shall be unlawful for persons to ride or propel any skateboard, roller skate or in line skate on any public sidewalk or street or private property open to public access in such a manner as to endanger the property, safety or well-being of any person on any public sidewalk or street or private property open to public access. 
(§ 2, Ord. 12-93, eff. October 21, 1993)  
Sec. 4-9.2106. - Signs. 
The City Public Works Director is authorized to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such appropriate signs on property owned by the City where the Public Works Director in conjunction with the Chief of Police conclude that prohibiting skating in such areas is in the best interest of the citizens of Yuba City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 12-93, eff. October 21, 1993)  
Sec. 4-9.2107. - Violations and penalties. 
A violation of Section 4-9.2101 through and including Section 4-9.2105 shall be punishable as provided for in Title 1, Chapter 2, Section 1-2.02 of the Yuba City Municipal Code entitled "Violations/Infractions." 
The violation of Section 4-9.2105 shall be punishable as provided for in Title 1, Chapter 2, Section 1-2.03 of the Yuba City Municipal Code entitled "Certain Violations/Misdemeanors." 
(§ 2, Ord. 12-93, eff. October 21, 1993)  
Article 22. - Interstate Truck Terminals and Access Routes 
 
Sec. 4-9.2201. - Purpose; authority. 
The purpose of this article is to establish a process for the designation and signing of truck terminal access routes as provided by State law, and to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the public. This article is adopted pursuant to Vehicle Code § 35401.5(d) and the City's general police power. The City Council finds that this article is necessary in consideration of public safety on, and preservation of, highways under the City's jurisdiction. 
(§ 1, Ord. 003-12, eff. October 18, 2012)  
Sec. 4-9.2202. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this article, and if any word or phrase used in this article is not defined in this section, it shall have the meaning set forth in the California Vehicle Code or, if not defined in the Vehicle Code, the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage. 
"Caltrans" shall mean the Department of Transportation of the State of California, or its successor agency. 
"Federally designated highway system" shall mean those highways within the National System of Interstate and Defense Highways and those portions of federal-aid primary highways and federal-aid urban system highways that have been qualified by the United States Secretary of Transportation for such uses. 
"Interstate truck" shall mean a truck tractor and semitrailer combination, or truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer combination with a length as regulated and allowed by the Federal Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1982, Public Law 97-424, 96 Stat. 2097, 49 U.S.C. § 2311 et seq., and as addressed by Vehicle Code § 35401.5. 
"Public Works Director" shall mean the Director of Public Works of the City of Yuba City or his or her authorized representative. 
"Terminal" shall mean any facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped or where full load consignments may be offloaded or at which freeway trucks are regularly maintained, stored or manufactured. 
(§ 1, Ord. 003-12, eff. October 18, 2012)  
Sec. 4-9.2203. - Application—Requirements generally. 
Any interested person requiring access for an Interstate truck or trucks from the federally designated highway system along highways under the City's jurisdiction to a terminal or terminals shall submit the following to the Public Works Director: an application, on a form as provided by the City, the requisite fee, and such further information as may be required by the Public Works Director. 
(§ 1, Ord. 003-12, eff. October 18, 2012)  
Sec. 4-9.2204. - Application—City action. 
Upon receipt of the application, the Public Works Director will cause an investigation to be made to ascertain whether or not the proposed terminal facility meets the requirements for a terminal, as defined. Upon his or her approval of the terminal facility, and in cooperation with the Department of Transportation (Caltrans), to the extent required by the California Vehicle Code, the Public Works Director will then determine the capability of the route requested and alternate routes, whether requested or not. Determination of route capability will include a review of adequate turning radius and lane widths of ramps, intersections, streets and highways, general traffic conditions such as sight distance, speed and traffic volumes, and other considerations as deemed relevant by the Public Works Director. No access of a federally designated highway system will be approved without the approval of Caltrans. Based on these considerations, the Public Works Director will then decide either to make a recommendation to the City Council to approve the terminal access route by resolution or the Public Works Director shall disapprove the terminal access route. 
(§ 1, Ord. 003-12, eff. October 18, 2012)  
Sec. 4-9.2205. - Fees and costs. 
(a)  At the time of submitting the application, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee, as established by resolution which may be amended from time to time, sufficient to pay the cost of the review of the terminal designation and the review of the route and alternate route, and related administrative costs. 
(b)  Upon the approval of the terminal designation and route by the City Council, the applicant shall deposit with the City sufficient funds as estimated by the Public Works Director to pay for the purchase and installation of terminal trailblazer signs. Trailblazer signs will be required at every decision point in the City on route to the terminal. Upon completion of the installation of the signs, the actual cost shall be computed and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant, whichever the case may be. No terminal or route may be used until such signs as may be required are in place. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, a fee will not be charged if the applicant is a terminal operator. 
(§ 1, Ord. 003-12, eff. October 18, 2013)  
Sec. 4-9.2206. - Retrofitting. 
(a)  If all feasible routes to a requested terminal are found unsatisfactory by the Public Works Director, the applicant may request retrofitting of the deficiencies. All costs of engineering, construction and inspection will be the responsibility of the applicant. Except when the retrofitting of deficiencies is within the jurisdiction of Caltrans, the actual construction will be done by the City or by a contractor acceptable to the City. 
(b)  When the work is to be done by the City, the applicant shall deposit with the City the estimated cost of retrofitting. Adjustments between the estimated and actual costs shall be made after completion of the work and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant, whichever the case maybe. 
(c)  If at any time within five years from the date of completion of the retrofitting by the applicant, should any other applicant seek terminal access route approval which would use the route upon which such retrofitting was accomplished, any such applicant's fee may include that applicant's proportionate share of the retrofitting, as determined by the Public Works Director, which fee shall be disbursed by the City to the applicant who paid for the retrofitting as well as to any other applicant who contributed to the cost of retrofitting. 
(§ 1, Ord. 003-12, eff. October 18, 2013)  
Sec. 4-9.2207. - Revocation of route. 
The Public Works Director may revoke any approved terminal or terminal access route if the terminal or route becomes an unreasonable traffic hazard for vehicular or pedestrian traffic. A traffic hazard includes the inability of Interstate trucks to negotiate the route or such vehicles causing unsafe driving conditions for other vehicular traffic or pedestrians. 
(§ 1, Ord. 003-12, eff. October 18, 2013)  
Sec. 4-9.2208. - Appeal process. 
If the Public Works Director denies terminal designation or route feasibility or revokes a previously approved terminal or route, the applicant or terminal owner, within 15 days following the date of receipt of the decision of the Public Works Director, may appeal the decision to the City Council in writing. The appeal shall state specifically whether there was an error or abuse of discretion by the Public Works Director or whether his or her decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. Within five days of receiving notification that the appeal has been filed, the Public Works Director shall transmit to the City Clerk the terminal application, the sketches of the revoked route and all other data filed there with, the written decision, and all other relevant documentation. The City Council will then reconsider the Public Works Director's decision and either affirm or reverse it. The City Council's decision shall be final. 
(§ 1, Ord. 003-12, eff. October 18, 2013)  
Sec. 4-9.2209. - Routes designated. 
The City Council designates the following roadway segments as terminal access routes in accordance with Vehicle Code § 35401.5(d). 
(a)  Bogue Road, within the City limits between Highway 99 and Garden Highway. 
(b)  Lincoln Road, within the City Limits between Highway 99 and Garden Highway. 
(c)  Garden Highway, between Lincoln Road to Bogue Road. 
(d)  Burns Drive, between Hassett Avenue and Putman Avenue. 
(e)  Epley Drive, between Garden Highway and Putman Avenue. 
(f)  Hassett Avenue, between Epley Drive and Burns Drive. 
(g)  Putman Avenue, between Epley Drive and Burns Drive. 
(h)  Tharp Road, between Butte House Road and Highway 20. 
(i)  Butte House Road, between Harter Parkway and Tharp Road. 
(j)  Harter Parkway, between Butte House Road and Highway 20. 
(k)  George Washington Boulevard, between Highway 20 and the south intersection of Industrial Drive. 
(l)  Industrial Drive, in its entirety from the north intersection with George Washington Boulevard to the south intersection with George Washington Boulevard;. 
(m)  Walton Avenue, between Highway 20 and Sunsweet Boulevard. 
(n)  Sunsweet Boulevard, between Walton Avenue and Highway 99. 
(o)  Civic Center Boulevard, from Highway 20 to the southerly terminus. 
Notwithstanding the application process set forth in this chapter, interstate trucks may use these access routes without the need to apply for designation of the route. The Public Works Director is directed to ensure that appropriate signage is installed along these routes. 
(§ 1, Ord. 003-12, eff. October 18, 2013)  
Sec. 4-9.2210. - Prohibition. 
No person shall drive an interstate truck upon any street not designated as a terminal access route pursuant to this article. 
(§ 1, Ord. 003-12, eff. October 18, 2013)  
Sec. 4-9.2211. - Prohibited interstate truck parking. 
In accordance with the provisions of this article relating to terminal access routes, no person shall at any time cause interstate trucks or semitrailers to be parked upon any street not so designated as a terminal access route in accordance with this article. Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the parking of interstate trucks and semitrailers shall be prohibited on the following terminal access route streets or portions thereof: 
(a)  Bogue Road, within the City limits between Highway 99 and Garden Highway. 
(b)  Lincoln Road, within the City limits between Highway 99 and Garden Highway. 
(c)  Garden Highway, between Lincoln Road to Bogue Road. 
(d)  Burns Drive, between Hassett Avenue and Putman Avenue. 
(e)  Epley Drive, between Garden Highway and Putman Avenue. 
(f)  Hassett Avenue, between Epley Drive and Burns Drive. 
(g)  Putman Avenue, between Epley Drive and Burns Drive. 
(h)  Tharp Road, between Butte House Road and Highway 20. 
(i)  Butte House Road, between Harter Parkway and Tharp Road. 
(j)  Harter Parkway, between Butte House Road and Highway 20. 
(k)  Walton Avenue, between Highway 20 and Sunsweet Boulevard. 
(l)  Sunsweet Boulevard, between Walton Avenue and Highway 99. 
(m)  Civic Center Boulevard, from Highway 20 to the southerly terminus. 
Signs shall be installed prohibiting the parking of interstate trucks and semitrailers on such streets. The posting or marking of non-terminal access route streets shall not be required to prohibit the parking of interstate trucks and semitrailers on such streets. The City Council may by resolution designate additional terminal access route streets or portion of any terminal access route streets, areas where the parking of interstate trucks and or semitrailers shall be prohibited and direct that appropriate signage is installed on such streets. 
(§ 1, Ord. 003-12, eff. October 18, 2013)  
CHAPTER 10. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 4-10.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the proper and effective use of alarm systems by setting forth regulations governing burglary and robbery alarm systems within the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.020. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Alarm agent" shall mean a person employed by an alarm company operator whose duties include selling on premises, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, monitoring, replacing, moving, or installing on or in any building, structure, or facility any alarm system within the City. "Alarm agent" also can mean a person who responds to or monitors an alarm system, or a person who manages or supervises a person employed by an alarm company to perform any duties described herein. Such agents shall be licensed in accordance with the provisions of Business and Professions Code § 7590 et seq., commonly known as the "Alarm Company Act." 
(b)  "Alarm company" shall mean, the business of any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, monitoring, altering, replacing, moving, or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, monitored, or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure, or facility within the City. Such companies shall be licensed in accordance with the provisions of Business and Professions Code § 7590 et seq., commonly known as the "Alarm Company Act." Additionally, such companies shall be licensed as required in this Code Section 3-4.01 et seq. 
(c)  "Alarm system" shall mean any mechanical or electrical device(s) designed to emit a sound or generate a signal by telephone, telephone line, or directly to a police or other emergency dispatch room, or which produces an audible or visible signal designed to notify persons of an emergency situation, the commission of an unlawful act, or the detection of an unauthorized entry or attempted unauthorized entry into a building, structure, or facility. 
The following devices shall not constitute an alarm system: 
(1)  Alarm devices affixed to motor vehicles (as defined in Vehicle Code §§ 415, 630, and 635), vessels or aircraft unless it is fixed in one position and used as a business or residence. 
(2)  Alarm devices installed on a temporary basis by the Yuba City Police Department or authorized by the Chief of Police for law enforcement purposes. 
(3)  Hand held portable personal safety devices that do not trigger an alarm system. 
(d)  "Alarm user" shall mean any person using an alarm system at his/her place of business or residence. 
(e)  "Answering service" shall mean a telephone answering service which provides as one of its services the receiving, on a continuous basis, of signals from alarm systems. Immediately upon receiving the signal, the answering service relays a message to the Yuba City Police Department. 
(f)  "Applicant" shall mean any person who files an application for a new or renewal alarm permit as provided in this chapter. 
(g)  "Automatic calling/dialing system" shall mean any alarm system which automatically sends over telephone lines, by direct connect or otherwise, a recorded message indicating an emergency situation exists or an alarm signal. 
(h)  "Burglary alarm" shall mean any electrical or mechanical device installed at a residence or business and designed or used to instantly emit a signal when there is an unlawful entry or unlawful attempted entry to an alarm system protected area. 
(i)  "Canceled alarm" shall mean a police response to an alarm signal, where the response is canceled by the alarm company or an authorized person at the alarm site prior to the arrival of any responding police unit. 
(j)  "Central station" shall mean an office to which alarm systems are connected, where operators supervise circuits, and where security or other personnel are continuously present to investigate alarm signals and as necessary relay a message by live voice to the Yuba City Police Department. 
(k)  "Chief of Police" shall mean the person who occupies the office of Chief of Police for the Yuba City Police Department, or any person(s) the Chief of Police designates to administer this chapter. 
(l)  "City" shall mean the City of Yuba City, California. 
(m)  "Direct connect or line" shall mean a telephone line leading directly from a central station or answering service to the communications center of the Yuba City Police Department which is used solely to report alarm signals on a person-to-person basis. 
(n)  "Emergency" shall mean any condition which results in, or which could result in, the response of police in an authorized emergency vehicle, or any condition which jeopardizes or could jeopardize public safety and results in, or could result in, the evacuation of any area, building, structure, facility, vehicle or any other place which an individual may enter. 
(o)  "Excessive false alarms" shall mean three or more false alarms within a 365-day period. 
(p)  "False alarm" shall mean the activation of an alarm system which results in a response or commencement of a response by the Yuba City Police Department where, after having completed a timely investigation of the alarm site, no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense exists. 
(q)  "False alarm service fee" shall mean the amount a permittee shall pay the City of Yuba City for excessive false alarms to defray the cost of responding to false alarms. 
(r)  "Infraction" shall mean an infraction as defined in the California Penal Code as a public offense which is not punishable by imprisonment. Unless otherwise specified, infractions under this chapter are punishable as provided in Section 1-2.02 of this Code. 
(s)  "Notice" shall mean written notice, served either by personal service or by United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at the last known address. Service of such notice shall be effective upon the completion of personal service or 48 hours after the placing of the notice in the custody of United States Postal Service. 
(t)  "Panic alarm" shall mean any electrical or mechanical device designed to enable an individual, 24 hours a day, to instantly alert others of the existence of a residential emergency by the transmitting of a signal and/or sounding of audible alarm when activated. 
(u)  "Permittee" shall mean the person, to whom an alarm system permit is issued, and his or her agents and representatives. 
(v)  "Person" shall mean natural persons without regard to number or gender, and any partnership, corporation, or other type of legal entity. 
(w)  "Primary trunk line" shall mean a telephone line leading directly to the communications center of the Yuba City Police Department, including 9-1-1 emergency lines, used to respond to emergency calls on a person-to-person basis. 
(x)  "Responding party" shall mean the person(s) identified on the alarm application as the person(s) who will respond to an alarm, or render service or repairs to the alarm, on a 24-hour basis, including holidays. 
(y)  "Revoke or revocation" shall mean the cancellation of an alarm permit. 
(z)  "Robbery alarm" shall mean any device or system designed to operate 24 hours a day to instantly transmit a silent signal from a business to alert others of an actual robbery in progress. 
(aa)  "Siren" shall mean any audible noise similar to the sound that authorized emergency vehicles are required to produce under conditions set forth in Vehicle Code § 21055. 
(bb)  "Suspension" shall mean that a person with an otherwise valid permit is prohibited from operating an alarm system for a period of time determined by the Chief of Police. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.030. - Alarm system standards and regulations. 
The Chief of Police may prescribe minimum standards and regulations and/or amend standards and regulations for the construction and maintenance of all alarm systems installed within the City. All alarm systems to be installed shall be installed, monitored, and maintained by licensed personnel pursuant to the provisions of Business and Professions Code § 7590 et seq. and all other related Federal and State provisions. The Chief of Police may require inspection of an alarm system installed within the City during the permitting process. 
Required and prohibited standards for alarm systems: 
(a)  Sirens. No alarm system which emits the sound of a siren shall be installed or connected. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of certain electronic horns or howlers that may be approved by the Chief of Police, provided such devices do not emit a sound similar to a siren. Anyone who installs, permits the installation, or uses an alarm system that emits the sound of a siren, is guilty of an infraction as provided in Section 1-2.02 of this Code. 
(b)  Automatic shutoff. Any alarm system that is designed to emit a sound audible outside the structure in which the alarm system is lawfully installed, maintained and operated shall include an automatic shutoff device that shuts off the alarm system within 15 minutes of the initial activation. Any person who knowingly installs, causes the installation of, maintains or uses an audible alarm system without the required shutoff is guilty of an infraction as provided in Section 1-2.02 of this Code. 
(c)  Automatic calling/dialing systems. Persons using automatic dialing devices shall have such devices transmit directly to a central station, answering service or other device not prohibited below. 
(1)  No automatic dialing device shall be interconnected to dial the 9-1-1 operator. Any person who knowingly interconnects or permits the interconnection of an automatic dialing device to the 9-1-1 operator is guilty of an infraction as provided in Section 1-2.02 of this Code. 
(2)  No automatic dialing device shall be interconnected to a primary trunk line of the Yuba City Police Department. Any person who interconnects or permits the interconnection of an automatic dialing device to a primary trunk of the Yuba City Police Department is guilty of an infraction as provided in Section 1-2.02 of this Code. 
(d)  Robbery alarm. A robbery alarm system shall be activated only in the event of an emergency. Any other use is prohibited. Any violation of this section is an infraction as provided in Section 1-2.02 of this Code. 
(e)  Panic alarm. Any person who activates a panic alarm for reason other than signifying an emergency is guilty of an infraction as provided in Section 1-2.02 of this Code. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.040. - Permits; required. 
(a)  Users. No person shall cause an alarm system to be installed, connected, operated or maintained upon any property within the City without first obtaining an alarm permit. The permit shall be issued in accordance with this chapter. Any person who causes an alarm system to be installed, connected, operated or maintained without first obtaining a permit as required by this section is guilty of an infraction as provided in Section 1-2.02 of this Code. 
(b)  Alarm companies—Installation or connection. No alarm company shall install or connect any alarm system upon any property located within the City without first performing one of the following: 
(1)  Obtain a copy of the alarm system permit from the alarm user; or 
(2)  Obtain a copy of the alarm permit fee receipt from the alarm user. 
(c)  Proof of compliance required. One of the copies of the permit referenced above shall be maintained in the alarm company files for the period of the warranty of the alarm system or while the alarm system is serviced by the installing alarm company, whichever is the longest. An alarm company that installs, connects or maintains an alarm system without complying with this section is guilty of an infraction as provided in Section 1-2.02 of this Code. 
(d)  Unauthorized installation or service. An alarm company may install, connect or maintain an alarm system only after it has established that the intended user has a valid permit or has complied with the provisions of this chapter for the issuance of a permit. If the Chief of Police notifies an alarm company of a denial, non-renewal, suspension, revocation or of other conduct rendering it illegal for the intended user to operate the alarm, the alarm company shall discontinue service to that alarm system within 24 hours of such notification. Any alarm company that fails to comply with this section is guilty of an infraction as provided in Section 1-2.02 of this Code. 
(e)  Alarm usage without a permit. Whenever any person shall cause an alarm system to be installed, connected, operated or maintained without first obtaining a permit as required by this section, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee shall be collected whether or not a permit is then, or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.050. - Permits; applications; content. 
(a)  Applications and renewals. Applications and renewals can be personally delivered or mailed to the Chief of Police on forms he or she may prescribe. The ability to make applications and renewals online will be considered by the City of Yuba City. Applications shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the responding party. 
(3)  The address where the alarm system is or will be installed: (i) if the address is a residence, the name and telephone number of the person(s) occupying the residence; or (ii) if the address is a business, the name, address and telephone number of the local manager or local contact person responsible for securing the premises, and the telephone number of the business which would be answered should an employee be inside the business. 
(4)  The name, address and telephone number of the company installing the alarm system, and the name, address and telephone number of the company monitoring the alarm system. If the installing company is not known, the name, address and telephone number of the company who will be maintaining the alarm system will suffice. 
(5)  The manufacturer's name and model number of the alarm being installed. 
(6)  Such additional information as the Chief of Police shall reasonably deem necessary for the evaluation and proper processing of the permit application. 
(b)  Applications confidential. In the interest of public safety, and as per Government Code § 6254(f), all information contained in and gathered through the alarm permit applications, records relating to alarm dispatch requests, and applications for appeals shall be held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the City and by any third-party administrator or employees of a third-party administrator with access to such information. 
(c)  Changes to applications. Whenever any change occurs to the information contained on the application relating to the information required by this section, written notice must be given to the Chief of Police within ten days after such change. 
(d)  Denial of application. An alarm system permit may be denied if the application is not in the form required and does not contain all information or fees required by this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.060. - Permit; issuance; term. 
(a)  Issuance. Upon the filing of an application containing all of the information required by Section 4-10.050, the Chief of Police may issue an alarm system permit. 
(b)  Three-year terms. Each alarm system permit that is issued shall expire three years after the date of issuance or renewal, unless otherwise suspended or revoked at an earlier time. The date of issuance or renewal shall be the date shown on the alarm system permit issued by the Chief of Police. If a permit is not renewed, or it is revoked, the alarm system may not be operated until a new permit is issued. 
(c)  Permit termination. If an application for renewal is not received by the Chief of Police within 30 days of the permit expiration date, the permit will be retroactively cancelled on the expiration date and the permittee will be guilty of an infraction each day of continued use of the alarm system after the date of cancellation. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.070. - Permit; fees; receipt. 
(a)  Fees. Every initial application, subsequent renewal and reapplication for an alarm system permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable permit fee. The fee is established to defray costs of processing applications and permits, and shall be in addition to any other permit fee imposed by the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(b)  Amount of fee. The fee imposed shall be as stated in Section 3-8.04 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(c)  Fee receipt. Applicants may request a receipt for the permit fee at the time the fee is paid. The receipt may serve as a temporary alarm permit for a period of time not to exceed 45 days commencing the day following payment of fee. 
(d)  Fee waiver. The permittee may request a waiver of fees from the Chief of Police if the permittee has more than one system at the same physical address, the location is under one name, the same company monitors the alarm systems and the same person(s) will respond to the alarms. This request for waiver of fees must accompany the application for the permit. Should a wavier be granted, the permittee will be responsible for all systems and all alarm responses will be calculated as though there was only one alarm system. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.080. - Applicability of chapter to existing alarm systems. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all alarm systems which were installed, connected, operated or maintained on or prior to the date on which this chapter becomes effective. 
(b)  Unauthorized alarm systems. For all alarm systems for which there is no permit, or the permit is not in good standing, a permit shall be obtained within 30 days from and after the date on which this chapter becomes effective. All alarm permits that were duly issued prior to the date that this chapter becomes effective shall remain as valid permits but will be subject to terms and conditions of this chapter. Upon renewal, the alarm user must apply for a new permit under the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(c)  Inapplicability. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alarm systems being used or installed within the City but under the law enforcement responsibility of the Sutter County Sheriff's Department, until 60 days after the Yuba City Police Department acquires the law enforcement responsibility of those systems. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.090. - Transferability of permit. 
Any alarm system permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be valid only as to the permittee named on the permit, and only for the particular alarm system or alarm systems specified on the permit. No alarm system permit shall in any manner be transferred or assigned without the consent of the Chief of Police. Any request to transfer an alarm system permit shall be on a completed alarm permit application and accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount equal to the current renewal fees as stated in Section 3-8.04 of this Code. Successful transfer of an alarm system permit shall extend the permit for a period of three years from the date issued to the new permittee. False alarms previously charged to the transferor shall not be charged to transferee. However, the Chief of Police may deny any request to transfer an alarm system permit where, after investigation, it appears that the transfer is requested for the purpose of allowing the transferor to evade responsibility for prior false alarms. 
(a)  Notice of denial. The Chief of Police shall give the permit applicant written notice of the denial to transfer. The notice of denial shall be mailed not later than ten days following the decision to deny the transfer. The notice shall include the grounds for denial. 
(b)  Appeal of denial. The decision by the Chief of Police to deny an application to transfer or assign an alarm permit may be appealed pursuant to Section 4.10-130 of this Code. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.100. - False alarm service fee. 
(a)  Fee. Any user of an alarm system which produces excessive false alarms shall pay a fee to the City as established in Section 3-8.04 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(1)  Failure to pay the penalty when due may, in addition to any other available remedy, lead to suspension and/or revocation of the alarm permit and additional fees associated with collection. 
(2)  Penalties for excessive false alarms may be waived by the Chief of Police or designee upon presentation of substantial evidence showing extenuating, mitigating, or extraordinary facts and circumstances, and where the permittee has undertaken action to correct alarm system deficiencies. 
(3)  Penalties may be waived by the Chief of Police for false alarms caused by extreme acts of nature. 
(4)  A canceled alarm is considered a false alarm unless the Chief of Police determines that no resources were expended in responding to the canceled alarm. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.110. - Grounds for suspension, denial and/or revocation. 
(a)  Grounds. The following shall constitute grounds for denial, suspension and/or revocation of the alarm permit: 
(1)  Failure to pay fines and/or charges imposed as a result of excessive false alarms at any alarm site; 
(2)  Excessive false alarms without remedial measures deemed adequate by the Chief of Police; 
(3)  Failure to comply with standards or regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter; or 
(4)  Where the applicant, permittee, or the employee or agent of the applicant or permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.120. - Denial, suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  Order. If the Chief of Police denies, suspends or revokes a permit issued under this chapter, the Chief of Police shall serve the permittee with a written order stating the reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation of the permit and indicate that the permittee may request a hearing. The order shall be effective immediately upon service and, unless there is a separate indication that there is a crime in progress, the Chief of Police may refuse or reduce the priority of police response to the alarm site after the suspension or revocation of an alarm permit. 
(b)  Illegal operation. It is unlawful to operate or use any alarm system after service of a notice of denial, suspension, or revocation of an alarm permit and is punishable as an infraction as provided in Section 1-2.02 of this Code. 
(c)  Reconsideration. The Chief of Police may reconsider the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit or reinstate a suspended permit, provided that within 30 days of the denial or suspension, the applicant or permittee has established to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police that the alarm system will be operated in compliance with this chapter, by complying with the following: 
(1)  Provide a letter from an alarm company licensed by the State of California indicating that the alarm has been completely checked, any mechanical malfunctions have been repaired and the responding party has been trained on how to operate the alarm; 
(2)  Agree that an agent of the business, or, if the alarm is residential, a responsible party, shall respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes of notification, each time the alarm is activated; 
(3)  Review correct alarm setting procedures with every resident, agent, employee or other person who may be responsible for user error alarm activations; 
(4)  Pay in full all outstanding excessive false alarm fines or charges; and 
(5)  Other reasonable procedures, conditions, or requirements as may be established by the Chief of Police. 
(d)  Final decision. Any denial, suspension or revocation of a permit which has not been reconsidered by the Chief of Police within 30 days of such denial, suspension or revocation shall be final. A revoked permit shall not be reissued and will be deemed cancelled. Six months after the denial, suspension or revocation of an alarm permit, a new application may be filed pursuant to Section 4-10.050. 
(e)  Expiration during suspension. Should the alarm permit's expiration date occur during a suspension, the permittee is required to apply for a renewal as stated in Section 4-10.060 of this chapter. However, the permit will remain suspended until the end of the suspension is reached. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.130. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of Police in denying, suspending or revoking an alarm permit, in denying the transfer of an alarm permit or in assessing a false alarm service fee may appeal such decision pursuant to Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code. 
(a)  Stay. During the pendency of said appeal, action by the Chief of Police may be stayed. 
(b)  Notice. 
(1)  Notice of the appeal shall also be mailed by the appellant to the Chief of Police. 
(2)  Notice of appeal shall include the name, current address and telephone number of the appellant, a statement of the action which is being appealed, and a statement of the facts and law on which the appeal is based. In addition, the appeal shall be accompanied by a copy of the relevant applications, renewals, and requests submitted to the Chief of Police and all notices and decisions received from the Chief of Police. 
(3)  The timely receipt of a proper notice of appeal shall not affect a suspension, revocation or service fee assessment unless the appellant seeks and is granted a stay by the Chief of Police. A request for stay shall set forth facts demonstrating that the appellant would suffer an extraordinary hardship if the stay is not granted. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.140. - Prohibitions. 
Anyone who activates any alarm system for the purpose of summoning Police personnel, except in the event of what is reasonably believed to be an emergency is guilty of an infraction as provided in Section 1-2.02 of this Code. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.150. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, and phrase of this chapter, irrespective of the fact that any one of the sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this chapter are declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.160. - Fee exemptions. 
The United States, State of California, counties, municipal corporations, departments thereof and other governmental entities are exempt from application fees required in Section 4-10.070. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.170. - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
Sec. 4-10.180. - Public nuisance. 
Any alarm system is a public nuisance when: 
(1)  The alarm system generates an audible sound on the premises for a period longer than 15 minutes; or 
(2)  The alarm system generates excessive false alarm. 
(§ 2, Ord. 003-09, eff. March 5, 2009)  
CHAPTER 11. - WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS 
 
Sec. 4-11.01. - Discharging—Permit required. 
Any person who fires or discharges any pistol, gun, rifle, firearm, cannon, anvil loaded with powder, bow, air gun, or other device whereby a shot, bullet, or other dangerous missile is projected in the City without having first obtained a special permit in writing from the Police Chief, which permit shall designate the place and the time of firing or discharging, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(§ 1, Ord. 001-02, eff. February 14, 2002)  
Secs. 4-11.02, 4-11.03. - Reserved.  
CHAPTER 12. - REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS  
Article 1. - General 
 
Sec. 4-12.105. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Yuba City through disease control of animals as a public nuisance. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.110. - Authority. 
(a)  Authority for this chapter derives from applicable sections of the following California Codes: Business and Professions Code, California Code of Regulations, Civil Code, Fish and Game Code, Food and Agricultural Code, Government Code, Health and Safety Code and the Penal Code. 
(b)  The City Council hereby appoints the Community Services Director of Sutter County who, under its direction, will oversee the administration of the provisions of this chapter and all applicable statutes of the State of California and shall thereupon have charge of the public animal shelter established in Section 4-12.120. The Community Services Director shall employ Animal Control Officers as needed to carry out the provisions of this chapter, which shall constitute Animal Control Services. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.111. - Authority as peace officers. 
Animal Control Officers are not peace officers but may exercise the powers of arrest of a peace officer as specified in Penal Code § 836 and the power to serve warrants as specified in Penal Code §§ 1523 and 1530 during the course of, and within the scope of their employment, after completing a course in the exercise of those powers pursuant to Penal Code § 832. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.112. - Uniforms and badges. 
(a)  Animal Control Officers employed in Animal Control Services while engaged in the execution of their duties, shall each wear a uniform as determined by the Community Services Director. 
(b)  Animal Control Officers employed in Animal Control Services, while engaged in the execution of their duties, shall each wear in plain view a badge having the words, "Animal Control Officer" engraved thereon. No person who is not a duly appointed and qualified Animal Control Officer shall represent himself or herself to be, or shall attempt to act as an Animal Control Officer. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.114. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the Community Services Director to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and it shall be the duty of every City officer to cooperate with employees of the Community Services Department in the enforcement of their duties related to this chapter. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.115. - Duty of general public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist, hinder, molest, or obstruct any duly authorized representative of the Community Services Director in the performance of his or her duty as provided in this chapter. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.120. - Establishment of public animal shelter. 
A public animal shelter is hereby provided and the same, and any branches thereof, shall be located and established at such places in the County of Sutter as shall be fixed from time to time by the City Council. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.121. - Delivery to animal control services. 
Every person taking up any animal under the provisions of this chapter and every person finding any lost, strayed or stolen animal shall, within 24 hours thereafter, give notice thereof to Animal Control Services. 
Any person into whose custody such animal may in the meantime be placed, shall be required to either: 
(a)  Deliver such animal to Animal Control Services without fee or charge, or 
(b)  Deliver such animal to a society for the prevention of cruelty to animals shelter, humane society shelter, or rescue group approved by, and registered with, the Community Services Department. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.122. - Care of animals by animal control services. 
Animal Control Services shall provide all animals in their custody with necessary and prompt veterinary care, nutrition, and shelter, and treat them humanely. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.123. - Diseased animals to be destroyed. 
Every animal taken into custody by Animal Control Services which, by reason of age, injury, disease or other good cause, should be destroyed, or which is dangerous to keep impounded, shall be forthwith destroyed by Animal Control Services in a humane manner. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.130. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership that willfully violates any of the provisions or fails to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction, except that nothing contained in this ordinance shall be deemed to bar any legal or equitable remedy to which the City of Yuba City or any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or governmental entity may have to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed violation of this chapter. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003; § 1, Ord. 004-04, eff. May 20, 2004)  
Sec. 4-12.140. - Animal control policies and procedures. 
Animal Control Services shall maintain a manual of policies and procedures implementing this Code and any other applicable Ordinances duly adopted by the City of Yuba City. The manual of policies and procedures shall detail the records to be kept and the manner in which they are to be kept. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.141. - Deposit of funds. 
Animal Control Services shall deposit all fees and all fines collected under the provisions of this chapter with the Sutter County Treasurer in a timely manner. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.150. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Assistance dogs" shall mean dogs specially trained as guide dogs, signal dogs, or service dogs. 
(b)  "Nuisance" shall mean anything which is injurious to health, or is indecent, or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by a community or neighborhood, or by any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin or any public park, square, street, or highway. 
(c)  "Potentially dangerous dog" shall have the same definition as contained in Food and Agricultural Code § 31602. 
(d)  "Quarantine," as used in this section, shall mean the strict confinement, upon the private premises of the owner, under restraint by leash, closed cage, or paddock, of all animals specified in the order for quarantine. 
(e)  "Rabies," as used in this chapter, includes rabies, and any other animal disease dangerous to human beings that may be declared by the State of California Health Department as coming under Health and Safety Code. 
(f)  "Ratproofing" shall consist of adequately covering or sealing all holes or means of ingress to such premises by which rats can enter in and upon such premises, save and except properly constructed and protected doors, windows, and ventilating shafts. With regard to open land, ratproofing shall consist of eliminating the harborage of the rat population. All costs of eliminating rats and ratproofing shall be borne by the person owning or in lawful possession of the premises ratproofed or from which rats are to be eliminated. 
(g)  "Vicious dog" shall have the same definition as contained in Food and Agricultural Code § 31603. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.190. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Article 2. - Rabies 
 
Sec. 4-12.200. - Duty to report. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal showing symptoms of rabies or acting in a manner which would lead to a reasonable suspicion that it may have rabies, to report that fact immediately to the Health Officer, the Environmental Health Division of Sutter County, or Animal Control Services with full information about the animal. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any person having knowledge of any person or animal that has been bitten by a rabid or suspected rabid animal, to report the incident immediately to the Health Officer, the Environmental Health Division, or Animal Control Services with full information about the incident. 
(c)  When either the Environmental Health Division, or Animal Control Services is notified pursuant to subsections (a) or (b) of this section, the information shall be reported immediately to the Health Officer and thereafter any directions from the Health Officer regarding the control of disease or other quarantine of any animals, or any other directions shall be carried out by Animal Control Services. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.201. - Rabies investigation. 
(a)  When rabies are suspected the Health Officer shall make or cause an inspection or examination of such animal to be made by a licensed veterinarian until the existence or nonexistence of rabies in such animal is established by such veterinarian. Such animal shall be kept isolated in a shelter, veterinary hospital, or other adequate facility in a manner approved by the Health Officer, and shall not be killed or released for at least ten days after the onset of symptoms suggestive of rabies, after which time such animal may be released by the Health Officer. 
(b)  Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of the Health Officer or Community Services Director, or any peace officer, may enter at reasonable times upon any premises where any dog or other animal is kept, or believed by him or her to be kept, for the purposes of taking up, seizing, or impounding any dog or other animal, for the purposes of ascertaining whether such dog or other animal is afflicted or infected with rabies or other contagious disease. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.202. - Rabies quarantine. 
If rabies is known to exist within an area, the Health Officer may establish a rabies quarantine and shall define the boundaries of the quarantine area and specify the animals subject to quarantine, and all such animals within the quarantined area shall be kept in strict confinement upon the private premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer at all times until the quarantine is terminated by the Health Officer. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.203. - Failure to quarantine or produce animal. 
No person shall violate, after notice, any order of the Health Officer concerning the isolation or quarantine of an animal, or species subject to rabies, that has bitten or otherwise exposed a person to rabies; nor, after such order, fail to produce such animal upon demand of the Health Officer of his or her duly authorized representative. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.204. - Isolation of rabid animals or clinically suspected rabid animals. 
Any rabid animal, clinically suspected rabid animal, or biting animal shall be isolated in strict confinement as follows: 
(a)  In the Sutter County Animal Shelter, a veterinary hospital, or other adequate facility, under proper care and under the observation of a licensed veterinarian, in a manner approved by the Health Officer, and shall not be killed or released for at least ten days after the onset of symptoms suggestive of rabies. 
(b)  At the discretion of the Health Officer, in a place and manner approved by the Health Officer and observed for at least 14 days (or ten days for dogs and cats) after the day of infliction of the bite. As an alternative to the ten-day isolation of dogs and cats, dogs or cats which have been isolated in strict confinement in a veterinary hospital or other adequate facility, in a manner approved by the Health Officer, under proper care and under observation of a licensed veterinarian may be released from isolation by the Health Officer after five days of veterinary observation if upon conducting a thorough physical examination on the fifth day or more after the infliction of the bite, the observing veterinarian certifies that there are no clinical signs or symptoms of any disease. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the Health Officer may authorize, with the permission of the owner and other legal requirements permitting, the euthanasia of a biting animal for the purpose of laboratory examination for rabies using the florescent rabies antibody (FRA) test in an approved public health laboratory. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.205. - Isolation of animals bitten by a known rabid or suspected rabid animal. 
Any animal of a species subject to rabies which has been bitten by a known rabid or suspected rabid animal or has been in intimate contact with a rabid or suspected rabid animal shall be quarantined in a place or manner approved by the Health Officer, for a period of six months, or destroyed after ten days from the onset of symptoms, with the exception that the following alternatives are permitted in the case of dogs and cats: 
(a)  If a dog over one year of age has been vaccinated against rabies within 36 months but not less than 30 days with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by the State Department of Health Services for a maximum immunity duration of at least 36 months, the dog may be revaccinated immediately (within 48 hours) in a manner prescribed by the State Department of Health Services and quarantined in a place and manner approved by the Health Officer for a period of 30 days following revaccination. 
(b)  If a dog under one year of age has been vaccinated against rabies within 12 months but not less than 30 days with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by the State Department of Health Services, the dog may be revaccinated immediately (within 48 hours) in a manner prescribed by the State Department of Health Services and quarantined in a place and a manner approved by the Health Officer for a period of 30 days. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.206. - Rabies vaccination required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring, or having the care, custody, or possession of any dog to keep or maintain such dog in any place in the City of Yuba City, unless such dog has been vaccinated as provided herein. 
(a)  The vaccination of dogs four months of age or older is required and shall be held a requisite to licensing. Completion of the licensing procedure consists of issuance of a license tag bearing the license data and shall be carried out only after presentation of a current valid official vaccination certificate. Vaccination certificates shall show all of the following: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the dog's owner or custodian; 
(2)  The description of the dog, including breed, color, age and sex; 
(3)  The date of immunization; 
(4)  The expiration date of the vaccination; 
(5)  The type of rabies vaccine administered; 
(6)  The name of the manufacturer; and 
(7)  The number of the vaccine used. 
(b)  Vaccination certificates shall bear the signature of the veterinarian administering the vaccine or a signature authorized by him or her, and in addition such certificate shall be legibly stamped, printed, or typed with his or her name, address and telephone number, with the exception that at dog vaccination clinics conducted pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 1920(f), vaccination certificates approved by the Health Officer may be used provided that the specific clinic is identified upon the vaccination certificate and records are maintained containing the information specified under subsection (a)(5) and (6) above. 
(c)  Every duly licensed veterinarian, after vaccinating any dog, shall immediately present the original certificate to the owner or harborer of the dog, and shall deliver the duplicate copy of the certificate to Animal Control Services, and shall retain the triplicate copy thereof. 
(d)  No person who owns or harbors any dog shall fail or refuse to exhibit the certificate required by this section upon demand of any person charged with its enforcement. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.207. - Revaccination intervals. 
Dogs shall be considered to be properly vaccinated when injected at four months of age or older with an approved canine rabies vaccine and revaccinated in accordance with the following conditions: 
(a)  Primary vaccination. Primary vaccination shall be defined as the initial inoculation of an approved canine rabies vaccine administered to young dogs between the ages of four to 12 months. 
(b)  Revaccination. Dogs shall be revaccinated one year (12 months) after the primary vaccination with an approved type of rabies vaccine. Dogs receiving vaccination after primary vaccination or any dog receiving its initial rabies vaccination over 12 months of age shall be revaccinated thereafter at least once every three years (36 months) with an approved type of rabies vaccine. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.208. - Laboratory examination of rabid animals, clinically suspected rabid animals or biting animals which die or have been killed. 
If any rabid animal, clinically suspected rabid animal or biting animal dies or has been killed, adequate brain specimens shall be obtained and examined in a public health laboratory approved by the State Department of Health. No person shall destroy or allow to be destroyed the brain of an animal of a species subject to rabies that has bitten or otherwise exposed a person before the destruction of such brain has been authorized by the Health Officer. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.210. - Dog licenses required. 
(a)  Except as provided in Section 4-12.218, any person who owns, harbors, keeps, or controls any dog over the age of four months shall obtain a dog license from the City of Yuba City. The license shall be obtained not later than either 30 days after the dog attains the age of four months or 30 days after the dog is first brought into the City of Yuba City. Dog licenses may be issued for a term of one, two, or three years at the option of the owner, subject to compliance with Sections 4-12.206 and 4-12.207. 
(b)  Animal Control Services shall not license any dog until it has been vaccinated with a State-approved vaccine, by injection or other method approved by the Health Officer, and the owner or person in possession of said dog submits a certificate of vaccination for such dog. In no instance shall a dog license be issued for a period beyond the date upon which revaccination expires. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.211. - Dog license fees. 
License fees shall be established by the City Council by resolution. Except as provided in Section 4-12.218, each dog license shall be issued upon payment of all required fees and penalties, and upon compliance with all conditions required for the issuance of a dog license. Each dog license shall expire on the expiration date of the anti-rabies vaccination required pursuant to Section 4-12.206 and Section 4-12.207 (or similar enactment of another jurisdiction). The resolution adopted by the City Council shall specify that: 
(a)  If the license applicant presents a certificate from a licensed veterinarian demonstrating that the dog has been neutered or spayed, the fee for the license shall be reduced by one-half or more. 
(b)  Upon presentation of adequate documentation showing that the owner or custodian is 60 years of age or older, the fee for the license shall be reduced by one-half or more. 
(c)  These reductions are cumulative; the fee for a neutered or spayed dog owned or in the custody of a person over the age of 60 shall be one-fourth the normal fee or less. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.212. - Dog license penalties. 
In the event the owner or person having custody of a dog fails to obtain a license, or fails to renew a license within 30 days after its expiration date, he or she shall pay a penalty, established by the City Council by resolution, which shall be applicable to all owners or persons having custody regardless of age and whether the dog is spayed or neutered. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.213. - Certificate to owner and tags. 
(a)  Animal Control Services shall be the issuing authority for dog licenses. Upon payment of the license fee pursuant to Section 4-12.211, and upon presentation of a valid vaccination certificate, pursuant to Section 4-12.206 and Section 4-12.207, there shall be issued a license certificate showing the following: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the dog's owner or custodian; 
(2)  The description of the dog, including breed, color, age, and sex; 
(3)  The expiration date of the vaccination; 
(4)  The name of the veterinarian administering the vaccine; and 
(5)  The number of the vaccine used. 
Such certificate shall be delivered to the person paying such license fee and one copy shall be retained by Animal Control Services. Animal Control Services shall at the same time issue and deliver to the person receiving such a certificate a tag of such form and design as the Director of Community Services shall designate, with the words "Sutter County Dog License," and a serial number and the expiration date plainly inscribed thereon. The license tag shall be securely affixed to a collar, harness or other device which shall be at all times worn by the licensed dog. 
(b)  The Director of Community Services may, by contract, authorize any duly qualified and licensed veterinarian or employee of the City of Yuba City to license any dog, collect the license fee thereon, and issue to the person paying said fee, the dog tag provided for in subsection (a) at the same time said dog is vaccinated and the certificate of vaccination is issued. Any person so authorized by the Director of Community Services to perform the aforementioned acts shall account to the Director of Community Services not less than once each month for all dogs so licensed and all license fees collected. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.214. - Transfer of license at change of ownership. 
Upon presentation of a valid vaccination certificate as required in Section 4-12.213, and after payment of the fee established by a resolution of the City Council, a current dog license may be transferred from one owner to another by making application to Animal Control Services in a form required by the Community Services Director. At a minimum, the previous owner shall provide Animal Control Services with the name, address, and telephone number of the owner to whom the dog is transferred. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.215. - Tag prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following: 
(a)  Remove any tag from any dog not owned by him or her, or not lawfully in his or her possession or under his or her control. 
(b)  Attach a license tag to the collar of any dog except the dog which is described in the license certificate for such license tag. 
(c)  Place on any dog, or to make, or to have in his or her possession, any counterfeit or imitation of any license tag provided for in this chapter. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.216. - Duplicate license tag issued. 
If any license tag is lost or stolen, the person owning, possessing or having control of the dog for which the license was issued shall be entitled to receive a duplicate of such tag by presenting to Animal Control Services the original certificate showing ownership of said tag and subscribing to an affidavit sufficiently showing that such tag was stolen or lost. Animal Control Services, upon receipt of the fee determined by resolution of the City Council, shall issue a properly numbered duplicate tag and shall keep on file the original affidavit upon which said duplicate tag was issued. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.217. - Exceptions to dog licensing requirements. 
The provisions of this chapter requiring the licensing of dogs shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  Dogs under the age of four months if kept within a sufficient enclosure. 
(b)  Dogs owned by or in custody or under the control of persons who are nonresidents of the City of Yuba City traveling through said City or temporarily sojourning therein for a period not exceeding 30 days. 
(c)  Dogs brought to the City of Yuba City exclusively for the purpose of entering the same in any dog show or exhibition, and which are actually entered in and kept at such show or exhibition. 
(d)  Dogs under the treatment, in the custody or control of animal hospitals. 
(e)  Dogs on sale in duly licensed pet shops, provided that such dogs are kept enclosed within such pet shops. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.218. - Exemption from payment of dog license fees. 
The provisions of Section 4-12.211 requiring payment of dog license fees shall not apply in the following cases. Nonetheless, all such dogs shall be licensed as required by Section 4-12.210, and shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter, including the penalties for failure to have a license pursuant to Section 4-12.212. The exemptions provided for in this section are a privilege which may be revoked for persons or organizations not complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
(a)  Assistance dogs. 
(1)  Whenever a person applies for a dog license for an assistance dog, the person shall sign an affidavit stating as follows: 
"By affixing my signature to this affidavit, I hereby declare I fully understand that Section 365.7 of the Penal Code prohibits any person to knowingly and fraudulently represent himself or herself, through verbal or written notice, to be the owner or trainer of any canine licensed as, to be qualified as, or identified as, a guide dog, signal dog, or service dog, as defined in subdivisions (d), (e), and (f) respectively, of Section 365.5 of the Penal Code and paragraph (6) of subdivision (b) of Section 54.1 of the Civil Code, and that a violation of Section 365.7 of the Penal Code is a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in a City jail not exceeding six (6) months, by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both that imprisonment and fine." 
(2)  Upon the death or retirement of an assistance dog, the owner or person in possession of the assistance dog identification tag shall immediately return the tag to Animal Control Services. 
(b)  Foster care dogs. 
(1)  Bona fide humane societies approved by the Community Services Director may register with Animal Control Services their representatives providing foster care homes to dogs. Representatives so registered may apply for a one-year nonrenewable license under the provisions of this Section for each foster care dog housed at their residence. 
(2)  Upon the adoption of each foster care dog licensed under the provisions of this Section, the tag shall be returned immediately to Animal Control Services along with the name and address of the person by whom the dog was adopted. The address shall be the address where the dog will be located. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.230. - Potentially dangerous and vicious dogs. 
If an Animal Control Officer or a law enforcement officer has investigated and determined that there exists probable cause to believe that a dog is potentially dangerous or vicious, the Director of Community Services, or his or her designee, or the Police Chief or his or her designee, or the Sheriff, or his or her designee, shall petition the court for a hearing to determine whether or not the dog in question should be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. The hearings shall be pursuant to Food and Agricultural Code §§ 31621 through 31626. 
A potentially dangerous dog, while on the owner's property, shall, at all times, be kept indoors, or in a securely fenced yard from which the dog cannot escape, and into which children cannot trespass. A potentially dangerous animal may be off the owner's premises only if it is restrained by a substantial leash of appropriate length, muzzled, and under control. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.231. - Impounding of biting dogs. 
Upon written notice by a duly authorized representative of the Health Officer or Community Services Director, the owner or person having the control of any dog which has, within the preceding ten days, bitten any person or animal shall, upon demand, and in the discretion of the Health Officer as directed by the Health Officer, follow one of the following procedures: 
(a)  Confine such dog to his or her own premises; or 
(b)  Surrender such dog to Animal Control Services who shall impound and keep such dog at the public animal shelter in a separate kennel for a period of not less than ten days; or 
(c)  Surrender such dog to a licensed veterinarian as designated by the Health Officer; or 
(d)  Surrender the dog to Animal Control Services for quarantine at any other location or facility designated and approved by the Health Officer. If the dog is quarantined on the premises of the owner, Animal Control Services shall post a quarantine sign on such premises, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove the sign during the term of such quarantine without the consent of the Health Officer. Any quarantine provided in this section shall be for a term of not less than ten days unless otherwise specified by the Health Officer. During the quarantine period it shall be the duty of the Health Officer, upon being notified by Animal Control Services that such dog has been impounded, to determine whether or not such dog is suffering from any disease. 
(1)  If a duly licensed veterinarian designated by the Health Officer shall determine that such dog is diseased and by reason of such disease is dangerous to persons or to other animals, the Health Officer shall notify Animal Control Services in writing, to destroy such dog. A copy of said notice shall also be served upon the owner or person having control of such dog. 
(2)  If said veterinarian shall determine that such dog is not so diseased, and if the license required for such dog shall have been duly paid for in the then current year, Animal Control Services shall notify by mail the person to whom the license for such dog was issued and at the address from which the dog was surrendered to Animal Control Services and shall, upon demand, release such dog to the owner or person lawfully entitled thereto, upon payment of any charges provided therefor, including expenses of quarantine and veterinary care; provided, however, that if no person lawfully entitled to such dog shall within 72 hours after the date of giving said last mentioned notice, appear at the public shelter and request the release of such dog, and pay said charges, such dog may be sold or destroyed by Animal Control Services in the same manner as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.232. - Muzzling. 
No person shall be compelled to muzzle any dog except pursuant to Section 4-12.230, and in cases of emergencies. Such emergencies shall be deemed to exist only when the Health Officer shall determine and report to the City Council that there is in the City, an epidemic of rabies. When and if the Health Officer so reports then any person who owns or has the charge, care, control, or custody of any dog shall cause such dog to be muzzled and to remain muzzled, except when such dog is eating, until the Health Officer shall declare publicly and officially that such epidemic is at an end. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Article 3. - Dogs 
 
Sec. 4-12.300. - Duty of Animal Control Services to seize and impound strays. 
It shall be the duty of Animal Control Services to seize and impound, subject to the provisions of this chapter, all stray, unleashed or unrestrained dogs found within the City of Yuba City, regardless of whether the dogs are licensed or unlicensed; and for that purpose the duly authorized employees of Animal Control Services may go upon private property to enforce this chapter, or to collect and impound dogs. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.301. - Entering upon premises. 
(a)  Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of the Health Officer or Community Services Director, or any peace officer may enter at reasonable times upon any premises where any dog is kept, or believed by him or her to be kept, for the purpose of taking up, seizing, or impounding any dog running at large, or for the purpose of ascertaining whether such dog is licensed as required by this chapter, or for the purpose of inspecting the premises to ascertain whether by law of the City, or the County, or the State relating to the care, treatment, or impounding of dogs is being violated, or for the purpose of enforcing any other provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law or ordinance of the City of Yuba City, Animal Control Officers shall not seize or impound a dog for the violation requiring a dog to be leashed or issue citations for violation of such leash requirements when the dog has not strayed from, and is upon, private property owned by the dog owner or the person who has a right to control the dog, or upon private property to which the dog owner or person who has the right to control the dog has a right of possession. 
(c)  A dog that has strayed from but then returned to the private property of his or her owner or the person who has a right to control the dog shall not be seized or impounded, but in such a case a citation may be issued; provided, however, that if in such a situation the owner or person who has a right to control the dog is not home, the dog may be impounded, but Animal Control Officers shall post a notice of such impounding on the front door of the living unit of the owner or person who has a right to control the dog. Such notice shall state the following: that the dog has been impounded, where the dog is being held, the name, address, and telephone number of Animal Control Services, and an indication of ultimate disposition of the dog if no action to regain it is taken within a specified period of time by its owner or the person who has a right to control the dog. 
(d)  This section shall not otherwise affect existing authority to seize or impound a dog or issue citations, as a result of a dog's being on property other than that owned by its owner or the person who has the right to control the dog. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.310. - Stray dogs—Running at large unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, having interest in, harboring, or having charge, care, control, custody or possession of any dog, licensed or unlicensed, to allow, cause or permit such dog to be in or on any public road, highway, street, alley, square, park, school ground or other public place, or in or upon any lot, premises, or property of another without the permission of the property owner. Any dog found running at large in violation of the provisions of any law of the State of California or of the City of Yuba City shall be deemed a stray dog, and for all purposes shall be immediately seized and impounded. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.311. - Sale, gift or destruction of dogs. 
At any time after the expiration of the holding period required by Food and Agricultural Code § 31108, Animal Control Services may, without further notice, and without advertising in any manner, sell, give away, or humanely destroy any dog not claimed or redeemed. Any dog having been released to a nonprofit animal rescue or adoption organization pursuant to Food and Agricultural Code § 31108(b) shall, upon its return to the custody of Animal Control Services, be deemed to have completed the holding period required by Food and Agricultural Code § 31108(a). Provided, however, that Animal Control Services may not transfer title to any living animal to any institution engaged in the diagnosis or treatment of human or animal disease, or in research for the advancement of veterinary, dental, medical, or biologic science, or in the testing or diagnosis, improvement or standardization of laboratory specimens, biologic products, pharmaceuticals, or drugs. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.312. - Return of dog by animal control services. 
If there is a valid license tag attached to any dog surrendered to Animal Control Services as provided herein, and such dog has not been redeemed by its owner within 120 hours from the time of impounding such dog, Animal Control Services may return such dog to the person who surrendered the dog, provided that such person procures a license for such dog pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, and pays all other appropriate shelter charges. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.320. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, having interest in, harboring, or having charge, care, control, custody, or possession of any dog, licensed or unlicensed, to permit such dog: 
(a)  In or upon any public street or other public place in the City or in or upon any property belonging to the City unless such dog is restrained by a leash and is under the complete control of the person owning or at the time in possession of such dog. Such leash shall not be more than eight ft. in length. Notwithstanding anything set forth in this section to the contrary, no person shall be compelled to keep any dog in his or her possession on a leash while in or upon any public street or other public place in the City if, at the time, such dog is confined securely within an automobile. 
(b)  To trespass on private property. 
(c)  To commit a nuisance on improved private property other than that of the person who owns or has charge, care, control, or custody of the dog. 
(d)  By any sound or cry, to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of any neighborhood or to interfere with any person in the reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of life or property, and every such animal shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement as such, and, in addition, the owner thereof, after personal service of a notice and citation of the condition, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if the nuisance continues after the service of such notice and citation. 
(e)  To suffer or permit the same to run at large on private or public property whereon livestock or domestic fowl are kept without the consent of the owner. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.330. - Dogs—Spay/neuter deposit required. 
Animal Control Services shall not sell, give away, or transfer any dog except as provided for in Food and Agricultural Code div. 4, ch. 1.5 (§ 30520 et seq.). 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.350. - Redemption of licensed dogs by owner. 
Whenever any licensed dog is impounded under the provisions of this chapter, the owner or person entitled to custody of any such dog may, at any time prior to the sale or other disposition thereof, during the regular office hours of the animal shelter, redeem the same, subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Animal Control Services shall keep any dog so impounded for the holding period required by Food and Agricultural Code § 31108. 
(b)  The person wishing to redeem the dog must exhibit to Animal Control Services the unexpired license certificate or license tag issued for the dog being redeemed. 
(c)  The person wishing to redeem the dog must pay all outstanding fees, charges and penalties owing to the animal shelter as required by the City Council either in ordinance or resolution. 
(d)  If the dog being redeemed is not spayed or neutered, the person wishing to redeem the dog must pay the deposit required by Section 4-12.330. 
(e)  If the person wishing to redeem the dog exhibits an expired license certificate, the dog may be redeemed by paying all requisite fees and charges owing, and, within 15 days from the redemption date, obtain a valid license as required by the provisions of this chapter. If a valid license has not been obtained within 15 days of the redemption date, Animal Control Services shall issue a citation to the person owning, harboring, or having charge, care, control, custody, or possession of such dog and indicate that if a valid license has not been obtained within 30 days from the redemption date, the dog may be subject to impoundment. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003; § 2, Ord. 004-04, eff. May 20, 2004)  
Sec. 4-12.351. - Redemption of stray and other impounded dogs. 
Whenever any stray dog not bearing a license tag is impounded under the provisions of this chapter, and such dog is not claimed by the owner within the holding period required by Food and Agricultural Code § 31108, any person may, at any time prior to the sale or other disposition thereof, during the regular office hours of the animal shelter, redeem the same, subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  The person wishing to redeem the dog must pay all outstanding fees, charges and penalties owing to the animal shelter as required by the City Council in either ordinance or resolution. 
(b)  If the dog being redeemed is not spayed or neutered, the person wishing to redeem the dog must pay the deposit required by Section 4-12.330. 
The person wishing to redeem the dog must, within 15 days of the redemption date, obtain a valid license as required by the provisions of this chapter. If a valid license has not been obtained within 15 days of the redemption date, Animal Control Services shall issue a citation to the person owning, harboring, or having charge, care, control, custody, or possession of such dog and indicate that if a valid license has not been obtained within 30 days from the redemption date, the dog may be subject to impoundment. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003; § 3, Ord. 004-04, eff. May 20, 2004)  
Sec. 4-12.352. - Redemption penalties. 
In the event the owner of any person having custody of a dog fails to contain such dog so that it is impounded two or more times within one year of an initial impound, such owner or person shall pay a penalty, established by the Yuba City City Council by resolution. 
(§ 4, Ord. 004-04, eff. May 20, 2004)  
Sec. 4-12.360. - Cleanliness of premises. 
Every person owning or occupying premises where any dog is kept shall keep the place in which such dog is kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Article 4. - Other Animals 
 
Sec. 4-12.400. - Animals, poultry and household pets. 
As used in this article, the word "animal" shall include all animals, poultry, or household pets except dogs. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.401. - Cleanliness of premises. 
Every person owning or occupying premises where any animal is kept shall keep the place in which such animal is kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.410. - Control. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or has the charge, care, control, or custody of any animal to permit such animal upon any public street or other public place in the City of Yuba City or upon any property belonging to the City unless such animal is under the complete control of the person owning or at the time in possession of such animal. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.411. - Trespassing prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or has the charge, care, control, or custody of any animal to permit such animal to trespass on private property. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.412. - Trespassing animals. 
Any animal found trespassing on any private property in the City of Yuba City may be taken up by any person at interest and delivered to Animal Control Services. Any dog found running at large on the lands of another, where poultry or livestock are kept, without the permission of the owner or person in charge of such lands, may be taken up by any person and delivered to Animal Control Services. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.420. - Commission of nuisances prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or has the charge, care, control, or custody of any animal to permit such animal to commit a nuisance on improved private property other than that of the person who owns or has the charge, care, control, or custody of the animal. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.421. - Disturbing the peace. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, has the charge, care, control, or custody of any animal or who allows any animal to remain upon his or her property, to permit such animal, by any sound or cry, to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any neighborhood or to interfere with any person in the reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of life or property. Every such animal shall be deemed to be a public nuisance, and shall be subject to abatement as such. In addition, the owner thereof, or person who has the charge, care, control, or custody of the animal, after personal service of a notice and citation of the condition, shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in Section 4-12.130 if the nuisance continues after the service of such notice and citation. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.430. - Entering upon premises. 
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of the Health Officer or Community Services Director, or any peace officer or deputy sheriff, may enter at reasonable times upon any premises where any animal is kept for the purpose of taking up, seizing, or impounding any animal running at large or staked, herded, or grazed thereon contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or for the purpose of inspecting the premises to ascertain whether any law of the City or the State relating to the care, treatment, or impounding of animals is being violated, or for the purpose of enforcing any other provisions of this chapter. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.431. - Cost of capture. 
In the event it is necessary for Animal Control Services to cause the impoundment of any large animal there shall be collected from the owner of such animal in addition to all other fees, a capture fee which shall be the actual cost of the capture, including, but not limited to, the salaries of City or County personnel utilized in effectuating the capture. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.432. - Expense borne by owner. 
The cost of feeding, keeping, and treating an animal impounded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be borne by the person who owns or has the charge, care, control, or custody of such animal at the time such animal is taken into custody. The cost may be recovered by the City from the owner or person having legal custody of such animal at the time such animal is taken into custody in any action at law or in equity. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.440. - Redemption, sale, gift, or destruction of impounded cats. 
Whenever any cat has been impounded under the provisions of this chapter, at any time during the holding period required by Food and Agricultural Code § 31752, subject to the provisions for owner redemption contained therein, any person may at any time prior to the sale or other disposition thereof, during the regular office hours of the animal shelter, redeem the same by: 
(a)  Paying all outstanding fees and charges owing to the animal shelter as required by the City Council in either ordinance or resolution, and 
(b)  Paying the deposit required by Section 4-12.470, if the cat being redeemed is not spayed or neutered. 
At any time after the expiration of the holding period required by Food and Agricultural Code § 31752, Animal Control Services may, without further notice, and without advertising in any manner, sell, give away, or humanely destroy any cat not claimed or redeemed. Any cat having been released to a nonprofit animal rescue or adoption organization pursuant to Agricultural Code § 31752(b) shall, upon its return to the custody of Animal Control Services, be deemed to have completed the holding period required by Agricultural Code § 31752(a). Provided, however, that Animal Control Services may not transfer title to any living animal to any institution engaged in the diagnosis or treatment of human or animal disease, or in research for the advancement of veterinary, dental, medical, or biological science, or in the testing or diagnosis, improvement or standardization of laboratory specimens, biologic products, pharmaceuticals, or drugs. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.445. - Redeeming impounded animals other than dogs and cats. 
(a)  When Animal Control Services, under the provisions of this chapter, has impounded any animal for at least 72 hours and the animal has not been redeemed, Animal Control Services shall be free to dispose of such animal. If, in the opinion of Animal Control Services, the value of the animal will exceed the expense of keeping it, an advertisement shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation that such animal is for sale. If the animal is not redeemed prior to the sale, the animal shall be sold for cash to the highest bidder. 
(b)  When any animal is impounded, the owner or any person interested therein may redeem the animal upon paying to Animal Control Services a fee as determined and set by resolution of the City Council, together with a further sum that is equal to the actual cost per day for the keep of such animal for each day such animal is impounded. If the animal has been offered for sale through public advertising, the owner or the person redeeming such animal shall pay the advertising costs in addition to the redemption fees set forth in this section. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.450. - Extermination of rats. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the Health Officer, it is determined that any building or property in the City contains rats in a number or of a kind dangerous to the health and welfare of the citizens of the City, such building shall be deemed to be a public health nuisance within the meaning of this article, and the person upon whose premises such rats are located shall be required to exterminate them and shall be required further, upon order of the Health Officer, to ratproof the premises designated by such Health Officer to be a public health nuisance. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.460. - Isolation of infected animals. 
Any person that owns or has possession or control of any animal which is affected by any contagious or infectious disease, shall keep the animal within an enclosure, or herd the animal in a place where it is secure from contact with other animals of like kind that are not so affected. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.461. - Disposal of carcasses of infected animals. 
Any person that has the care or control of any animal that dies from any contagious disease shall immediately cremate or bury the animal. An animal which has died from any contagious disease shall not be transported, except to the nearest crematory. 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.470. - Cats—Spay/neuter deposit required. 
Animal Control Services shall not sell, give away, or transfer any cat over six months of age except as provided for in Agricultural Code div. 14.5, ch. 2 (§ 31760 et seq.). 
(§1, Ord. 007-03, eff. June 5, 2003)  
Sec. 4-12.480. - Feeding of feral cats. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Feral cat means a cat as defined in Food and Agricultural Code § 31752.5. 
Free-feeding means not limiting the amount of food made available to an animal at a single feeding, resulting in excess food which will result in creating inviting conditions for other animals, including wildlife. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create a public nuisance by free-feeding any wild animals including any feral cats. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make available more food supply than is reasonably adequate for the number of legally allowed domesticated cats the person may care for. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to: 
Persons who qualify for a trap-neuter-release program that the City establishes to reduce the feral/wild cat populations. 
( Ord. No. 002-15 , § 1, 2-27-2015)  
CHAPTER 13. - PARADES AND USE OF PUBLIC PLACES 
 
Sec. 4-13.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Chief of Police" shall mean the Chief of Police of the City. 
(b)  "City" shall mean the City of Yuba City. 
(c)  "Parade" shall mean any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park, or other public place in the City. 
(d)  "Parade permit" shall mean a permit as required by the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  "Person" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
(Ord. 581, eff. April 15, 1970)  
Sec. 4-13.02. - Permits required. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to engage in, participate in, aid, form, or start any parade unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the Chief of Police, except that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to funeral processions. 
(Ord. 581, eff. April 15, 1970)  
Sec. 4-13.03. - Applications. 
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the Chief of Police on forms provided by such officer. 
(Ord. 581, eff. April 15, 1970)  
Sec. 4-13.04. - Time for filing applications. 
An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the Chief of Police not less than five days nor more than 30 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(Ord. 581, eff. April 15, 1970)  
Sec. 4-13.05. - Late applications. 
The Chief of Police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider and approve any application for a parade permit which is filed less than five days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(Ord. 581, eff. April 15, 1970)  
Sec. 4-13.06. - Contents of applications. 
The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(a)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
(b)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
(c)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(d)  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
(e)  The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination point; 
(f)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade, the type of animals, and a description of the vehicles; 
(g)  The times when such parade will start and terminate; 
(h)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(i)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; 
(j)  The time when units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas; 
(k)  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the Chief of Police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf; and 
(l)  Any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit shall be issued. 
(Ord. 581, eff. April 15, 1970)  
Sec. 4-13.07. - Standards for issuance. 
The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for in this chapter when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that: 
(a)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(b)  The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles to assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(c)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(d)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct, or create a disturbance; and 
(e)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(Ord. 581, eff. April 15, 1970)  
Sec. 4-13.08. - Notices of rejection. 
The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within three working days after the filing thereof. If the Chief of Police disapproves the application, he or she shall mail to the applicant within three days after the date upon which the application was filed a notice of his or her action, stating the reasons for his or her denial of the permit. 
(Ord. 581, eff. April 15, 1970)  
Sec. 4-13.09. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the Council. The appeal shall be taken within ten days after notice. The Council shall act upon such appeal at its next meeting. 
(Ord. 581, eff. April 15, 1970)  
Sec. 4-13.10. - Alternative permits. 
The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the Chief of Police, file a written notice of acceptance with the Chief of Police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements and have the effect of a parade permit under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 581, eff. April 15, 1970)  
Sec. 4-13.11. - Notices to City officials. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the Chief of Police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(a)  The City Manager; and 
(b)  The Fire Chief. 
(Ord. 581, eff. April 15, 1970)  
Sec. 4-13.12. - Contents of permits. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(a)  The starting time; 
(b)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(c)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; and 
(d)  Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find necessary to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 581, eff. April 15, 1970)  
Sec. 4-13.13. - Duties of permittees. 
A permittee under the provisions of this chapter shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances and the parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity and shall carry the parade permit upon his or her person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Ord. 581, eff. April 15, 1970)  
Sec. 4-13.14. - Public conduct during parades. 
No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in a parade, and no driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(Ord. 581, eff. April 15, 1970)  
Sec. 4-13.15. - Parking on parade routes. 
The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along the highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. 581, eff. April 15, 1970)  
Sec. 4-13.16. - Revocation of permits. 
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 581, eff. April 15, 1970)  
CHAPTER 14. - ELECTRIC FENCES 
 
Sec. 4-14.01. - Restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, maintain, allow, or suffer to be erected, maintained, or allowed at any time of the day or night at any place within the City any electrical fence, wire, or wire fence, or any metallic substance, or any other electrical conductor which is carrying, conducting, or charged with electricity of any degree whatever which is not completely covered with a sufficiently heavy insulation to protect all persons and property against any shock, injury, or damage whatever. 
(Ord. 610, eff. July 21, 1971)  
Sec. 4-14.02. - Insulation. 
No such electrical fence, wire, or wire fence, or metallic substance or other electrical conductor which is carrying, conducting, or charged with electricity of any degree whatever shall be mounted, hung, suspended, or otherwise affixed outside any building at any place less than ten ft. above the surface of the adjacent ground, paving, or land, unless the same is completely covered and insulated as provided in Section 4-14.01 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 610, eff. July 21, 1971)  
Sec. 4-14.03. - Violations; penalties. 
(Ord. 610, eff. July 21, 1971; repealed by § 3, Ord. 697, eff. April 16, 1975)  
CHAPTER 15. - ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 4-15.01. - Findings and determinations. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the State pursuant to the provisions of Vehicle Code § 22660 to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, as public nuisances, the Council hereby makes the following findings and declarations: 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, except as expressly permitted by the provisions of this chapter, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 673, eff. December 5, 1973)  
Sec. 4-15.02. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Highway" shall mean a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" shall include street. 
(b)  "Owner of the land" shall mean the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
(c)  "Owner of the vehicle" shall mean the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
(d)  "Public property" shall not include "highway." 
(e)  "Vehicle" shall mean a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(§ 2, Ord. 673, eff. December 5, 1973)  
Sec. 4-15.03. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(a)  A vehicle, or part thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(b)  A vehicle, or part thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junk dealer or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
The provisions of this section shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined pursuant to the provisions of law other than Vehicle Code div. 11, ch. 10 (§ 22650 et seq.) and this chapter. 
(§ 3, Ord. 673, eff. December 5, 1973)  
Sec. 4-15.04. - Effect on other laws. 
The provisions of this chapter are not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles within the City. The provisions of this chapter shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and laws heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(§ 4, Ord. 673, eff. December 5, 1973)  
Sec. 4-15.05. - Administration and enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Police Chief. In the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, such officer and his or her deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle, or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle, and to remove, or cause the removal of, a vehicle, or part thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 5, Ord. 673, eff. December 5, 1973)  
Sec. 4-15.06. - Right of entry of certain persons. 
When the Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person, such person shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove, or cause the removal of, a vehicle, or parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 6, Ord. 673, eff. December 5, 1973)  
Sec. 4-15.07. - Administrative costs. 
The Council shall from time to time determine and fix, by resolution, an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of the removal of any vehicle, or part thereof) for the purposes of administering the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 7, Ord. 673, eff. December 5, 1973)  
Sec. 4-15.08. - Notices of intention to abate and remove. 
A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE, OR PARTS THEREOF, AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
___________ 
(Name and address of owner of the land) 
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 15 of Title 4 of the Yuba City Municipal Code, has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle registered to ___________, license number _____, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 15 of Title 4 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on or before ________, which is ten (10) calendar days from the date of the mailing of this notice, and, upon your failure to do so, the same will be abated and removed by the City of Yuba City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located. 
As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, on or before ________, (ten (10) calendar days after the mailing of this notice of intention) file a request with the City Clerk for a public hearing, and, if such a request is not received by the City Clerk within such ten (10) day period, the Police Chief of the City of Yuba City shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such ten (10) day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such meeting. 
Notice Mailed ________ 
Date 
s/s ___________ 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE, OR PARTS THEREOF, AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
___________ 
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle; notice should be given to both if different) 
As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle - make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 15 of Title 4 of the Yuba City Municipal Code, has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 15 of Title 4 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on or before ________, (ten (10) calendar days from the date of the mailing of this notice). 
As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, on or before ________, (ten (10) calendar days after the mailing of this notice of intention) file a request with the City Clerk for a public hearing, and, if such a request is not received by the City Clerk within such ten (10) day period, the Police Chief of the City of Yuba City shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing. 
Notice Mailed ________ 
Date 
s/s ___________ 
(§ 8, Ord. 673, eff. December 5, 1973)  
Sec. 4-15.09. - Hearings—Notices. 
If the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land files a request with the City Clerk for a public hearing within the ten-calendar-day period as set forth by the notice of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the Council on the question of the abatement and removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle and the assessment of the administrative costs and the costs of removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, against the property on which it is located. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land within such ten-day period, such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his or her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten calendar days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within such ten days after mailing the notice of intention to abate and remove, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(§ 9, Ord. 673, eff. December 5, 1973)  
Sec. 4-15.10. - Hearings—Determinations. 
All hearings held pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be held before the Council which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on private property or public property. The Council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing, or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial. 
The Council may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purposes of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, if, in its opinion, the circumstances so justify. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Council may find that a vehicle, or part thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property, order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter, and determine the administrative costs and the costs of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the Council shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the Council but does not appear, such person shall be notified in writing of the decision. The determination of the Council shall be final and conclusive. 
(§ 10, Ord. 673, eff. December 5, 1973)  
Sec. 4-15.11. - Removal. 
Five days after the adoption of the order declaring the vehicle, or parts thereof, to be a public nuisance, the vehicle, or parts thereof, may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. 
(§ 11, Ord. 673, eff. December 5, 1973)  
Sec. 4-15.12. - Removal—Notices. 
Within five days after the date of the removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State identifying the vehicle, or part thereof, removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title, and license plates. 
(§ 12, Ord. 673, eff. December 5, 1973)  
Sec. 4-15.13. - Assessment of costs. 
If the administrative costs and the costs of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of Section 4-15.10 of this chapter are not paid within 30 days from the date of the order, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of Government Code § 38773.5 and shall be transmitted to the Tax Collector for collection. Such assessment shall have the same priority as other City taxes. 
(§ 13, Ord. 673, eff. December 5, 1973)  
CHAPTER 16. - PUBLIC SAFETY DISPATCHERS 
 
Sec. 4-16.01. - Qualification to receive aid. 
The City Council of the City of Yuba City does hereby declare that it is the desire of the City of Yuba City to qualify and receive aid from the State of California under the provisions of Penal Code § 13522. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1070, eff. July 19, 1989)  
Sec. 4.16.02. - Adherence to standards for recruitment and training. 
Pursuant to Section 13510(c), Chapter 1, the Yuba City Police Department will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (P.O.S.T). 
(§ 2, Ord. 1070, eff. July 19, 1989)  
Sec. 4.16.03. - Enforcement. 
Pursuant to Section 13512, Chapter 1, the Commission and its representative may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the Commission to ascertain that the Yuba City Police Department public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to the standards for selection and training established by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(§ 3, Ord. 1070, eff. July 19, 1989)  
CHAPTER 17. - NOISE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 4-17.01. - Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Yuba City that the peace, health, safety and welfare of its citizens require protection from loud and raucous noises from any and all sources in the community. 
(§ 1, Ord. 14-91, eff. December 19, 1991)  
Sec. 4-17.02. - Prohibited generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or knowingly make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud and raucous noise. 
The term "loud and raucous noise" shall mean any sound which because of its volume level, duration or character annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, health, peace or safety of a reasonable person of ordinary sensibility within the limits of the City of Yuba City. 
The term "loud and raucous noise" specifically includes, but is not limited to, the kinds of noise generated by the activities enumerated in Section 4-17.10. The term "loud and raucous noise" specifically excludes the kinds of noise generated by the activities described in Section 4-17.20. 
For any kind of noise not enumerated in Section 4-17.10, the factors which may be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  The volume of the noise; 
(b)  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
(c)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
(d)  The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any; 
(e)  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
(f)  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
(g)  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
(h)  The time of the day or night the noise occurs; 
(i)  The day of the week the noise occurs; 
(j)  The duration of the noise; 
(k)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and 
(l)  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or non-commercial activity. 
(§ 1, Ord. 14-92, eff. December 19, 1991)  
Secs. 4-17.03—4-17.09. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4-17.10. - Enumeration. 
The following specific acts, subject to the exemptions provided in Section 4-17.20, are declared to be public nuisances in violation of Sections 4-17.22 and 4-17.30, namely: 
(a)  The loud and raucous use or operation of any radio, amplifier, phonograph, stereo, compact disc or tape player, loudspeaker, bullhorn, megaphone or other device for the producing or reproducing of sound. 
(b)  Loud and raucous yelling, shouting, talking, whistling or singing between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day. 
(c)  The owning, possessing, controlling, harboring or keeping of any dog, cat or other animal or fowl which by howling, yelping, whining, barking or otherwise causes a loud and raucous noise. 
(d)  The loud and raucous use of any drum, guitar, horn or other musical instrument or device. 
(e)  The loud and raucous operation or use of any of the following before 6:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. daily except Sunday and State or Federal holidays when the prohibited time shall be before 8:00 a.m. and after 9:00 p.m.: 
(1)  A hammer or any other device or implement used to produce or strike an object. 
(2)  An impact wrench or other tool or equipment powered by compressed air. 
(3)  A hand powered saw. 
(4)  Any tool or piece of equipment powered by an internal combustion engine such as, but not limited to, chain saw, backpack blower and lawn mower. Except as included in paragraph (6) below, motor vehicles powered by an internal combustion engine and subject to the California Vehicle Code are excluded from this prohibition. 
(5)  Any electrically powered (whether by alternating current electricity or by direct current electricity) tool or piece of equipment used for cutting, drilling or shaping wood, plastic, metal or other materials or objects such as, but not limited to, a saw, drill, lathe or router. 
(6)  Any of the following: Heavy equipment (such as, but not limited to, bulldozer, road grader, back hoe), ground drilling and boring equipment (such as, but not limited to, derrick or dredge), crane and boom equipment, portable power generator or pump, pavement equipment (such as, but not limited to, pneumatic hammer, pavement breaker, tamper, compacting equipment), pile driving equipment, vibrating roller, sand blaster, gunite machine, trencher, concrete truck and hot kettle pump. 
(7)  Any construction, demolition, excavation, erection, alteration or repair activity. 
In the case of urgent necessity and in the interest of public health and safety, the Chief Building Official may issue a permit for exemption from the requirements within subsection (e) of this section. Such period shall not exceed three working days in length while the emergency continues but may be renewed for successive periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. The Chief Building Official may limit such permit as to time of use and/or permitted action, depending upon the nature of the emergency and the type of action requested. 
(§ 1, Ord. 14-91, eff. December 19, 1991)  
Secs. 4-17.11—4-17.19. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4-17.20. - Exemptions. 
The term "loud and raucous noise" as used in this chapter does not include noise or sound generated by the following: 
(a)  Cries for emergency assistance and warning calls. 
(b)  Radios, sirens, horns and bells on police, fire and other emergency response vehicles. 
(c)  Parades, fireworks displays and other special events for which a permit has been obtained from the City are exempted provided there is compliance with all conditions which have been noted in writing on the permit. That loud and raucous noise produced as a result of noncompliance with any condition specified on the permit is not exempted from the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Activities on or in publicly owned property and facilities, or by public employees while in the authorized discharge of their responsibilities, are exempt provided that such activities have been authorized by the owner of such property or facilities or its agent or by the employing authority. 
(e)  Religious worship activities, including but not limited to, bells, organs, singing and preaching. 
(f)  Locomotives and other railroad equipment and aircraft. 
(g)  The collection of solid waste by employees of a company engaged in the waste disposal business. 
(h)  Organized activities at the Yuba Sutter Fair. 
(i)  Organized sports events. 
(§ 1, Ord. 14-91, eff. December 19, 1991)  
Sec. 4-17.21. - Persons responsible. 
Any person, owner, agent, manager or supervisor in charge of operating, ordering, directing or allowing the operation or maintenance of any device, object, machine or animal creating a noise as prohibited in this chapter shall be deemed guilty of violating this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 14-91, eff. December 19, 1991)  
Sec. 4-17.22. - Violations—Infraction/misdemeanor. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance to Section 1-2.02 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(§ 1, Ord. 14-91, eff. December 19, 1991)  
Sec. 4-17.23. - Notice of violation. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be probable cause for a notice of violation to be issued by the Yuba City Police Department according to current procedures. 
(§ 1, Ord. 14-91, eff. December 19, 1991)  
Sec. 4-17.24. - Authorization to collect second response fee. 
When a loud party or gathering occurs at a premises and a police officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the person in charge of the premises and the person responsible for the event or if either of those persons is a minor then the parents or guardians of that minor will be held jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing police personnel on special security assignment over and above the services normally provided by the Police Department. The warning to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare shall be deemed to be on special security assignment over and above the services normally provided. The costs of such special security assignment may include personnel and equipment costs, damage to City property and injuries to City personnel. 
(§ 1, Ord. 14-91, eff. December 19, 1991)  
Secs. 4-17.25—4-17.29. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4-17.30. - Violations—Additional remedies/injunctions. 
As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter which operation or maintenance causes or creates sound levels or vibration exceeding the allowable limits as specified in this chapter shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. Additionally, no provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for injury or damages arising from any violation of this ordinance or from other law. 
(§ 1, Ord. 14-91, eff. December 19, 1991)  
Sec. 4-17.31. - Severability. 
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of the provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. 
(§ 1, Ord. 14-91, eff. December 19, 1991)  
CHAPTER 18. - TRIP REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 4-18.01. - Findings. 
The City Council of the City of Yuba City hereby makes the following findings: 
(a)  Increasing employment opportunities and residential construction in Sutter and Yuba Counties are projected to create an increase in traffic volumes. 
(b)  Government Code § 65089.3(a) requires all jurisdictions within Sutter and Yuba Counties to adopt and implement a Trip Reduction Ordinance. 
(c)  Ridesharing among employees for home to work trips is a simple, inexpensive, and effective means of reducing single occupant motor vehicle trips. A reduction in such trips can be expected to result in an improvement to the region's air quality, and a reduction in traffic congestion and energy consumption impacts relating to the anticipated growth in new jobs and residential construction. 
(d)  Cooperation with the coordination of trip reduction programs with other cities, counties, and communities in the region and through regional agencies would enhance the effectiveness of such programs. 
(§ 1, Ord. 04-94, eff. July 7, 1994)  
Sec. 4-18.02. - Purpose. 
The primary purposes of this Trip Reduction Ordinance include the following: 
(a)  Reduce traffic congestion in Sutter and Yuba Counties by reducing both the number of vehicular trips and the vehicular miles traveled that might otherwise be generated by home-to-work commuting. 
(b)  Reduce or delay the need for major transportation facility improvements and reduce congestion by making efficient use of existing facilities. 
(c)  Increase the average vehicle ridership (AVR) during the weekday work commute period ("peak period"). 
(§2, Ord. 04-94, eff. July 7, 1994)  
Sec. 4-18.03. - Objective. 
The fundamental objective of the trip reduction program as established by this chapter is to increase the average vehicle ridership (AVR) for home-to-work commuting. 
(§ 3, Ord. 04-94, eff. July 7, 1994)  
Sec. 4-18.04. - Intent and applicability. 
It is the intent of this chapter that all new employers strive to increase average vehicle ridership. New employers are required to put forth a good faith effort to encourage employees to use alternative transportation modes through the methods described below. This trip reduction ordinance applies to all new employers with more than 500 employees. It specifically excludes all existing employers. 
(§ 4, Ord. 04-94, eff. July 7, 1994)  
Sec. 4-18.05. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Alternative commute mode" shall mean method of traveling to and from the work site other than by single occupant vehicle (i.e., transit, carpool, vanpool, bicycle, walking, telecommuting) 
(b)  "Average vehicle ridership (AVR)" shall mean the average number of persons occupying each vehicle. AVR is calculated by multiplying the number of employees by the standard number of trips in a work week (generally ten, then dividing by actual number of vehicular trips per work week) For example, if all employees drive alone to work each day, the AVR = 1.0 Ten employees would be expected to take ten trips each per week for a total of 100 trips. If only 67 vehicular trips are taken, then the AVR is 1.5, which means that, on average, each vehicle is transporting 1.5 people to their destination. The higher the AVR, the more people are using alternative transportation methods. 
(c)  "Carpool" shall mean a motor vehicle occupied by two or more persons traveling to and from work. 
(d)  "Commuter" shall mean an employee who travels regularly to and from an employment facility three or more days a week. 
(e)  "Commuter matching service" shall mean any system for mapping and matching home and work locations of interested commuters to identify prospects for ridesharing. 
(f)  "Employee" shall mean a person employed at a location for at least 20 hours a week. 
(g)  "Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC)" shall mean employee or other individual designated by the employer to coordinate and implement TCM activities as required by the transportation plan. 
(h)  "New employer" shall mean any business, nonprofit organization, or public agency with one or more employees, including the owner, that locates in Yuba City after the adoption of this chapter. 
(i)  "Peak period commuter" shall mean any employee who travels regularly to and from a work facility three or more days a week and arrives or departs from the facility during the weekday peak period specified by the jurisdiction. This peak period should be linked to the hours that commuter congestion actually occurs. 
(j)  "Rideshare program" shall mean the commuter matching service and commuter information service operated by Caltrans-Sacramento Rideshare. 
(k)  "Ridesharer" shall mean any employee who commutes to and from his or her work location by any mode other than single occupancy light or medium duty vehicle, motorcycle, or moped. 
(l)  "Shift of employment" shall mean any group of employees who work at a common work location and who arrive and depart from work in a common time interval not greater than one hour. 
(m)  "Single occupant vehicle (SOV)" shall mean a motor vehicle occupied by one employee for commute purposes. 
(n)  "Transportation control measures (TCMS)" shall mean measures used to maintain or improve the efficient movement of persons and goods while reducing the congestion and air quality impacts associated with motorized vehicles. 
(o)  "Transportation Control Measures (TCM) Coordinator" shall mean public agency employee or other individual designated to manage and enforce employer compliance with TRO requirements. 
(p)  "Transportation Management Association (TMA)" shall mean an association, usually of employers, developers, property managers, and public agencies, organized to facilitate, support, and encourage the use of alternative transportation methods for commuters. 
(q)  "Transportation plan" shall mean the plan developed by the employer to reduce single occupant vehicle trips, pursuant to Section 4-18.06 herein. 
(r)  "Trip reduction credit" shall mean the number of points credited to an employer's transportation plan for implementing a specific transportation control measure (TCM) program. 
(s)  "Vanpool" shall mean a motor vehicle, other than a motor truck or truck tractor, suited for occupancy by more than six but less than 16 persons including the driver, traveling to and from work. 
(§5, Ord. 04-94, eff. July 7, 1994)  
Sec. 4-18.06. - Requirements for new employers with 500 or more employees. 
Every new employer with 500 or more employees shall encourage use of alternative commute modes by providing the following: 
(a)  Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC). 
(1)  Every new employer shall facilitate the employees' use of an area-wide ridesharing program by designating an Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC) for employees. The name, title, address, and telephone number of such Coordinator shall be reported to the TCM Coordinator within 60 calendar days of reaching 500 or more employees at one site for at least 20 hours per week. The ETC should be strongly encouraged to take advantage of educational resources, including training seminars, workshops, training manuals and discussions with other ETCs. ETCs need not be full-time employees, nor is it necessary that ETC duties take up a majority of the designated employee's time. 
(2)  The Employee Transportation Coordinator responsibilities shall include: 
(i)  Publicizing the availability of public transportation. 
(ii)  Communicating employee transportation needs to the County TCM Coordinator or County staff as appropriate. 
(iii)  Assisting employees in forming carpools or vanpools. 
(iv)  Developing, coordinating, and implementing the employer's transportation plan. 
(v)  Coordinating, documenting, and preparing the Annual Transportation Mode Survey and Report. 
(vi)  Performing an annual survey of employees showing the distribution of employees by transportation mode. 
(vii)  Coordinating participation in a ridesharing program through a Transportation Management Association, either as a member agency or otherwise, including the distribution and collection of commuter matching forms, and submittal to the appropriate rideshare program. The information on these forms will then be entered into the regional database to match commuters by home and work address for carpools and vanpools. 
(viii)  Coordinating any necessary, authorized on-site visits by the TCM Coordinator. 
(b)  Transportation plan. 
(1)  A transportation plan is required for each new employer having 500 or more employees working at a single site for at least 20 hours per week, and/or for every new employer upon reaching a level of 500 or more employees working at one site for at least 20 hours per week. 
(2)  In the case of seasonal work locations, the transportation plan shall be in effect only at such times that the employment level reaches 500 or more employees at a single site for at least 20 hours per week. 
(3)  Transportation plan elements. The transportation plan shall include: 
(i)  Description. A description of the activity and operating characteristics of the proposed project (e.g., business hours and peak hours of travel), including a parking area map or diagram. 
(ii)  Existing conditions. A description of the alternative transportation facilities and programs currently in place, such as bike lockers, preferential carpool parking, rideshare information posting, vanpool subsidies, etc. 
(iii)  Estimate. A description and estimation of the commuting characteristics of the labor force (e.g., travel distance and mode). 
(iv)  Transportation control measures (TCMs). Measures designed to reduce the number of single occupant vehicle trips. Each TCM is assigned a point value for trip reduction based on its effectiveness in reducing trips. 
(v)  Implementation schedule. A time line showing the approximate schedule of implementation of each of the selected mitigation measures. 
(vi)  Management support letter. In order for the transportation plan to be successfully implemented, the top management of the employer must be aware of the program and committed to making it work. A letter expressing that commitment is required. 
(4)  The plan must include mandatory and optional transportation control measures (TCMs) from the list in Section 4-18.07. Each of these transportation control measures (TCMs) are assigned a trip reduction credit; the plan must include measures that have a cumulative total of 14 trip reduction points. 
(5)  The TCM Coordinator shall provide assistance to ETCs in preparing and managing their transportation plan. This assistance may include, but is not limited to, guidebooks to an estimate of the potential effectiveness of common ridesharing activities, sample transportation plans, educational resources, and networking opportunities. 
(6)  Trip reduction credit for transportation control measures (TCMs). In order to meet the required levels of trip reduction, every transportation plan shall list the TCMs proposed to be implemented. Every plan shall include and implement all of the mandatory TCMs set forth in the project requirements in Section 4-18.07. The employer may then select from optional TCMs from the Transportation Control Measure Menu shown below that will best serve to reduce commute trips of the employees of the particular project. The transportation plan will then receive the vehicle trip reduction credits as defined in this section. 
(§6, Ord. 04-94, eff. July 7, 1994)  
Sec. 4-18.07. - Transportation Control Measure (TCM) Menu. 
Each of the following transportation control measures (TCMs) are assigned a trip reduction credit. Each transportation plan must include measures that have a cumulative total of 14 trip reduction points. 
(a)  Required transportation control measures (TCMs). 
(1)  Designation of an Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC). 
Trip reduction credit—2 points 
(2)  Posting of ridesharing information, including: 
(i)  Posters or flyers encouraging the use of ridesharing and referrals to sources of information concerning ridesharing. 
(ii)  The names and phone numbers of the Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC), Transportation Management Association, and the TCM Coordinator. 
Trip reduction credit—1 point 
(3)  Posting of alternative transportation mode information, including: 
(i)  Current schedules, rates (including procedures for obtaining transit passes), and routes of mass transit service to the employment site; 
(ii)  The location of all bicycle routes within at least a five-mile radius of the facility. 
Trip reduction credit—1 point 
(4)  Distribution of commuter matching service applications to employees. Caltrans Sacramento Rideshare maintains regional computer databases to match commuters with common cross streets. They provide rideshare applications to employers for distribution and then directly mail the match lists to the employees. Credit will be given if the ETC distributes the applications annually to all employees, and upon hiring to all new employees. 
Trip reduction credit—3 points 
(5)  Bicycle parking facilities. Unless there are overriding considerations specific to the employment site, sufficient bicycle parking must be supplied for employees. To receive credit, the employer must provide bicycle parking for all bicycle commuters, as determined by a survey of employees, or 2% of employment, whichever is less. The bicycle parking facilities shall be, at minimum, Class II stationary bike racks. 
Trip reduction credit—1 point 
(6)  Preferential carpool/vanpool parking. Unless there are overriding considerations specific to the employment site, parking spaces for 4% of employees must be painted "Carpool Parking" or "Vanpool Parking" and must be, with the exception of handicapped and customer parking, the spaces with most convenient access to the employee entrances. The ETC shall be responsible for monitoring the spaces. 
Trip reduction credit—2 points 
(b)  Optional transportation control measures (TCMs). Each new employer, in preparing a transportation plan, may choose from the following menu of TCMs to achieve the required number of trip reduction credits. It is at the discretion of the individual employer to choose which are best suited to his or her location, business, and employees. 
(1)  ETC Education Program. The ETC must attend educational seminars, workshops, or other approved training programs on an annual basis. Points given are based on number of hours of attendance; two points are given for eight hours of training, with an additional point for every additional four hours of training, to a maximum credit of four points. However, since initial education of the ETC is critical, additional points are available for ETC education in the first year. In the first year, four points are given for eight hours of training, with an additional two points for every additional four hours of training, to a maximum credit of ten points. The ETC training is provided free of charge by Sacramento Rideshare. 
Trip reduction credit—2—10 points 
(2)  In-house carpool matching service. The ETC conducts a survey of all employees in order to identify persons interested in being matched into carpools. Potential carpoolers are then matched by work address and shift. Credit is given if this service is performed on an annual basis and for all new employees interested in ridesharing. 
Trip reduction credit—4 points 
(3)  Additional preferential carpool/vanpool parking. Additional employee parking spaces must be painted "Carpool Parking" or "Vanpool Parking" and must be, with the exception of handicapped and customer parking, the spaces with most convenient access to the employee entrances. The ETC shall be responsible for monitoring the spaces. An additional point is provided for each additional 2% of total number of employees for which preferential carpool/vanpool parking is provided, up to a maximum of three additional points. 
Trip reduction credit—1—3 points 
(4)  Transportation Management Association (TMA) membership. The ETC or other designated management employee shall actively participate in a regional TMA. The ETC shall attend all membership meetings or send a designated representative, pay all required dues, and/or be involved in any other programs which the TMA Board administers. 
Trip reduction credit—4 points 
(5)  Guaranteed ride home program. Employers shall provide or contract to provide a guaranteed ride home for employees who rideshare two days a week or more. The guaranteed ride home shall be provided to the ridesharer in the event that an emergency or illness requires that they or their carpool or vanpool driver must leave work early. 
Trip reduction credit—3 points 
(6)  Parking fee. Employees who arrive at work in single-occupant vehicles shall pay a parking fee of $10 per week, while carpool and vanpool vehicles are not charged. Credit is given only in situations where there is no alternative free public parking available within one-fourth mile of the site. 
Trip reduction credit—6 points 
(7)  Clean air fuel vehicles. The employer leases or purchases and maintains fleet vehicles that use clean air fuels, such as compressed natural gas, electricity, methanol, and propane. Two points are given for each dedicated alternative fuel vehicle, and one point is given for each flexible fuel (able to use either gasoline or alternative fuel) vehicle, to a maximum of ten points. 
Trip reduction credit—1—10 points 
(8)  Shuttle bus/buspool program. The employer shall provide sufficient shuttle service to transport workers to and from their residences, a park-and-ride lot, or other staging area to the workplace. The employer may choose to lease a bus and may work with nearby employers or employment complexes to maximize ridership. 
Trip reduction credit—4 points 
(9)  Vanpool program. The employer is required to continuously extend an offer to purchase or lease a van or vans, to obtain insurance, and to make available to any group of at least seven employees a van for commute purposes. The employer may recover full or partial operating costs from the vanpool participants. 
Trip reduction credit—4 points 
(10)  Transit pass subsidy. The employer provides a monthly transit pass subsidy of 50% or the maximum taxable benefit limit, whichever is higher. The workplace must be within a reasonable walking distance of a transit stop. The ETC will be responsible for distribution of the passes and collection of fees. 
Trip reduction credit—4 points 
(11)  Transit shelter. The employer shall construct a shelter on a designated bus route or shall post a bond for future construction once the transit route is extended to the site. Credit is given when the transit shelter is constructed in conformance with County regulations and when the employment site is on or adjacent to an existing or planned bus route. 
Trip reduction credit—2 points 
(12)  Secure bicycle parking facilities. Parking must be supplied for at least 3% of employment. The bicycle parking facilities shall be of the following types: 
(i)  A Class I bicycle parking facility with a locking door, typically called a bicycle locker, where a single bicyclist has access to a bicycle storage compartment. 
(ii)  A fenced or covered area with Class II stationary bike racks and a locked gate 
Trip reduction credit—2 points 
(13)  Showers and lockers . Two showers, one men's and one women's, shall be provided for employers of less than 200 persons. For employers of more than 200 persons, there shall be four showers with the number increasing by two for every 500 employees. Ten lockers shall be provided for employers of less than 200 persons. For employers of more than 200 persons, there shall be 20 lockers, with the number increasing by ten for each 500 employees. 
Trip reduction credit—2 points 
(14)  Flexible work location/telecommuting. A management strategy allowing the employee flexibility in work place outside of the employer's established location. These strategies may include but are not limited to telecommuting from the employee's home, or the creation of neighborhood office satellites. Credit is given when employees in appropriate positions, which may not include the entire work force, are permitted to telecommute at least one day per week. 
Trip reduction credit—4 points 
(15)  Flexible work hours. A work hour management strategy allowing the employee to adjust work hours outside of the employer's established start and stop time and outside peak hours. Variable work hours may include, but are not limited to: 1) staggered work hours involving a shift in the set work hours of all employees at the workplace to those outside of peak hours; and 2) flexible work hours involving individually determined work hours within guidelines established by the employer. Credit is given when employees in appropriate positions, which may not include the entire work force, are permitted to take advantage of flexible work hours. 
Trip reduction credit—2 points 
(16)  Compressed work weeks. A management strategy allowing the employee to compress the total number of hours required in a week to fewer days. For example, a typical 40-hour work week could be compressed into four ten-hour days. Credit is given when employees in appropriate positions, which may not include the entire work force, are permitted to reduce their number of work days by at least one in two weeks (9-80 schedule). 
Trip reduction credit—3 points 
(17)  On-site services. Necessary services would be provided within one-fourth mile of the employment site to eliminate the need for a vehicular trip before, during, or after the work day. Necessary services would include, but are not limited to, child care, cafeteria/restaurant, lunch room, automated teller machine, dry cleaners, or post office. These services may be provided by the employer, through cooperative efforts of employers and service providers, or by other means. Actual credits awarded will depend on which service or combination of services are provided and proximity to employment site. 
Trip reduction credit—Negotiable with TCM Coordinator and designated approving body. Expected range for each service: One through ten or more points, depending on service type, proximity, and extent of service provided. Maximum point award for all services is 15 points total. 
(18)  Transit system subsidy/grant. Employer provides support to local transit system, which may be for system operations or for capital needs such as new buses. Subsidies or grants may be financial or through donation of capital needs. Actual credits awarded shall depend on the amount and type of subsidy or grant. 
Trip reduction credit—Negotiable with TCM Coordinator, Yuba-Sutter Transit and designated approving body. Expected range: One through 20 points, depending on amount and type of subsidy or grant. 
(19)  Other. Trip reduction measures that are not included in this menu or do not specifically fit the descriptions contained herein may also be considered. Innovative methods are strongly encouraged. An example would be a high school setting up a ridesharing educational program for their students. 
Trip reduction credit—Negotiable with TCM Coordinator and designated approving body. 
(§ 7, Ord. 04-94, eff. July 7, 1994)  
Sec. 4-18.08. - Plan review. 
The transportation plan shall be referred to the TCM Coordinator for review and evaluation of the proposed mitigation measures and recommendation made to the Public Works Director for approval. A decision to approve or disapprove the transportation plan shall be deemed final 20 calendar days after the date the applicant receives a notice of the approving person or body's decision unless an appeal has been filed. (Please refer to Section 4-18.13 "Appeals".) 
(§ 8, Ord. 04-94, eff. July 7, 1994)  
Sec. 4-18.09. - Annual reporting requirements. 
The ETC shall complete an Annual Transportation Mode Survey and Status Report. The purpose of this report is to verify the dates and results of the mitigation measures specified in the Transportation plan. 
(1)  Annual transportation mode survey. The survey portion of the report requires the ETC to annually perform a transportation survey of employees. A standard form will be provided to determine the changes in the distribution of employees using various transportation modes in comparison with the baseline information. The transportation survey shall include information such as origin and destination of travel, transportation mode used, work schedule, and interest in alternative mode commuting. A survey response rate of 75% is required to ensure the significance of the results. The surveys distributed by the ETC shall be available for audit following the completion of the annual report. 
(2)  Status report. The status report portion shows the mitigation measures included in the transportation plan with the implementation or completion date entered for each measure. If a measure was not implemented within the stated time frame, an explanation as to why it was not done shall be included. If there are certain measures stipulated in the previous transportation plan that are believed to no longer be feasible, an explanation shall be included. 
(i)  Compliance program. Description and documentation of compliance with mitigation measures described in the transportation plan, including details of individual programs. 
(ii)  Commute characteristics. Status report on effectiveness of transportation plan as shown by the commute characteristics of employees. Specifically, this includes the average number of employees regularly arriving at and leaving the project site by each of the following modes of transportation: 
A.  Single passenger motor vehicles (including mopeds); 
B.  Carpools, including number of vehicles and number of occupants per vehicle; 
C.  Van-type vehicles with seven or more commuters including the number of vehicles and number of occupants per vehicle; 
D.  Mass transit; 
E.  Bicycles; 
F.  Flexible work location/telecommuting; 
G.  All others. 
(iii)  Totals. The total number of employees by work shift at the project site. 
(iv)  Employee characteristics. The zip code and nearest cross streets of each employee's residence. 
(v)  Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC). The name, address, and telephone number of the ETC. 
(vi)  Statement of certification. The employer shall certify that the TCMs agreed to for trip reduction credit have been fully implemented. If the TCMs have not been implemented, an explanation shall be included, and the Annual Transportation Survey and Report shall include actions to be taken to implement the program. 
(§ 9, Ord. 04-94, eff. July 7, 1994)  
Sec. 4-18.10. - Implementation schedule. 
New employers with 500 or more employees working at a single site shall comply with this chapter within six months. 
(§ 10, Ord. 04-94, eff. July 7, 1994)  
Sec. 4-18.11. - Monitoring of employer performance. 
(a)  The TCM Coordinator shall review the Annual Transportation Mode Survey and Report of each project and compare performance with the goals established in the approved Transportation Plan. Inspection of the business location by The TCM Coordinator may be conducted as necessary to determine compliance with these provisions or to assist ETCs in preparing surveys or reports. A good faith effort to encourage employees to use alternative transportation as provided in the transportation plan is required. However, this ordinance does not hold employers liable if the TCM Coordinator finds the results of the transportation plan on employee commute habits did not achieve the stated trip reduction goals. 
(b)  If, after review of the Annual Transportation Mode Survey and Report, the County TCM Coordinator finds the performance has been unsatisfactory, the County TCM Coordinator shall work with the employer to achieve the implementation of TCMs within one year of submittal. The employer shall be assisted in submitting a revised report by the TCM Coordinator. 
(c)  If the revised report is still not satisfactory, the TCM Coordinator shall prepare a staff report to the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director may then find that the employer and/or the ETC is in violation of this chapter and recommend that the matter be forwarded to the Traffic Committee for hearing. 
(§ 11, Ord. 04-94, eff. July 7, 1994)  
Sec. 4-18.12. - Penalties. 
Failure to comply with the requirements of this regulation or with the terms of a transportation plan required pursuant to this regulation shall be deemed a violation and subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  Misdemeanor or as an infraction at the discretion of the City Attorney. 
(2)  Violations of this chapter are punishable separately and independently of any other remedies at law or inequity, including, but not limited to, those remedies provided in any applicable transportation plan. 
(3)  In addition to any other penalty allowed, the City Council may impose civil or administrative fines of up to maximum of $500 per day for failure to meet the goals set forth in the chapter. Fines collected under this chapter will be used by the City of Yuba City for the implementation of transportation control measures. 
(§ 12, Ord. 04-94, eff. July 7, 1994)  
Sec. 4-18.13. - Appeal. 
Appeal from an action taken by the Public Works Director pursuant to this regulation may be made in writing to the City Council within 20 days of the Public Works Director's decision. 
(§ 13, Ord. 04-94, eff. July 7, 1994)  
CHAPTER 19. - HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE CLEANUP 
 
Sec. 4-19.01. - Liability for costs. 
The City of Yuba City is authorized to cleanup or abate the effects of any hazardous substance deposited upon or into any property or facilities within the City. Any person or persons who intentionally or negligently cause such deposit shall be liable for the payment of all costs incurred by the City as a result of such cleanup or abatement. The remedy provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(§ 1, Ord. 02-98, eff. June 18, 1998)  
Sec. 4-19.02. - Definition of hazardous substance. 
For purposes of this chapter, "hazardous substance" shall be as defined in Health and Safety Code § 25316 and shall also include any petroleum or petroleum fraction. 
(§ 1, Ord. 02-98, eff. June 18, 1998)  
Sec. 4-19.03. - Definition of costs. 
For purposes of this chapter, "costs incurred by the City" shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the following: actual labor costs of City personnel, including benefits and administrative overhead; cost of equipment operation; cost of materials obtained by the City; and the cost of any contract labor and materials. 
(§ 1, Ord. 02-98, eff. June 18, 1998)  
CHAPTER 20. - TRASH SCAVENGING 
 
Sec. 4-20.01. - Purpose. 
This chapter is necessary to preserve the public health and safety. Trash scavengers enter business and residential refuse containers daily. This causes refuse to be scattered about the area of the containers causing an unnecessary public health risk to scavengers as well as pedestrians and passers-by. Property owners and residents must spend an inordinate amount of time to clean up the litter caused by the scavengers. 
Secondly, some refuse containers contain sensitive information not intended to be circulated amongst the general public. The discarding owner of such information should have a reasonable expectation that the information placed in a refuse container will not be immediately accessed by persons sorting through his or her refuse. 
(§ 1, Ord. 04-00, eff. July 6, 2000)  
Sec. 4-20.02. - Garbage trespass. 
It is unlawful for any person to open, enter or remove items from a refuse container or receptacle of another located on public or private property without written permission from the person or entity in lawful control of such container or receptacle. Such written permission shall be carried with that person while engaging in the aforementioned activity. This section shall not apply to any peace officer in the performance of his or her duty. 
(§ 1, Ord. 04-00, eff. July 6, 2000)  
Sec. 4-20.03. - Violation. 
Any person violating the provisions of Section 4-20.02 shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Title 1, Chapter 2, Section 1-2.02 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(§ 1, Ord. 04-00, eff. July 6, 2000)  
CHAPTER 21. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 003-16 , § 1, adopted Feb. 16, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 21, §§ 4-21.01—4-21.67, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 21 as set out herein. The former Ch. 21 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 003-10, § 1, effective June 3, 2010. 
 
Article 1. - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 4-21.01. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Stormwater Quality Management and Discharge Control Ordinance" of the City of Yuba City and may be so cited. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.02. - Findings. 
The City Council adopts this chapter based upon the following findings: 
(a)  The Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., provides for the regulation and reduction of pollutants discharged into the waters of the United States by extending National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) requirements to stormwater and urban runoff discharge into the City storm drain system. 
(b)  The State Water Resources Control Board ("State Board") is the State water pollution control agency for all purposes of the Clean Water Act pursuant to California Water Code § 13160 of the California Water Code. The State Board is authorized by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) to administer the NPDES program within the State. The Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (Water Code Section 13000 et seq.) provides authority for the State NPDES program, including provisions to issue NPDES permits and waste discharge requirements to regulate discharges of stormwater to waters of the State. 
(c)  Due to amendments to the Clean Water Act, the USEPA developed a phase I and a phase II program requiring municipalities to develop and implement stormwater pollution management programs. Smaller municipalities and contiguous areas with small, but still urban, communities come under the phase II regulations of the State Board's General Permit for Discharges of Storm Water from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (hereafter called the "small MS4 general permit" where "MS4" stands for "municipal separate storm sewer system"). Yuba City is subject to the phase II regulations, which requires the submittal of a notice of intent (NOI) to seek coverage under the "small MS4 general permit." 
(d)  The Council finds in this regard that the provisions of this chapter are necessary to provide the City with the legal authority necessary to implement and otherwise comply with the requirements of the small MS4 general permit and to protect the waters of the United States for the benefit of its people and the environment. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.03. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water bodies within the incorporated areas of the City in a manner consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act, the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, the small MS4 general permit, and the City Stormwater Management Program, by reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable and by prohibiting non-stormwater discharges from entering the storm drain system. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.04. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all urbanized areas covered under the small MS4 general permit. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.05. - Responsibility for administration. 
The Department of Public Works Director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Director may be delegated by the Director to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City. In administering this chapter, the Director has the authority to request and require the submittal of information deemed necessary to assess compliance with this chapter and the small MS4 general permit. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.06. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, word, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.07. - Regulatory consistency. 
This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act, the Porter-Cologne Act, the small MS4 general permit, and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, or any applicable implementing regulations. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.08. - Conflicts. 
In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any Federal or State law, regulation, order, or permit, that requirement which establishes the higher standard for public health or safety shall govern. To the extent permitted by law, nothing in this chapter shall preclude enforcement of any other applicable law, regulation, order or permit. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.09. - Disclaimer of liability. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the United States caused by said person. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Yuba City or any agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from any discharger's reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.10. - Indemnification. 
Any discharge which would result in or contribute to a violation of the City's small MS4 general permit, either separately, considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and such person(s) shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City against any claim, expense, liability, or payment for injury or damage to any person or property and shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City in any administrative or judicial enforcement or any legal action resulting from such discharge. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Article 2. - Definitions 
 
Sec. 4-21.11. - Definition of words and phrases. 
(a)  The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this article. 
(b)  Any term(s) defined in the small MS4 general permit, the Federal Clean Water Act, the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, and/or defined in the regulations for the stormwater discharge permitting program issued by the Environmental Protection Agency, as amended, and which are not specifically defined in this article shall, when used in this chapter, have the same meaning as set forth in said act or regulation. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.12. - Best management practice. 
Best management practice (BMP) means schedules of activities, prohibition of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the municipal storm drain system and waters of the United States. Best management practices include but are not limited to: treatment facilities to remove pollutants from stormwater; operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks of non-stormwater, waste disposal, and drainage from materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures and such other provisions as the City determines appropriate for the control of pollutants. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.13. - CFR. 
CFR means the Code of Federal Regulations. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.14. - City. 
City means the City of Yuba City, its designated representatives, boards, or commissions. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.15. - Clean Water Act. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.16. - Commercial. 
Commercial means use types that include the distribution, sale and rental of goods, and the provision of services. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.17. - Construction activity. 
Construction activity means any private and public construction project that involves soil disturbing activities, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, paving, grading, demolition, utility work, disturbances to ground such as stockpiling, and excavation. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.18. - Development. 
Development means construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment, or reconstruction of any public or private residential project, industrial, commercial, retail, transportation, institutional, or other nonresidential project including public agency projects. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.19. - Development runoff requirements. 
Development runoff requirements means the provisions in the small MS4 general permit that contain design standards or performance criteria to address both the construction and post-construction phase impacts of new projects and redeveloped projects on stormwater quality and quantity. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.20. - Director. 
Director means the Department of Public Works Director or the Director's authorized representative. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.21. - Discharge or discharge of a pollutant. 
Discharge or discharge of a pollutant means (a) the addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to waters of the United States from any point source, or (b) any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft, which is being used as a means of transportation. The term includes additions of pollutants to waters of the United States from: surface runoff which is collected or channeled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a State, municipality, or other person which do not lead to a treatment works; and discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances, leading into privately owned treatment works. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.22. - Enforcement officer. 
Enforcement officer means any City employee or agent of the City with the authority to enforce any provision of this chapter and the authority to make any decision on behalf of the Director required or called for by this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.23. - Erosion and sediment control plan. 
Erosion and sediment control plan (ESCP) means a plan prepared to control erosion and prevent the discharge of sediment and construction materials from a construction site. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.24. - Garbage. 
Garbage means solid waste from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.25. - Hazardous materials. 
Hazardous materials means any material that, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the environment. "Hazardous materials" include, but are not limited to, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, and any material which a handler or the administering agency has a reasonable basis for believing that it would be injurious to the health and safety of persons or harmful to the environment if released into the environment. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.26. - Illegal discharge. 
Illegal discharge or illicit discharge means any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer (storm drain) system (MS4) that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. The term "illegal discharge" includes all non-stormwater discharges not composed entirely of stormwater and discharges that are not exempt from prohibition (Section 4-21.60). The term "illegal discharge" does not include discharges that are regulated by an NPDES permit (other than the small MS4 general permit). 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.27. - Illicit connections. 
Illicit connections is defined as either of the following: 
(a)  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any collections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency; or 
(b)  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the City. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.28. - Incidental irrigation runoff. 
Incidental irrigation runoff means unintended amounts (volume) of runoff, such as unintended, minimal over-spray from sprinklers that escapes the landscaped area of intended use. Water leaving an intended use area is not considered incidental if it is part of the facility design, is due to excessive application, is due to intentional overflow or application, or is due to negligence. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.29. - Industrial activity. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26 (b)(14). 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.30. - Industrial wastes. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.31. - Local health officer. 
Local health officer means the Sutter County Health Officer. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.32. - Low impact development. 
Low impact development (LID) means a sustainable practice that benefits water supply and contributes to water quality protection. LID uses site design and stormwater management to maintain the site's pre-development runoff rates and volumes. The goal of LID is to mimic a site's predevelopment hydrology by using design techniques that infiltrate, filter, store, evaporate, and detain runoff close to the source of rainfall. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.33. - National pollutant discharge elimination system permit. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) means a discharge permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or a California Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to the Clean Water Act that authorizes discharges to waters of the United States. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.34. - Natural outlet. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.35. - Non-stormwater discharge. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.36. - Permit registration documents. 
Permit registration documents (PRDs) means the application materials required by the State Water Resources Control Board that includes a notice of intent (NOI) to comply with the terms of the General Permit to Discharge Storm Water Associated with Construction and Ground Disturbing Activities (Order No. 2009-0009-DWQ as amended, General Permit No. CAS000002) or the General Permit to Discharge Storm Water Associated with Industrial Activities (Order No. 2014-057-DWQ, General Permit No. CAS000001). 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.37. - Person. 
Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.38. - Pollutant. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure (including, but not limited to, sediments, slurries, concrete rinsates, lime, and asphalt); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind, that is discharged to or placed in such a way as to be carried away by stormwater into the storm drains and watercourses of the City. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.39. - Pollution. 
Pollution means any water or other liquids containing wastes or other materials in concentrations sufficient to create a nuisance condition by directly or indirectly altering the waters' chemical, physical, or biological integrity. "Pollution" includes, but is not limited to, any discolored or otherwise aesthetically undesirable waters; waters that are harmful to human life; and wastes that interfere with the beneficial uses of local water courses (agricultural supply; municipal supply; recreation; aesthetic enjoyment; groundwater recharge; preservation and enhancement of fish, wildlife, and other aquatic resources). 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.40. - Porter-Cologne Act. 
Porter-Cologne Act means the California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and as amended (California Water Code § 13000 et seq.). 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.41. - Post-construction measure requirements. 
Post-construction measure requirements means the requirements of provision E.12 of the small MS4 general permit that contain design standards or performance criteria to address the post-construction phase impacts of new projects and redeveloped projects on stormwater quality and quantity. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.42. - Premises. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.43. - Receiving water limitation. 
Receiving water limitation means site-specific interpretations of water quality standards from applicable water quality control plans. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.44. - Regional Board. 
Regional Board means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.45. - Responsible person. 
Responsible person means the owner or occupant of any premises or who engages in any activity from which there is or may be a non-stormwater discharge or any person who releases pollutants to the City's stormwater system. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.46. - Rubbish. 
Rubbish means any and all solid waste materials, including, but not limited to, paper, rags, bottles, cans, glass, boxes, packing material, trimmings from lawns, trees and gardens, magazines, books, ashes, and construction debris. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.47. - Sewage. 
Sewage means a combination of the municipal wastewater from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.48. - Small MS4 general permit. 
Small MS4 General Permit means the NPDES general stormwater permit applicable to the City of Yuba City, Water Quality Order No. 2013-0001—DWQ, General Permit No. CAS000004, and any subsequent amendment, reissuance or successor to this NPDES permit. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.49. - Spill. 
Spill means any leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the environment, unless permitted or authorized by a regulatory agency. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.50. - Storm drain system. 
Storm drain system or storm drain includes but is not limited to those publicly owned stormwater drainage conveyance facilities within the City by which stormwater may be collected and/or conveyed to the waters of the United States, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures which are within the City and are not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 CFR 122.2 or privately owned facilities outletting to waters of the United States or connected to the City storm drain system. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.51. - Stormwater. 
Stormwater means stormwater runoff, surface flow and runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from weather events such as rain, snow, sleet, or hail. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.52. - Stormwater facilities operation and maintenance plan. 
Stormwater facilities operation and maintenance plan means a plan identifying the locations and characteristics of stormwater management facilities on a newly developed or redeveloped site and describing maintenance activities, schedules, and responsibilities to ensure the ongoing proper operation of those facilities. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.53. - Stormwater management facility. 
Stormwater management facility means any device designated to detain, retain, filter, or infiltrate stormwater. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.54. - Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) means a plan to identify sources of pollutants that affect the quality of stormwater discharges and describes and ensures the implementation of practices to reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.55. - Urban runoff. 
Urban runoff means stormwater runoff from an urbanized area including streets and adjacent domestic and commercial properties that carries pollutants of various types into the storm drainage system and receiving waters. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.56. - Urbanized area. 
Urbanized area means a densely settled core of census tracts and/or census blocks that have a population of at least 50,000, along with adjacent territory containing non-residential urban land uses as well as territory with low population density included to link outlying densely settled territory with the densely settled core. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.57. - Watercourse. 
Watercourse means a channel, ditch, drainage swale, closed pipe system, whether manmade or natural, or depression in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.58. - Waters of the United States. 
Waters of the United States means surface watercourses and water bodies as defined within 40 CFR 122.2, including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Article 3. - Discharge Prohibitions 
 
Sec. 4-21.59. - Prohibition of illegal discharges. 
It is unlawful to discharge, permit to be discharged or cause to be discharged any non-stormwater discharges into any storm drain system, watercourse, natural outlet, creek or channel except as provided in Section 4-21.60. All discharges other than stormwater must be in compliance with this chapter, state and federal regulations. 
The discharge of stormwater from premises or any activity that causes or contributes to a violation of receiving water limitations in the City's NPDES permit is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.60. - Exemptions. 
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(a)  Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a significant source of pollutants to the municipal storm drain system and to waters of the United States when properly managed to ensure that no potential pollutants are present, and therefore they shall not be considered illegal discharges unless determined to cause a violation of the provisions of the Porter-Cologne Act, the Federal Clean Water Act, the small MS4 general permit, or this chapter: 
(1)  Water line flushing; 
(2)  Incidental irrigation runoff from landscaped areas provided the conditions in item (d) of this section are met; 
(3)  Diverted stream flows; 
(4)  Rising groundwater; 
(5)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20)) to separate storm sewers; 
(6)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
(7)  Discharges from potable water sources; 
(8)  Foundation drains; 
(9)  Air-conditioning condensation; 
(10)  Springs; 
(11)  Water from crawl space pumps; 
(12)  Footing drains; 
(13)  Lawn watering; 
(14)  Individual residential car washing; 
(15)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(16)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and 
(b)  Discharges or flows from firefighting activities are excluded from the prohibition of non-stormwater and need only be addressed where they are identified as significant sources of pollutants to waters of the United States. 
(c)  The prohibition of non-stormwater discharges shall not apply to any discharges regulated under another NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the State of California under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that approval has been granted by the City for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(d)  Irrigation systems must be designed to conserve water and prevent water leaving the area of application. Persons responsible for controlling irrigation systems shall prevent excessive irrigation runoff by: 
(1)  Detecting and correcting leaks from the irrigation system within 72 hours of discovering the leak; 
(2)  Properly designing and aiming sprinkler heads to only irrigate the planned application area; 
(3)  Not irrigating during precipitation events; and 
(4)  Where recycled water is used for irrigation, designing and managing holding ponds such that no discharge occurs unless it is the result of the 25-year-24-hour storm event. Any releases from holding ponds must be reported to the Regional Water Board and the City of Yuba City within 24 hours of the discharge. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.61. - Exceptions to otherwise applicable exemptions. 
Notwithstanding the exemptions provided for in the previous section above, if the Regional Board or the Director determines that a discharge which is otherwise exempt from the prohibition on discharges causes or significantly contributes to a violation of any receiving water limitation or results in the conveyance of significant quantities of pollutants to surface waters, or is otherwise a danger to public health or safety, the Director may give written notice to the owner or operator of the facility that the discharge exception shall not apply to the discharge at issue following a 30-day period commencing upon delivery of the notice. Upon expiration of such 30-day period, any such discharge from the noticed facility shall be unlawful. Upon finding that any discharge poses an immediate significant threat to the environment or to public health and safety, the Director may waive the 30-day waiting period and require immediate cessation of the discharge. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.62. - Solid waste disposal prohibitions. 
Except for pollutants lawfully disposed of by way of containers or at a licensed dumping ground, no person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left, or maintained, in or upon any public or private lot of land or other premises in the City, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, business place, component of the storm drain system, or waters of the United States, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that the same might be or become a pollutant discharged to water or may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes properly deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles or pursuant to a City sponsored program for the purposes of collection are exempted from this prohibition. 
The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee or proprietor of any premises, residential or commercial, in the City in front of which there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain said sidewalk free of dirt or litter to the maximum extent practicable. Sweepings from said sidewalk, including but not limited to the blowing or sweeping of leaves, grass clippings, or other organic wastes, shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.63. - NPDES stormwater discharge general permits. 
Any person conducting an industrial or construction activity, or other discharger, described in any general stormwater permit addressing such discharges, as may be adopted by the Environmental Protection Agency, State Water Resources Control Board, or the Regional Water Board, shall provide permit registration documents, comply with, and undertake, all other activities required by any general stormwater permit applicable to such discharges. 
Proof of compliance with said stormwater general permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Director prior to, or as a condition of, a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, grading permit, or development or improvement agreement, upon inspection of the facility, during any enforcement proceeding or action, or for any other reasonable cause. Prior to issuance of a construction permit or approval of the proposed improvement plans, proof of compliance shall include a copy of the notice of intent (NOI), and a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) for said activity submitted to the City. 
The Director and/or the enforcement officer, may, at any time, inspect facilities and sites subject to general stormwater permits to ensure compliance with the measures outlined in the SWPPP for said facilities and sites and implement enforcement measures as outlined in Article 5 of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Article 4. - Regulations and Requirements 
 
Sec. 4-21.64. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants. 
(a)  The Director is authorized to designate as subject activities any activities, operations, or facilities identified as sources or potential sources of pollutant discharges to the City storm drain system, natural surface waters, or watercourses. A subject activity may occur at a stationary facility or it may occur as a mobile activity that takes place at various job sites. The City may require the implementation of best management practices (BMPs) for any of such subject activities that may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. 
(b)  All persons engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants entering the City storm drain system, natural surface waters, or watercourses shall undertake all practicable measures to cease such activities, and/or eliminate or reduce such pollutants. Such activities shall include, but not be limited to, ownership and use of parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, commercial facilities, ground disturbing activities, and stores fronting City streets. Such persons shall implement BMPs to prevent and/or reduce such pollutants from entering non-stormwater discharges and/or stormwater discharges. 
(c)  All BMPs shall be protected, inspected, and maintained to ensure continuous and fully effective performance as designed. A maintenance and inspection schedule for both dry and wet season BMPs shall be in writing and a record shall be kept with dates, the BMP inspected or maintained, a description of any maintenance activity, and the name of the inspector or maintenance foreman. This record shall be made available to the Director upon request. 
(d)  Whenever the Director finds that a discharge of pollutants is taking place or has occurred that results in or resulted in pollutants entering the City storm drain system or natural surface waters, the Director shall require by written notice to the owner or occupant of the property that the pollution be remediated and the affected property restored within a specified time pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  The Director shall by written notice require that persons engaged in subject activities and/or owning or operating designated facilities, which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution, illicit discharges, and/or non-stormwater discharges into the City storm drain system, natural surface waters, or watercourses, to undertake at said person's expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the Director as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(f)  The City may establish requirements identifying appropriate best management practices to control the volume, rate, and potential pollutant load of stormwater runoff from new development and redevelopment projects as may be appropriate to minimize the generation, transport and discharge of pollutants. The City shall incorporate such requirements in any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit to be issued relative to such development or redevelopment. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of such land use entitlements and building permits as required in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.65. - Best management practices for construction and ground disturbing activities. 
Any person performing any ground disturbing activities shall implement appropriate best management practices (BMPs) consistent with the California Stormwater Quality Association BMPs or equivalent to prevent the discharge of sediment, construction wastes, or pollutants from construction materials, tools, and equipment from entering into the City storm drain system or natural surface waters. These pollutants may include, but are not limited to, soils, construction wastes, or debris, contaminants from construction materials, tools, and equipment. 
(a)  Authorization to review. The City has the authority to review designs and proposals for construction activities and new development and redevelopment sites to determine whether adequate BMPs will be installed, implemented, and maintained during construction and after final stabilization (post-construction). 
(b)  Erosion and sediment control. All construction plans and applications submitted to the City pursuant to any permit application shall consider the potential for erosion and sedimentation at the construction site, and shall include appropriate erosion and sedimentation controls. 
(c)  Erosion and sediment control plan requirements. 
(1)  When required by the City, a project shall have an erosion and sediment control plan (ESCP) that addresses erosion and sediment control and pollution prevention during the construction phase and final stabilization control measures. The ESCP shall be implemented year round and must be updated to reflect changing conditions on the project site. 
(2)  Implementation of an approved ESCP by the applicant shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a grading permit, building permit, or a construction permit for a project subject to this section. Subsequent changes to the ESCP must be submitted to the City for review and approval. 
(3)  The Director may issue guidance and requirements specifying the content of ESCPs. The City will provide references to current guidance manuals and BMP information on request. 
(4)  The City shall collect a fee in accordance with the fee schedule to ensure compliance with the ESCP. The fee schedule would be adopted under a separate resolution. 
(5)  Financial security may be required to ensure that BMPs operate and are maintained during the construction period. Financial security shall consist of an irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit, or performance bond as determined by the City. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.66. - Best management practices for new development and redevelopment. 
(a)  New development and redevelopment projects shall be required to implement post-construction BMPs to control the volume, rate, and potential pollutant load of stormwater runoff, including, but not limited to, requirements to minimize the generation, transport, and discharge of pollutants. 
(b)  Post-construction BMPs. 
(1)  Prior to and/or during construction, the City may establish controls on the volume and rate of stormwater runoff from new developments and redevelopment as may be appropriate to minimize peak flows or total runoff volume, and to mimic the pre-development site hydrology. These controls may include limits on impervious area or provisions for detention and retention of runoff on-site. 
(2)  Permanent structural controls. The City may require, as a condition of project approval, permanent structural controls designed for the removal of sediment and other pollutants. The selection and design of such controls shall be in accordance with criteria established or recommended by federal, state, or local agencies. Where physical and safety conditions allow, the preferred control measure is to retain drainageways above ground and in as natural a state as possible or other biological methods such as bioretention areas. 
(3)  The Director may issue design guidelines for post-construction BMPs consistent with the small MS4 general permit and may amend the guidelines from time to time in accordance with state and federal laws. 
(4)  The City shall incorporate such post-construction design guideline requirements in any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit to be issued relative to such development or redevelopment. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions and conditions of such land use entitlements and building permits as required in this chapter. The City shall collect a fee in accordance with the fee schedule to ensure compliance with the post-construction BMPs. 
(5)  Any permit issued for the construction of a privately-owned post-construction BMP shall be conditioned upon the applicant providing a written acknowledgement of the obligation to maintain the BMP in accordance with the original design capacity and standards. In the event that future improvements negate the need for a privately-owned post-construction BMP, the maintenance obligation may be altered or removed by the Director upon the receipt and review of a document evidencing the removal of such obligation. 
(c)  Runoff control plan requirements. 
(1)  For each new development and redevelopment project subject to the development runoff requirements, or where required by the nature and extent of a proposed project and where deemed appropriate by the City, every applicant will submit a runoff control plan and shall implement conditions of approval that reduce stormwater pollutant discharges through the construction, operation and maintenance of source control measures, low impact development design, site design measures, stormwater treatment measures and hydromodification management measures. Increases in runoff shall be managed in accordance with the development runoff requirements. 
(2)  Implementation of an approved runoff control plan and submittal of an approved stormwater facilities operation and maintenance plan by the applicant shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit or a construction permit for a project subject to this section. Financial security may be required to ensure that stormwater management facilities operate and are maintained following construction for a period which may be determined by the City. Financial security shall consist of an irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit, or performance bond as determined by the City. 
(3)  All stormwater management facilities shall be designed in a manner to minimize the need for maintenance and reduce the chances of failure. All stormwater management facilities shall be maintained according to the approved stormwater facilities operation and maintenance plan. The person(s) or organization(s) responsible for maintenance shall be designated in the plan. Unless a different time period is provided for in the plan, those responsible for maintenance shall inspect the stormwater management facility at least annually. The plan shall also describe how the maintenance costs will be funded. Upon the failure of a responsible person to maintain a stormwater management facility in accordance with this chapter or the plan, the City may perform the maintenance and recover its costs from the responsible person as provided in this chapter. 
(4)  For each new development and redevelopment project subject to the development runoff requirements, or where deemed appropriate by the City, access by the City to stormwater management facilities for inspections, as provided in Section 4-21.74, and through such means as may be appropriate, including, but not limited to, legal agreements, recorded covenants or easements, shall be provided by the property owner. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.67. - Requirement to eliminate illegal discharges. 
Notwithstanding the requirements of this chapter, the Director may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illegal discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.68. - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, use or maintain, or cause to establish, use or maintain, any illicit connection. Illicit connections shall be subject to removal or abatement by the City. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(b)  The prohibition set forth in subsection (a) above shall apply to illicit connections in existence at the time this chapter becomes effective. Upon the effective date of this chapter, any person who maintains an illicit connection shall have 30 days to disconnect and discontinue use of such connection or secure approval of such connection. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.69. - Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections. 
(a)  The Director may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain system comply with the requirements of this chapter to eliminate or secure approval for the connection by a specified date, regardless of whether or not the connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
(b)  If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this chapter, the responsible person can demonstrate that an illegal discharge will no longer occur, said person may request City approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the responsible person's expense. 
(c)  If any person fails to disconnect an illicit connection upon notification by the Director or enforcement officer, the Director or enforcement officer may direct that such connection be disconnected from the storm drain system. The City may pursue the recovery of costs for such disconnection. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.70. - Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for utility and bikeway construction and/or maintenance, flood control, or fire protection, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to unnaturally high rates of erosion. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.71. - Prohibition of spills. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a spill to discharge into the municipal storm drain system or any watercourse. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.72. - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal storm drain system, any watercourse, or water of the United States from said facility, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. 
(a)  In the event of such a release of a hazardous material said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). Said person should also notify the Public Works Department immediately. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City's Public Works Department within three business days of the phone notice. 
(b)  In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the City's Public Works Department, Stormwater Management Program, no later than 5:00 p.m. of the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City's Public Works Department, Engineering Division, Stormwater Management Program, within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(c)  For any discharge subject to the reporting requirements of the State of California Water Code §§ 13271 and 13272, notification in compliance therewith shall constitute sufficient notification for the purposes of this section. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.73. - Hazardous materials response. 
Any person engaged in activities which may result in pollutants entering the municipal storm drain system shall, to the maximum extent practicable, undertake the measures set forth below to reduce the risk of non-stormwater discharge and/or pollutant discharge. 
(a)  Any business requiring a hazardous materials release response and inventory plan under Chapter 6.95 (commencing with Section 25500) of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code, shall include in that plan provisions for compliance with this chapter, including the provisions prohibiting non-stormwater discharges and illegal discharges or connections, and requiring the release of pollutants to be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. 
(b)  Any business requiring a hazardous waste generator contingency plan and emergency procedures pursuant to California Code of Regulations, Title 22, sections 66265.51 to 66265.56, shall include in that plan provisions for compliance with this chapter, including the provisions prohibiting non-stormwater discharges and illegal discharges, and requiring the release of pollutants to be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Article 5. - Inspection and Monitoring 
 
Sec. 4-21.74. - Authority to inspect. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the Director, or enforcement officer, has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the Director, and/or the enforcement officer, may enter and inspect such premises (including, but not limited to, facilities, equipment, practices, or operations that may be situated outside the premises or at field sites) at all reasonable times to inspect and copy records related to stormwater compliance to inspect the same for any or all of the following situations, as determined by the Director and/or the enforcement officer: 
(a)  Routine inspections to ensure implementation of BMPs and other requirements of this chapter; 
(b)  Active or potential stormwater discharges; 
(c)  Whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists any condition which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this chapter or the phase II stormwater permit; 
(d)  Actual violations of this chapter or the phase II stormwater permit; 
(e)  Whenever necessary to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter or the phase II stormwater permit; or 
(f)  To perform any duty imposed upon the official by this chapter. 
The Director and/or enforcement officer must present proper credentials, and obtain consent from the owner or occupant, to enter. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the City is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.75. - Authority to sample, establish sampling devices, and test. 
Inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this chapter, including but not limited to, random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, illegal discharge, non-stormwater discharge to the stormwater conveyance system, or similar factors. 
During any inspection as provided herein, the Director or his or her designee may take samples, perform any testing deemed necessary and take photographs to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. This authority may include the installation of sampling and metering devices on private property, or requiring the person owning or occupying the premises to supply samples. The enforcement officer may require monitoring, analysis and reporting of discharges from any premises to the municipal storm drain system. Upon service of written notice by the enforcement official, the burden, including cost, of these activities, analyses and reports, incurred in complying with the requirement shall, to the extent permitted by law, be borne by the property owner or occupant of the facility or activity for which testing and monitoring has been requested. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.76. - Requirement to monitor and analyze. 
The Director may require by written notice a requirement that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution, illegal discharges, and/or non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain system or waters of the United States, to undertake at said person's expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the City as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.77. - Requirement to remediate. 
Whenever the Director finds that a discharge of pollutants is taking place or has occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States, the Director may require by written notice to the owner of the property and/or the responsible person that the pollution be remediated and the affected property restored at their expense within a specified time pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Article 6. - Enforcement 
 
Sec. 4-21.78. - Violations. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter. A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall occur irrespective of the negligence or intent of the violator to construct, maintain, operate or utilize an illicit connection or to cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge. A violation of or failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter may be charged as either an infraction or a misdemeanor in the discretion of the City Attorney. 
In addition to any other enforcement powers and/or remedies provided in this chapter, the Director or enforcement officer may issue an order to a person to cease and desist from the discharge, practice, operation or other activity causing or likely to cause a violation of this chapter. At the discretion of the Director or enforcement officer, orders to cease and desist may take the following form: 
(a)  Verbal warnings, as may be issued during inspections; 
(b)  Warning letters and orders to abate pollution; 
(c)  Warning letters with requirements to submit written reports; and 
(d)  Formal violations and legal action as described in this chapter. 
Whenever the Director or enforcement officer finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the Director or enforcement officer may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation: 
(a)  The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting; 
(b)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(c)  That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and desist; 
(d)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(e)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(f)  The implementation or maintenance of source control or treatment BMPs. 
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work may be done by the City or a contractor designated by the Director and/or the enforcement officer and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator pursuant to this chapter. A notice issued under this chapter shall identify the provisions of this chapter which have been violated, shall state the recipient has the right to appeal as set forth in Section 4-21.81 of this chapter. 
Said notice shall be served upon recipient by: (1) personal service; (2) deposit in U.S. mail, postage pre-paid for first class delivery; or (3) electronic mail service with confirmation of receipt. Where recipient is the owner of the subject property, the address for notice shall be the address from the most recently issued equalized assessment roll or as otherwise appears in the current records of the county. Where the owner or occupant cannot be located after reasonable efforts, notice of violation shall be deemed delivered after posting on the subject property for a period of ten days. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.79. - Acts potentially resulting in a violation of the Clean Water Act and/or Porter-Cologne Act. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of any requirement issued pursuant to this chapter, or who discharges waste or wastewater which causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, or effluent limitation, may also be in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act and/or the Porter-Cologne Act and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement action authorized under this chapter shall also include written notice to the violator of such potential liability. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.80. - Violation procedure. 
Whenever the Director determines that a violation has occurred, or may occur, the violation procedure may follow the City's Administrative Citation Program contained in Chapter 6, Title 1, of the City's Municipal Code or any other procedure authorized by law or the City's Municipal Code in the discretion of the City. In any such action, the City may seek, and the court shall grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies: 
(a)  A temporary and/or permanent injunction. 
(b)  An action for an unlawful business practice pursuant to Business and Professions Code § 17206. 
(c)  Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection. 
(d)  Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from the violation. 
(e)  Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. Assessments under this subsection shall be paid to the City to be used exclusively for costs associated with monitoring and establishing stormwater discharge pollution control systems and/or implementing or enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  The cost of maintenance and repair of any BMP or stormwater management facility that is not maintained in accordance with the guidebook or the stormwater control plan. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.81. - Appeal. 
Any person may appeal a violation of this chapter in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.82. - Stop work orders. 
Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the Director or enforcement officer may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Director or enforcement officer to proceed with the work. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.83. - Urgency abatement on private property. 
The Director is authorized to require immediate abatement of any violation of this chapter that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public or the environment, or is a violation of a NPDES permit. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the Director, the City is authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the City is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the City shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief under this section shall not prevent the City from seeking other and further relief authorized under this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-21.84. - Urgency abatement of municipal storm drain system. 
The Director is authorized to immediately abate or require the abatement of any illegal discharge or spill into the municipal storm drain system when in the opinion of the enforcement officer it constitutes or threatens to constitute an immediate threat to the public health, safety or wellbeing, or to the environment, or is a violation of a NPDES permit. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the Director or the enforcement officer, the City is authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the City is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the City shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief under this section shall not prevent the City from seeking other and further relief authorized under this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 003-16 , § 2, 2-16-2016)  
CHAPTER 22. - AGGRESSIVE AND UNSAFE PANHANDLING 
 
Sec. 4-22.010. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect the safety and welfare of the general public and improve the quality of life and economic vitality of the City of Yuba City by imposing reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions on aggressive, intrusive or unsafe panhandling while respecting the constitutional rights of free speech for all citizens. 
(b)  Aggressive and intrusive panhandling typically includes approaching or following pedestrians, the use of abusive language, unwanted physical contact, or the intentional blocking of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The City Council finds that an increase in aggressive panhandling throughout the City has become disturbing and disruptive to residents and businesses and has contributed not only to the loss of access to and enjoyment of places open to the public, but has also created an enhanced sense of fear, intimidation and disorder. 
(c)  The City Council finds that panhandling from people in places where they are a "captive audience," in which it is impossible or difficult for them to exercise their own right to decline to listen to or to avoid panhandling from others, is problematic and presents a risk to the health, safety and welfare of the public. Such places include public transportation vehicles and their designated locations for stops, as well as gasoline stations. The City Council further finds that the presence of individuals who panhandle money from persons at or near banks or automated teller machines is especially threatening and dangerous. Such activity often carries with it an implicit threat to both person and property. Restricting panhandling in such places will provide a balance between the rights of panhandlers and the rights of persons who wish to decline or avoid such panhandlings, and will help avoid or diminish the threat of violence in such unwarranted and unavoidable confrontations. 
(d)  The City Council finds that panhandling on roadway median strips, at traffic intersections, and in the public roadway is unsafe and hazardous for panhandlers, drivers, pedestrians, and the general public. Panhandling on roadway median strips, at traffic intersections, and in the public roadway increases the risk of drivers becoming distracted from their primary duty to watch traffic which may result in automobile accidents, congestion and blockage of streets, and delay and obstruction of the free flow of travel, all of which constitute substantial traffic safety problems. 
(e)  The City Council further finds that the practice of panhandling near driveways accessing shopping centers, retail, and business establishments is unsafe and hazardous for panhandlers, drivers, pedestrians and the general public. The location of the panhandler near the driveway compromises the panhandler's safety, impedes visibility, and impairs a driver's ability to safely enter and exit. Drivers also become distracted from their duty to watch traffic which may result in automobile accidents, congestion and blockage of streets, and delay and obstruction of the free flow of travel, all of which constitute substantial traffic safety problems. 
(f)  This law is timely and appropriate because current laws and City regulations are insufficient to address the aforementioned problems. The restrictions contained herein are neither overbroad nor vague and they are narrowly tailored to serve a substantial governmental interest. The goal of this law is to protect citizens from the fear and intimidation accompanying certain kinds of panhandling that have become an unwelcome presence in the City, and to protect the safety of the general public. 
( Ord. No. 002-14 , § 1, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 4-22.020. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  After dark means any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise. 
(b)  Aggressive means any of the following: 
(1)  Conduct intended or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, to fear damage to or loss of property, or otherwise to be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value; 
(2)  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person or an occupied vehicle without that person's consent; 
(3)  Persisting in closely following or approaching a person, after the person has informed a panhandler that such person does not want to be panhandled or does not want to give money or any other thing of value to the panhandler; 
(4)  Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person; or 
(5)  Using profane, offensive or abusive language that is inherently likely to provoke an immediate reaction either before, during or after panhandling. 
(c)  Automated teller machine (ATM) means any electronic information processing device which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit, or convenience account. 
(d)  Automated teller machine facility means the area comprised of one or more automated teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours. 
(e)  Bank means any member bank of the Federal Reserve System, and any bank, banking association, trust company, savings bank, or other banking institution organized or operated under the laws of the United States, and any bank the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
(f)  Check cashing business means any person duly licensed as a check seller, bill payer, or prorater pursuant to Financial Code div. 3 (§ 12000 et seq.). 
(g)  Credit union means any Federal credit union and any State-chartered credit union the accounts of which are insured by the Administrator of the National Credit Union Administration. 
(h)  Donation means a gift of money or other item of value. 
(i)  Financial institutions means any of the following as defined herein: bank, savings and loan association, credit union, and/or check cashing business. 
(j)  Intrusive means to thrust or force oneself in without invitation, permission, or welcome and cause physical contact, block the path of travel, or behave in a threatening manner. 
(k)  Median strip means a paved or planted area of public right-of-way that divides a street or highway according to the direction of travel. 
(l)  Panhandling means to ask, beg, request using the spoken, written, or printed word, or bodily gestures, signs or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value or panhandling the direct and immediate sale of goods or services. 
(m)  Public place means a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway, sidewalk, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, playground, and any doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby and other portion of any business establishment, an apartment house or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence. 
(n)  Public transportation vehicle means any vehicle, including a trailer bus, or train, designed, used or maintained for carrying ten or more persons, including the driver; or a passenger vehicle designed for carrying fewer than ten persons, including the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire. 
(o)  Savings and loan association means any Federal savings and loan association and any "insured institution" as defined in Section 401 of the National Housing Act, as amended, and any Federal credit union as defined in Section 1752 of the Federal Credit Union Act. 
( Ord. No. 002-14 , § 1, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 4-22.030. - Prohibited panhandling. 
(a)  No person shall panhandle in an aggressive or intrusive manner in any public place. 
(b)  All panhandling is prohibited at the following specified locations: 
(1)  Financial institutions and automated teller machines (ATMs). No person shall panhandle within an automated teller machine facility where a reasonable person would or should know that he or she does not have the permission to do so from the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such facility. No person shall panhandle within 35 feet of any entrance or exit of any financial institution during its business hours or within 35 feet of any automated teller machine during the time it is available for customers' use. When an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility. 
These provisions shall not apply to any unenclosed automated teller machine located within any building, structure or space whose primary purpose or function is unrelated to banking activities, including but not limited to supermarkets, airports and school buildings, provided that such automated teller machine shall be available for use only during the regular hours of operation of the building, structure or space in which such machine is located. 
(2)  Motor vehicles. No person shall panhandle from an operator or occupant traveling in a motor vehicle while such vehicle is located within 100 feet of any intersection in which at least one corner is controlled by an official traffic signal of the type set forth in Vehicle Code § 21450 or by any sign regulating the flow of traffic, such as a stop sign or yield sign. 
(3)  Median strips. No person shall panhandle on a median strip or in any manner or location that is inconsistent with the provisions of the California Vehicle Code. 
(4)  Driveways accessing shopping centers, retail, and business establishments. No person shall panhandle from an operator or occupant traveling in a motor vehicle while such vehicle is located within 35 feet of a driveway providing vehicular access to a shopping center, retail, or business establishment. 
(5)  Public transportation vehicles and stops. No person shall panhandle in any public transportation vehicle or within 50 feet of any designated or posted public transportation vehicle stop. 
(6)  Gasoline stations and fuel pumps. No person shall panhandle from an operator or occupant of a motor vehicle while such vehicle is stopped in a gasoline station or at a gasoline pump. This subsection (b)(6) shall not apply to panhandlings related to business authorized by and/or conducted by the property owner, business owner, or employees thereof on the premises. 
(c)  No person shall panhandle in any place after dark. This section is not violated if a person who is panhandling is doing so: 
(1)  On private property that is open to the public; and 
(2)  With the express authorization of the owner, manager, or supervisor at the business operating at the property. 
( Ord. No. 002-14 , § 1, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 4-22.040. - Penalty. 
(a)  Infraction. Any person who violates Section 4-22.030 of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(b)  Misdemeanor. Any person who violates Section 4-22.030 of this chapter more than two times within a six-month period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall limit or preclude the enforcement of any other applicable laws or remedies available for violations of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 002-14 , § 1, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 4-22.050. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, phrase, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or portion of this chapter, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. 
( Ord. No. 002-14 , § 1, 9-2-2014)  
TITLE 5. - PUBLIC WELFARE, MORALS, AND CONDUCT  
CHAPTER 1. - ADVERTISING (To Be Enacted)  
CHAPTER 2. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES (To Be Enacted)  
CHAPTER 3. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE THERAPISTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 003-17 , § 1, adopted March 21, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 3, §§ 5-3.01—5-3.16, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 3 as set out herein. The former Ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from § 1, Ord. 015-04, eff. Nov. 18, 2014. 
 
Sec. 5-3.01. - Purpose—Authority. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the orderly regulation of massage therapists and massage establishments, in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. The City wishes both to recognize the practice of massage as a valid professional field and to discourage prostitution and other unlawful activity which otherwise may become associated with some massage establishments. 
This chapter relies upon the uniform statewide certification process applicable to massage practitioners and establishments under California Business and Professions Code § 4600 et seq. In addition, this chapter provides certain minimum standards for the operation of massage establishments, their managing employees, and massage practitioners. 
This chapter is adopted under the authority of Government Code §§ 51030 through 51034. 
( Ord. No. 003-17 , § 2, 3-21-2017)  
Sec. 5-3.02. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the particular provision or the context otherwise clearly requires, the definitions in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. 
(a)  Business includes, but not by way of limitation, everything about which a person can be employed, and means that which occupies the time, attention, and labor of men and women for the purpose of producing a livelihood or profit, and connotes the efforts of men and women by varied and diverse methods of dealing with each other, to improve their individual economic conditions, and for the purposes of this chapter shall include, without limitation, the advertising and soliciting of massages. The term "business" includes, but is not limited to, a massage practitioner who is the sole owner, operator and employee of a massage business operating as a sole proprietorship, as well as a massage establishment which employs massage practitioners and therapists. 
(b)  California Massage Therapy Council or CAMTC means the massage therapy organization formed pursuant to Business and Professions Code § 4600.5. 
(c)  Certified massage practitioner means any individual certified by the California Massage Therapy Council as a certified massage therapist or as a certified massage practitioner pursuant to California Business and Professions Code § 4600 et seq. 
(d)  Client means the customer or patron who pays for or receives massage services. 
(e)  Compensation means the payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, exchange, or gift of money or anything of value. 
(f)  City Manager means the City Manager of the City of Yuba City, and his or her authorized representatives or designees. 
(g)  City registration certificate means a registration certificate issued by the Chief of Police upon submission of satisfactory evidence that a massage business employs or uses only certified massage practitioners pursuant to this chapter. 
(h)  Chief of Police means the Chief of Police of the City of Yuba City, and his or her authorized representatives or designees. 
(i)  Employee means any person employed by a massage business who may render any service to the business, and who receives any form of compensation from the business. 
(j)  Exempt therapist means a person who meets the following criteria: 
A person who has completed at least 200 hours of approved training and shows to the satisfaction of the City Police Department that he or she would have qualified for a massage therapist permit under the requirements of the previous massage ordinance. 
A person who is an exempt therapist shall comply with all the requirements of this chapter, except for the State certification requirements. Exempt therapists must apply for and receive a permit through the City Police Department to practice as a massage therapist. Exempt therapists will be subject to a suspension or revocation of their permit as described in Section 5-3.10. Exempt therapists must renew their permits annually. Exempt therapists who allow their license to expire will not be eligible for a renewal. Persons must submit an application for an exempt therapist permit to the City Police Department prior to December 31, 2017, to be eligible for the exempt therapist permit. 
(k)  Massage or massage therapy means and refers to any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, health, or hygienic purposes for any form of compensation by means of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, or stimulating the external parts of the body, with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances; or with or without supplementary aids, such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice; or by baths, including but not limited to Turkish, Russian, Swedish, Japanese, vapor, shower, electric tub, sponge, mineral, fomentation, or any other type of bath. 
(l)  Massage business means any business that offers massage therapy in exchange for compensation, whether at a fixed place of business or at a location designated by the customer or client through outcall massage services. Any business that offers any combination of massage therapy and bath facilities, including, but not limited to, showers, baths, wet and dry heat rooms, pools and hot tubs, shall be deemed a massage business under this chapter. The term "massage business" includes a certified massage practitioner who is the sole owner, operator and employee of a massage business operating as a sole proprietorship. 
(m)  Operator or massage business operator means any and all owners of a massage business. 
(n)  Outcall massage means the engaging in or carrying on of massage therapy for compensation in a location other than the business operations address set forth in the massage business's City registration certificate. 
(o)  Owner or massage business owner means any of the following persons: 
(1)  Any person who is a general partner of a general or limited partnership that owns a massage business. 
(2)  Any person who has five percent or greater ownership interest in a corporation that owns a massage business. 
(3)  Any person who is a member of a limited liability company that owns a massage business. 
(4)  Any person who has a five percent or greater ownership interest in any other type of business association that owns a massage business. 
(p)  Permit means the permit required by this chapter to practice massage as an exempt therapist. 
(q)  Person means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture, limited liability company, or combination of individuals. 
(r)  Practitioner or massage practitioner shall be used interchangeably and mean any person who administers massage to another person, for any form of consideration (whether for the massage, as part of other services or a product, or otherwise). 
(s)  Reception and waiting area means an area immediately inside the front door of the massage business dedicated to the reception and waiting of patrons of the massage business and visitors, and which is not a massage therapy room or otherwise used for the provision of massage therapy services. 
(t)  Registration means the registration required by this chapter to operate a massage business. 
(u)  School of massage means any school or institution of learning that is recognized as an approved school pursuant to Business and Professions Code Division 2, Chapter 10.5, as currently drafted or as may be amended. 
(v)  Sole proprietorship means and includes any legal form of business organization where the business owner (sometimes referred to as the "sole proprietor") is the only person employed by that business to provide massage services. 
(w)  Solicit means to request, ask, demand or otherwise arrange for the provision of services. 
( Ord. No. 003-17 , § 2, 3-21-2017)  
Sec. 5-3.03. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals or businesses while engaged in the performance of their duties: 
(a)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, nurses or any physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California and persons working directly under the supervision of or at the direction of such licensed persons, working at the same location as the licensed person, and administering massage services subject to review or oversight by the licensed person. 
(b)  Barbers and cosmetologists who are duly licensed under the laws of the State of California while engaging in practices within the scope of their licenses, except that this provision shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face and/or scalp, hands or feet of the clients. 
(c)  Hospitals, nursing homes, mental health facilities, or any other health facilities duly licensed by the State of California, and employees of these licensed institutions, while acting within the scope of their employment. 
(d)  Accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges or universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their employment. 
(e)  Trainers of amateur, semi-professional or professional athletes or athletic teams while engaging in their training responsibilities for and with athletes; and trainers working in conjunction with a specific athletic event. 
(f)  Individuals administering massages or health treatment involving massage to persons participating in single-occurrence athletic, recreational or festival events, such as health fairs, road races, track meets, triathlons and other similar events; provided, that all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The massage services are made equally available to all participants in the event; 
(2)  The event is open to participation by the general public or a significant segment of the public such as employees of sponsoring or participating corporations; 
(3)  The massage services are provided at the site of the event and either during, immediately preceding or immediately following the event; 
(4)  The sponsors of the event have been advised of and have approved the provisions of massage services; 
(5)  The persons providing the massage services are not the primary sponsors of the event. 
( Ord. No. 003-17 , § 2, 3-21-2017)  
Sec. 5-3.04. - CAMTC certification and local registration required. 
(a)  Individuals. It shall be unlawful for any individual to practice massage therapy for compensation as a sole proprietorship or employee of a massage business or in any other capacity with the City of Yuba City unless that individual is a certified massage practitioner or an exempt therapist. 
(b)  Businesses. It shall be unlawful for any business to provide massage for compensation within the City of Yuba City unless all individuals employed by the massage business to perform massage, whether as an employee, independent contractor or sole proprietorship, are certified massage practitioners or exempt therapists and said business has obtained a valid City registration certificate as provided in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 003-17 , § 2, 3-21-2017)  
Sec. 5-3.05. - Massage business registration. 
(a)  Application. The registration application for a City registration certificate shall include all of the following: 
(1)  Legal name of the massage business. 
(2)  Address and telephone number of the massage business. 
(3)  Legal names of all owners of the massage business. 
(4)  A list of all of the massage business's employees and independent contractors who are performing massage and their CAMTC certification or valid City permit. 
(5)  Residence address and telephone number of all owners of the massage business. 
(6)  Business address and telephone number of all owners of the massage business. 
(7)  The form of business under which the massage business will be operating (i.e. corporation, general or limited partnership, limited liability company, or other form). 
(8)  Each owner operator of the massage business who is not a CAMTC-certified massage practitioner shall submit an application for a background check, including the following: the individual's business, occupation, and employment history for the five years preceding the date of the application; the inclusive dates of such employment history; the name and address of any massage business or similar business owned or operated by the individual within the City of Yuba City. 
(9)  For all owners, a valid and current driver's license and/or identification issued by a State or federal governmental agency or other photographic identification bearing a bona fide seal by a foreign government. 
(10)  For all owners, a signed statement that all of the information contained in the application is true and correct; that all owners shall be responsible for the conduct of the business's employees or independent contractors providing massage services; and acknowledging that failure to comply with the California Business and Professions Code § 4600 et seq., and local, State, or federal law, or the provisions of this chapter may result in revocation of the business's City registration certificate. 
(b)  Issuance. Upon provision by the massage business of the foregoing documentation, the Chief of Police shall issue the massage business a City registration certificate, which shall be valid for two years from the date of issuance. No reapplication will be accepted within one year after an application or renewal is denied or a certificate is revoked. City registration certificates shall not be issued to a massage business seeking to operate at a particular location if another massage business is or was operating at that particular location and that massage business is currently serving a suspension or revocation pursuant to Section 5-3.10, during the pendency of the suspension or one year following revocation. 
(c)  Amendment. A massage business shall apply to the City to amend its City registration certificate within 30 days after any change in the registration information, including, but not limited to, the hiring or termination of certified massage practitioners, the change of the business's address, or changes in the owner's addresses and/or telephone numbers. 
(d)  Renewal. A massage business shall apply to the City to renew its City registration certificate at least 30 days prior to the expiration of said City registration certificate. If an application for renewal of a City registration certificate and all required information is not timely received and the certificate expires, no right or privilege to provide massage shall exist. 
(e)  Fees. There shall be no fee for the registration application or certificate, or any amendment or renewal thereof. The provisions of this section shall not prevent the City from establishing fees for safety inspections as may be conducted from time to time by the Chief of Police, and for the background checks, fingerprinting, and subsequent arrest notification for owners of a massage business who are not CAMTC-certified and who are subject to such background checks pursuant to this chapter. In addition, this section shall not prevent the City from requiring a business license and business license tax for the operation of a massage business pursuant to Chapter 4 of Title 3 of this Code. 
(f)  Transfer. A City registration certificate shall not be transferred except with the prior written approval of the Chief of Police. A written request for such transfer shall contain the same information for the new ownership as is required for applications for registration pursuant to this section. In the event of denial, notification of the denial and reasons therefor shall be provided in writing and shall be provided to the applicant by personal delivery or by registered or certified mail. A City registration certificate may not be transferred during any period of suspension or one year following revocation pursuant to Section 5-3.10. 
( Ord. No. 003-17 , § 2, 3-21-2017)  
Sec. 5-3.06. - Operating requirements. 
No person shall engage in, conduct, carry on, or permit any massage within the City of Yuba City unless all of the following requirements are met: 
(a)  CAMTC certification shall be worn by and clearly visible on the massage practitioner's person during working hours and at all times when the massage practitioner is inside a massage business or providing outcall massage. 
(b)  Massage shall be provided or given only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. No massage business shall be open and no massage shall be provided between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. A massage commenced prior to 10:00 p.m. shall nevertheless terminate at 10:00 p.m., and, in the case of a massage business, all clients shall exit the premises at that time. It is the obligation of the massage business to inform clients of the requirement that services must cease at 10:00 p.m. 
(c)  A list of the services available and the cost of such services shall be posted in the reception area within the massage premises, and shall be described in readily understandable language. Outcall service providers shall provide such a list to clients in advance of performing any service. No owner, manager, operator, or responsible managing employee shall permit, and no massage practitioner shall offer or perform, any service other than those posted or listed as required herein, nor shall an operator or a massage practitioner request or charge a fee for any service other than those on the list of services available and posted in the reception area or provided to the client in advance of any outcall services. 
(d)  A copy of the CAMTC certificate or valid City permit of each and every massage practitioner employed in the business shall be displayed in the reception area or similar open public place on the premises. CAMTC certificates of former employees and/or contractors shall be removed as soon as those massage practitioners are no longer employed by or offering services through the massage business. 
(e)  For each massage service provided, every massage business shall keep a complete and legible written record of the following information: the date and hour that service was provided; the service received; the name or initials of the employee entering the information; and the name of the massage practitioner administering the service. Such records shall be open to inspection and copying by police officers, or used by any massage practitioner or operator for any purpose other than as records of service provided and may not be provided to other parties by the massage practitioner or operator unless otherwise required by law. Such records shall be retained on the premises of the massage business for a period of two years and be immediately available for inspection during business hours. 
(f)  Massage businesses shall at all times be equipped with an adequate supply of clean sanitary towels, coverings and linens. Clean towels, coverings, and linens shall be stored in enclosed cabinets. Towels and linens shall not be used on more than one client, unless they have first been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels and coverings shall not be used on more than one client. Soiled linens and paper towels shall be deposited in separate, approved receptacles. 
(g)  Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, toilet rooms, shower and bath rooms, tanning booths, whirlpool baths and pools shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected as needed, and at least once each day the premises are open, with a disinfectant approved by the Health Officer. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use with a disinfectant approved by the Health Officer. All walls, ceilings, floors, and other physical facilities for the business must be in good repair, and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(h)  Instruments utilized in performing massage shall not be used on more than one client unless they have been sterilized, using approved sterilization methods. 
(i)  All massage business operators and their employees, including massage practitioners, shall wear clean, non-transparent outer garments. Said garments shall not expose their genitals, pubic areas, buttocks, or chest, and shall not be worn in such manner as to expose the genitals, pubic areas, buttocks, or chest. For the purposes of this section, "outer garments" means a garment worn over other garments and does not include garments like underwear, bras, lingerie or swimsuits. 
(j)  No person shall enter, be, or remain in any part of a massage business while in possession of an open container of alcohol, or consuming or using any alcoholic beverage or drugs except pursuant to a prescription for such drugs. The owner, operator, responsible managing employee, or manager shall not permit any such person to enter or remain upon such premises. 
(k)  No massage business shall operate as a school of massage, or use the same facilities as that of a school of massage. 
(l)  No massage business shall place, publish or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective clients that any service is available other than those services listed as an available service pursuant to Section 5-3.06(c), nor shall any massage business employ language in the text of such advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective client that any service is available other than those services as described in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(m)  No massage shall be given unless the client's genitals are, at all times, fully covered. A massage practitioner shall not, in the course of administering any massage, make physical contact with the genitals or private parts of any other person regardless whether the contact is over or under the person's clothing. 
(n)  Where the business has staff available to assure security for clients and massage staff are behind closed doors, the entry to the reception area of the massage business shall remain unlocked during business hours when the business is open for business or when clients are present. 
(o)  No massage business located in a building or structure with exterior windows fronting a public street, highway, walkway, or parking area shall, during business hours, block visibility into the interior reception and waiting area through the use of curtains, closed blinds, tints, or any other material that obstructs, blurs, or unreasonably darkens the view into the premises. For the purpose of this subsection, there is an irrebuttable presumption that the visibility is impermissibly blocked if more than 10% of the interior reception and waiting area is not visible from the exterior window. 
(p)  All signs shall be in conformance with the current ordinances of the City of Yuba City. 
(q)  Minimum lighting consisting of at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided and shall be operating in each room or enclosure where massage services are being performed on clients, and in all areas where clients are present. 
(r)  Ventilation shall be provided in accordance with applicable building codes and regulations. 
(s)  Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
(t)  Adequate dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for clients. 
(u)  A minimum of one wash basin for employees shall be provided at all times. The basin shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to performing of massage services. Sanitary towels shall also be provided at each basin. 
(v)  All massage businesses shall comply with all State and federal laws and regulations for handicapped clients. 
(w)  A massage practitioner shall operate only under the name specified in his or her CAMTC certificate. A massage business shall operate only under the name specified in its City registration certificate. 
(x)  No massage business shall allow any person to reside within the massage business or in attached structures owned, leased or controlled by the massage business. 
(y)  Other than custodial or maintenance staff, no persons shall be permitted within the premises of a massage business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
( Ord. No. 003-17 , § 2, 3-21-2017)  
Sec. 5-3.07. - Inspection by officials. 
The investigating and enforcing officials of the City of Yuba City, including, but not limited to, the police and Director of Development Services, or their designees, shall have the right to enter the premises from time to time during regular business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health regulations, and to enforce compliance with applicable regulations, laws, and statutes, and with the provisions of this chapter. The massage business may be charged a fee for any safety inspections. 
( Ord. No. 003-17 , § 2, 3-21-2017)  
Sec. 5-3.08. - Notifications. 
(a)  A massage business shall notify the Chief of Police of any changes described in Section 5-3.05 pursuant to the timelines specified therein. 
(b)  A registrant shall report to Chief of Police any of the following within 96 hours of the occurrence: 
(1)  Arrests of any employees or owners of the registrant's massage business for an offense other than a misdemeanor traffic offense; 
(2)  Resignations, terminations, or transfers of practitioners employed by the registrant's massage business; 
(3)  Any event involving the registrant's massage business or the massage practitioners employed therein that constitutes a violation of this chapter or State or federal law. 
(c)  This provision requires reporting to the Chief of Police even if the massage business believes that the Chief of Police has or will receive the information from another source. 
( Ord. No. 003-17 , § 2, 3-21-2017)  
Sec. 5-3.09. - Unlawful business practices may be enjoined; remedies cumulative. 
Any massage business operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall constitute an unlawful business practice pursuant to Business and Professions Code § 17200 et seq., and the City Attorney or District Attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of taking any other action permitted by this chapter, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings in the Superior Court of Sutter County, seeking an injunction prohibiting the unlawful business practice and/or any other remedy available at law, including but not limited to fines, attorney's fees and costs. All remedies provided for in this chapter and Code are cumulative. 
( Ord. No. 003-17 , § 2, 3-21-2017)  
Sec. 5-3.10. - Suspension and revocation of City registration certificates and exempt therapist permits. 
(a)  City registration certificates and permits may be suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police upon finding any of the following grounds: 
(1)  A massage practitioner is no longer in possession of current and valid CAMTC certification or valid City permit. This subsection shall apply to a sole proprietor or a person employed or used by a massage business to provide massage. 
(2)  An owner, sole proprietor or massage practitioner fails to register under the provisions of California Penal Code § 290 (sex offender registration), is convicted of California Penal Code §§ 266i (pandering), 315 (keeping or residing in a house of ill-fame), 316 (keeping disorderly house), 318 (prevailing upon person to visit a place for prostitution), 647(b) (engaging in or soliciting prostitution), 653.22 (loitering with intent to commit prostitution), 653.23 (supervision of prostitute); has a business permit or license denied, revoked, restricted, or suspended by any agency, board, city, county, territory, or state; is subject to an injunction for nuisance pursuant to California Penal Code §§ 11225—11235 (red light abatement); is convicted of a felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance; is convicted of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, violence, or moral turpitude; or is convicted in any other state of an offense which, if committed in this State, would have been punishable as one or more referenced offenses in this subsection. 
(3)  The City determines that a material misrepresentation was included on the application for a City registration certificate or permit at registration or renewal. 
(4)  Violations of any of the following occurred on the premises of a massage business or were committed by a massage practitioner: California Business and Professions Code § 4600 et seq.; any local, State, or federal law; or the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Procedures. Written notice of the suspension or revocation shall be served on the sole proprietor or owners by personal service or certified mail with the legal violation and supporting facts. The notice shall contain an advisement of the right to request an appeal hearing before the Police Chief. 
(c)  Time period of suspension of permit. The Chief of Police may suspend a City registration certificate or permit for a period between five days and the end of the license term, at his or her discretion. 
(d)  Effective date of suspension or revocation. Suspension or revocation issued pursuant to subsection (b) of this section will be effective ten days from the date appearing on the order, unless a timely appeal is filed in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Appeal. 
(1)  The decision of the Chief of Police is appealable to the City Manager. 
(2)  An appeal must be in writing, and be hand-delivered or mailed to the City Manager's office. 
(3)  An appeal must be received by the City Manager on or before the effective date of suspension or revocation provided by subsection (d) of this section. 
(4)  The filing of a timely appeal will stay a suspension or revocation pending a decision on the appeal by the City Manager. 
(5)  A hearing shall be scheduled before the City Manager within 30 days. Either the appellant or the Police Chief may request, in writing directed to the City Manager, a continuance of the hearing. Such requests must be supported by good cause. The decision whether to grant a continuance is at the discretion of the City Manager, who shall consider whether granting the continuance poses a threat to public health or safety in light of the severity of the violations alleged. 
(6)  The decision of the City Manager shall be final, with no further administrative right of appeal or reconsideration. The City Manager may sustain a suspension or revocation, overrule a suspension or revocation, reduce a revocation to a suspension and/or reduce the length of a suspension. Further, the City Manager may stay the effective date of any suspension for a reasonable time following a hearing. 
(f)  Reapplication. No reapplication will be accepted within one year after a certificate is revoked. 
(g)  Evidence. The following rules shall apply to any hearing required by this section. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues, to be represented by counsel, and to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply to proceedings governed by this chapter. Unless otherwise specifically prohibited by law, the burden of proof is on the registrant in any hearing or other matter under this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 003-17 , § 2, 3-21-2017)  
Sec. 5-3.11. - Public nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for a massage business to be operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter. The City may exercise its discretion, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action, to commence proceedings for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment of that business in any manner provided by law. 
( Ord. No. 003-17 , § 2, 3-21-2017)  
CHAPTER 4. - CLOSING OUT SALES (To Be Enacted)  
CHAPTER 5. - DISTURBING THE PEACE 
 
Sec. 5-5.01. - Unlawful disturbances. 
Any person who shall disturb the pace and good order of any neighborhood or person by violent threats, loud or unusual noises, or drunkenness, or who shall run any horse race on the public streets, either for a wager or for amusement, or fire any gun or pistol, or use any vulgar, profane, or indecent language, or who shall be found in an intoxicated or drunken condition shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(§ 1, Ord. 66)  
CHAPTER 6. - PUBLIC CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 002-18 , §§ 1, 2, adopted March 6, 2018, repealed the former ch. 6, §§ 5-6.01—5-6.04, and enacted a new ch. 6 as set out herein. The former ch. 6 pertained to intoxicants and derived from §§ 1—3, Ord. 102. 
 
Sec. 5-6.01. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter: 
(a)  "Alcoholic beverage" is as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 23004. 
(b)  "ABC" means the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board for the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 002-18 , §§ 1, 2, 3-6-2018)  
Sec. 5-6.02. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages 
It is unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage: 
(a)  On any public street, sidewalk, alley, walkway, parking lot. 
(b)  On private property open to the public, including but not limited to parking lots and shopping centers except where expressly permitted pursuant to the terms of a license issued by the ABC. 
(Ord. No. 002-18 , §§ 1, 2, 3-6-2018)  
Sec. 5-6.03. - Possession of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It is an infraction for any person to have in his or her possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, to enter, be, or remain on the posted premises of, including the posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with Section 23000) of the Business and Professions Code, or on any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed and posted premises. 
(b)  As used in subdivision (a), "posted premises" means those premises which are subject to licensure under any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage license, the parking lot immediately adjacent to the licensed premises and any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed premises on which clearly visible notices indicate to the patrons of the licensee and parking lot and to persons on the public sidewalk, that the provisions of subdivision (a) are applicable. 
(Ord. No. 002-18 , §§ 1, 2, 3-6-2018)  
Sec. 5-6.04. - Exceptions. 
The prohibitions in this chapter shall not apply to: 
(a)  City sponsored events where the City has authorized the consumption of alcoholic beverages in designated areas. 
(b)  Sidewalk areas adjacent to restaurants on Plumas Street if the City has granted a permit for outdoor dining on the sidewalk area and the ABC has issued a license which permits the sidewalk consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Areas specifically permitted pursuant to the terms of a license issued by the ABC. 
(Ord. No. 002-18 , §§ 1, 2, 3-6-2018)  
CHAPTER 7. - LITTERING (To Be Enacted)  
CHAPTER 8. - CURFEW 
 
Sec. 5-8.00. - Purpose and intent. 
The City Council declares its purpose and intent in enacting this chapter is as follows: 
(a)  Juvenile crime, especially nighttime crime, has increased over the years and jurisdictions enforcing a nocturnal juvenile curfew have experienced a reduction in crime and noncriminal mischief. 
(b)  In recent years, minors have increasingly been victims of violent crime and the adoption and enforcement of a curfew ordinance will tend to reverse this trend. 
(c)  Curfew ordinances tend to reinforce parental authority and supervision and recognize that minors are not likely to have an adult's capability to make reasoned judgments, resist peer pressure and understand the consequences of improper behavior. 
(Ord. 05-96, eff. August 1, 1996)  
Sec. 5-8.01. - Loitering by minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor person under the age of 18 years between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on the day and 5:00 a.m. of the immediate following day, to loiter, stand, idle, wander, stroll or aimlessly drive or ride about in or upon any public street, avenue, highway, road curb area, parking lot, alley, park, playground, or other public ground, or public place, without lawful purpose and/or in such manner that the minor's conduct, in light of all surrounding circumstances, reasonably leads to a conclusion that the public peace or safety is thereby threatened or that the conduct constitutes a search or wait for an opportunity to breach the public peace or safety or otherwise commit a crime, or that the minor is in need of protective custody pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code § 300, 601, or 602. 
(Ord. 05-96, eff. August 1, 1996; § 1, Ord. 001-11, eff. February 17, 2011)  
Sec. 5-8.02. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of Section 5-8.01 of this chapter shall not apply when the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or another adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or when the minor is returning directly home from a meeting, entertainment, or recreational activity directed, supervised, or sponsored by the local educational authorities, or when engaged in a legitimate business, trade, profession, or occupation, or when the minor is upon any emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his or her parents or legal guardian. 
(Ord. 05-96, eff. August 1, 1996)  
Sec. 5-8.03. - Permission of parents unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian to permit, aid, abet, allow, or encourage any such minor to violate the provisions of Section 5-8.01 of this chapter and shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 05-96, eff. August 1, 1996)  
Sec. 5-8.04. - Accompanying minors without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian of such a minor, to accompany such minor in any public place set forth in Section 5-8.01 of this chapter between the hours specified without the consent of a parent or legal guardian of such minor. 
(Ord. 05-96, eff. August 1, 1996)  
Sec. 5-8.05. - Reports by managers of lodging places. 
It shall be the duty of any owner, agent, manager, or keeper of a hotel, boarding house, lodging house, tenement house, apartment house, or motor court to report the presence therein of any minor, unless such minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor, to the Police Department. In making such report such person shall state the name, age, last known place of abode, and the names and residences of the parents or other custodian of such minor, so far as such information can be ascertained. 
(Ord. 05-96, eff. August 1, 1996)  
Sec. 5-8.06. - Violations by managers of lodging places. 
It shall be unlawful for any proprietor, keeper, clerk, or other person having charge or control of a hotel, boarding house, lodging house, tenement house, apartment house, or motor court to knowingly permit any minor to remain in such place between the hours specified in Section 5-8.01 of this chapter unless such minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor. 
(Ord. 05-96, eff. August 1, 1996)  
Sec. 5-8.07. - Violations and penalties—Adults and minors. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by: 
(a)  A fine not exceeding $100 for the first offense; 
(b)  A fine not exceeding $200 for the second offense; 
(c)  A fine not exceeding $300 for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. 
(Ord. 05-96, eff. August 1, 1996)  
CHAPTER 8A. - DAYTIME LOITERING AND TRUANCY OF JUVENILES 
 
Sec. 5-8A.010. - Declaration of intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the incidents of juvenile loitering and truancy that create a burden upon the health, safety and welfare of the community. Students who are absent from school are more likely to participate in unlawful activities and to become victims of crime. In addition, they impose an extraordinary burden on the manpower and resources of law enforcement because juveniles taken into custody must be supervised by law enforcement personnel until they are released to a parent or guardian. Personnel supervising these juveniles are then unavailable to carry out law enforcement duties in the field thereby decreasing the level of protection afforded to the community. The City Council finds that having an enforceable juvenile loitering and truancy ordinance is critical to addressing these concerns and determines that a special need exists for the adoption of such an ordinance. 
(§ 1, Ord. 011-08, eff. December 4, 2009)  
Sec. 5-8A.020. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Adult" means any person who is 18 years of age and older or who is emancipated pursuant to law. 
(b)  "Caretaker" means any person who is 18 years of age or older, other than the juvenile's parent or legal guardian, who has been given and has accepted responsibility for the care, custody and control of the juvenile by the juvenile's parent or legal guardian. 
(c)  "Emergency" means the unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes but is not limited to fire, natural disaster, automobile accident or requirement for immediate medical care for another person. 
(d)  "Establishment" means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
(e)  "Guardian" means a person who, or private agency that, under court order, has been named the guardian of the juvenile. 
(f)  "Juvenile" means any person less than 18 years of age who is not emancipated pursuant to law. 
(g)  "Loitering" means to linger or hang around in a public place or establishment where one has no particular or legal purpose. 
(h)  "Parent" means a person who is the natural or adoptive mother or father of a person. 
(i)  "Public place" means any place to which the public has access and includes but is not limited to public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, public buildings, public rights-of-way, public grounds, dedicated open or trail space, or privately owned land that is unsupervised and from which the public is not expressly excluded under applicable trespass laws, including but not limited to vacant lots, parking lots and the common areas of hospitals, apartment complexes, housing complexes, office buildings, transport facilities, shopping centers and malls. For the purposes of this chapter, "public place" shall not include the buildings, grounds or facilities of the school which the juvenile is required to attend but shall include the buildings, grounds and facilities of schools in which the juvenile is not enrolled. 
(j)  "Truancy" means the act or condition of being absent from school without permission by one who is subject to compulsory full-time education or to compulsory continuation or alternative education under State law. 
(§ 1, Ord. 011-08, eff. December 4, 2009)  
Sec. 5-8A.030. - Daytime loitering or truancy. 
It is unlawful for any juvenile, who is subject to compulsory full-time education or to compulsory continuation, or alternative education under State law, to loiter in, or upon, any establishment or public place during the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., on any day when that juvenile would otherwise be required to attend school. The provisions of this section shall not apply if: 
(a)  The juvenile is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian or caretaker; or 
(b)  The juvenile is on an emergency errand directed by a parent, legal guardian or caretaker; or 
(c)  The juvenile is going to or coming directly from his or her place of school-authorized employment; or 
(d)  The juvenile is going to or from a medical, dental, optometry, or chiropractic appointment; or 
(e)  The juvenile is a student who has permission to leave the school campus for lunch or school related activity and has in his or her possession a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit; or 
(f)  The juvenile is going to or coming from a compulsory alternative education program activity; or 
(g)  The juvenile is attending or, without any detour or stop, going to, or returning from, an event or activity directly related to the medical condition of the parent, legal guardian or child of whom the juvenile is the custodial parent; or 
(h)  The juvenile is officially enrolled in home schooling; or 
(i)  The juvenile is exempt by law from compulsory education, continuation education or alternative education; or 
(j)  The juvenile is authorized to be absent from his or her school pursuant to the provisions of Education Code § 48205, or any other applicable State or Federal law; or 
(k)  The juvenile is, without any detour or stop, going to or returning from any event or activity authorized by the provisions of California Education Code § 48205 or any other applicable State or Federal law; or 
(l)  The school which the juvenile is required to attend is not in session. 
(§ 1, Ord. 011-08, eff. December 4, 2009)  
Sec. 5-8A.040. - Parental, guardian and caretaker responsibility. 
It is unlawful for the parent, legal guardian or caretaker of any juvenile to knowingly permit or, by insufficient control, to allow the juvenile to be in violation of Section 5-8A.030 of this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 011-08, eff. December 4, 2009)  
Sec. 5-8A.050. - Violation, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violation. Any person who willfully violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, except that nothing herein shall be deemed to bar any legal, equitable, or summary remedy to which the City of Yuba City may be entitled. 
(b)  Aiding and abetting. Any person who willfully permits, aids, abets, allows or encourages any juvenile to violate any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, except that nothing herein shall be deemed to bar any legal, equitable, or summary remedy to which the City of Yuba City may be entitled. 
(c)  Enforcement. A peace officer may issue a citation to any juvenile, parent, guardian, caretaker or individual found to be in violation of this chapter and may detain the juvenile until he or she can be placed into the care and custody of a parent or legal guardian; or may transport the juvenile to his or her home or to the school from which the juvenile is absent. The peace office may also notify the parent or legal guardian that the juvenile has been issued a citation. If cited, the juvenile and a parent or legal guardian shall appear in court as directed by the citation. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any juvenile convicted of violating this chapter may be punished by the imposition of a fine not exceeding $250 or may be required to perform County or school-approved work projects or community service or both. If required to perform a project, the total time for performance shall not exceed 20 hours over a period not to exceed 60 days, during times other than a juvenile's hours of school attendance or juvenile, parent or legal guardian's hours of employment. 
(2)  Any parent, legal guardian, caretaker or individual convicted of violating this chapter may be punished by the imposition of a fine not exceeding $250. 
(§ 1, Ord. 011-08, eff. December 4, 2009)  
CHAPTER 9. - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 
 
Sec. 5-9.01. - Pawnbrokers defined. 
Every person advertising by use of the three-ball pawnbrokers' sign, or advertising "unredeemed pledges" or any other expression or term designating a pawnbroker's business, or advertising that advances of money are made on articles of personal property of any kind, or advertising that the purchase of such article is made on the condition that the same will be resold to the seller shall be deemed to be a pawnbroker and shall be subject to the conditions and restrictions provided in this chapter. 
(§ 5, Ord. 108)  
Sec. 5-9.02. - Purchases from intoxicated persons and minors. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, junk dealer, or dealer in secondhand goods, except furniture, to receive or purchase any property, article, or thing from any person who shall appear to be intoxicated or from any minor. It shall be unlawful for any such pawnbroker, junk dealer, or dealer in secondhand goods to employ or otherwise procure any minor to collect, receive, or in any manner obtain possession of any such articles, material, or property. 
(b)  Exception. The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply when the minor presents the written consent of his or her parent or guardian, duly signed, authorizing the particular transaction with such pawnbroker, junk dealer, or dealer in secondhand goods. Such written consent shall be retained by the such pawnbroker, junk dealer, or dealer in secondhand goods as long as the goods procured through such transaction remain in his or her possession, and such goods shall be exhibited upon demand to any police officer or other peace officer. 
(§ 1, Ord. 108)  
Sec. 5-9.03. - Release of seller; retention of property. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, junk dealer, or dealer in secondhand goods, except furniture, to receive or purchase any property, article, or thing from any person without first securing his or her signature in his or her own handwriting. Such property purchased shall be retained in the custody of the pawnbroker, junk dealer, or dealer in secondhand goods for a period of ten days after such purchase. 
(§ 2, Ord. 108)  
Sec. 5-9.04. - Record of purchases. 
Every person engaged in carrying on the business of pawnbroker, junk dealer, or dealer in secondhand goods, wares, and merchandise shall keep at his or her place of business a record book in which, at the time of purchases of such goods, shall be entered in the English language by such person carrying on such business a description sufficient for identification of all property so purchased, the price paid therefor by such person carrying on such business, and the signature of the person selling the same. Every pawnbroker, junk dealer, or dealer in secondhand goods, wares, or merchandise, except furniture, shall furnish a full and complete description of the person selling the same and such description shall be written in the English language on a form furnished by the City. 
(§ 3, Ord. 108)  
Sec. 5-9.05. - Record of purchases; inspection. 
The record book referred to in Section 5-9.04 of this chapter shall be open at all times for inspection by any sheriff, police officer, or other peace officer and shall not in any manner be concealed from them. The good, wares, and merchandise referred to shall, upon demand, be shown and exhibited to any such sheriff, police officer, or other peace officer. 
(§ 3, Ord. 108)  
Sec. 5-9.06. - Registration required; fees. 
(a)  Required. Every person engaged in carrying on the business of pawnbroker, junk dealer or secondhand goods, wares and merchandise shall be registered with the Police Chief. 
(b)  Fees. An annual fee shall be charged by the Police Chief for each registration or renewal. The fee imposed shall be as stated in Section 3-8.4 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1022, eff. May 11, 1987; § 4, Ord. 26-92, eff. November 5, 1992)  
CHAPTER 10. - PUBLIC ASSEMBLAGES 
 
Sec. 5-10.01. - Parading. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to form, or to aid in forming, or to ride in any parade or procession of two or more motor vehicles formed or moving along any highway for the purpose of inducing any person, by means of compulsion, coercion, intimidation, or fear, from entering into or carrying on his or her employment upon or about any farm, ranch, packing shed, or any other place of employment. 
(§ 1, Ord. 119)  
Sec. 5-10.02. - Obstructing persons and vehicles on streets and sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, stand, or sit in or upon any public highway, alley, sidewalk, or crosswalk so as to in any manner hinder or obstruct the free passage therein or thereon of persons or vehicles passing, or attempting to pass, along the same or so as to in any manner annoy or molest persons passing along the same. 
(§ 2, Ord. 119)  
Sec. 5-10.03. - Obstructing entrances to places of public assemblage. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, stand, or sit in or at the entrance or approach to any church, hall, theater, park, or place of public assemblage so as to in any manner obstruct such entrance or approach. 
(§ 3, Ord. 119)  
Sec. 5-10.04. - Picketing employees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to beset or picket the premises of another, or any approach thereto, where any person is employed or seeks employment, or any place or approach thereto where such employee or person seeking employment lodges or resides, for the purpose of inducing such employee or person seeking employment, by means of compulsion, coercion, intimidation, threats, acts of violence, or fear, to quit his or her employment or to refrain from seeking or freely entering into employment. 
(§ 4, Ord. 119)  
Sec. 5-10.05. - Picketing places of business. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to beset or picket the premises of another, or any approach thereto, for the purpose of inducing others, by means of compulsion, coercion, intimidation, threats, acts of violence, or fear, to refrain from entering such premises or to refrain from patronizing, negotiating with, or transacting business with the owner or occupant of such premises. 
(§ 5, Ord. 119)  
Sec. 5-10.06. - Congregating in streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, in association or agreement with one or more persons, to assemble, congregate, or meet together in the vicinity of the premises of another or upon the streets or highways, or approaches thereto, for the purpose of inducing others, by means of compulsion, coercion, intimidation, threats, acts of violence, or fear, to refrain from entering such premises or to refrain from patronizing, negotiating with, or transacting business with the owner or occupant of such premises. 
(§ 7, Ord. 119)  
Sec. 5-10.07. - Using indecent language and gestures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to utter to or within the hearing of another any derogatory, indecent, or opprobrious epithets or language, or to use any gesture, or to make any demonstration of any kind for the purpose of inducing any person, by means of compulsion, coercion, intimidation, threats, acts of violence, or fear, to quit his or her employment, or to refrain from seeking or freely entering into employment, or to refrain from patronizing, negotiating with, or transacting business with any other person. 
(§ 6, Ord. 119)  
Sec. 5-10.08. - Using indecent language to create a breach of peace. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to utter, publish, or use any seditious language, words, remarks, or epithets, or to address to another any such language, words, remarks, or epithets, which create or provoke, or tend to create or provoke, a breach of the peace. 
(§ 8, Ord. 119)  
CHAPTER 11. - TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
 
Sec. 5-11.005. - Findings and authority. 
(a)  The regulation of privately operated taxicabs promotes the safety, reliability and public benefits of that transportation service; 
(b)  The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to Government Code § 53075.5. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.010. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "City" means the City of Yuba City, California. 
(b)  "Driver" means every individual who operates any taxicab or vehicle for hire as an employee of an operator, independently owns the taxicab or vehicle for hire and operates under the auspices of such operator, or has independently contracted with such operator to operate the taxicab or vehicle for hire pursuant to a lease, license or any other form of agreement. 
(c)  "Employee" includes any person who is self-employed as an independent driver. 
(d)  "Motor vehicle" means every motor vehicle used for public hire propelled by mechanically produced power and intended for use on public streets and highways, except street cars, trains and motor buses. 
(e)  "Operator" means any entity engaged in the business of providing vehicles for the purpose of carrying passengers in a taxicab or other vehicle for hire, whether comprised of an individual, group of individuals, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, corporation or any other organizational structure. 
(f)  "Taxicab" means a motor vehicle which is designed for carrying not more than eight passengers, excluding the driver, which is used in the transportation of passengers over the public streets of the City and operated at rates per mile, per destination or per mile and destination, irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the limits of the City, and which is made available for hire on call or demand, at taxi stands or by telephone. 
(g)  "Vehicle for hire" means any motor or electric vehicle which is offered to the public for hire with the services of a driver, which is used for the transportation of passengers over the public streets of the City, irrespective of whether such operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the City, at rates per distance, per trip, per hour, per day, per week, per month and where the route is under the control of the persons hiring the same. "Vehicle for hire" shall not include a charter-party carrier of passengers within the meaning of the Passenger Charter-party Carriers' Act, Article 8 (commencing with Public Utilities Code § 5351). "Vehicle for hire" includes taxicabs. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.020. - Annual permits required for operators, drivers and vehicles. 
(a)  No person, corporation, partnership, cooperative, business, fictitious name or dispatch center shall engage in the business of operating any kind of taxicab or vehicle for hire within the City, without an operator's permit, driver's permit and vehicle permit issued by the City. Each permit shall be valid for one year, unless suspended or revoked and must thereafter be renewed. Such permits shall not be assigned, sold or transferred to another operator, driver or vehicle. 
(b)  City Council shall set by resolution the fees required for obtaining operator's, driver's and vehicle permits. Such fees shall be due and payable upon submission of an application to the Chief of Police and shall not be refundable, regardless of the disposition of the application. In addition to such permit fees, the applicant shall pay currently any and all other taxes or fees as may be required by the provisions of this Code, including, but not limited to, City business licenses and fingerprinting fees. 
(c)  All permits shall be valid for a period not to exceed one calendar year. Unless otherwise provided by the Chief of Police, applications for all permits shall be submitted to the Chief of Police on or before November 1 of each year for the following calendar year and all permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. Permits may be renewed annually by application to the City. Current permit holders have priority for annual renewal. 
(d)  Every person holding a permit issued under this chapter shall at all times keep the City notified of his or her current address and shall notify the City in writing within ten days of any address change. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.030. - Operator's permits. 
(a)  Any person or entity seeking to operate a business providing taxicab or vehicle for hire service shall submit an application in writing, signed by the operator, and shall set forth all information required, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Name and address of each operator applying to operate taxicabs or vehicles for hire; 
(2)  Fictitious business name of the operator, if any; 
(3)  Mailing address and business telephone number of the operator; 
(4)  Name, address, age and driver's license number of each employee who will be driving the operator's vehicles; 
(5)  Total number of vehicles to be operated in the City under the operator's permit and, for each of such vehicles the manufacturer, model year, vehicle type, vehicle identification number ("VIN"), license plate number, passenger capacity and proof of commercial registration; 
(6)  Description of the color scheme, insignia, trade style and/or any other unique characteristics of the taxicab or vehicle for hire design and placement of City required markings and company markings; 
(7)  The street address(es) from which the operator conducts or will conduct the taxicab or vehicle for hire business; where dispatch will be conducted; and each location at which the business's vehicles will be garaged; 
(8)  Prior experience of the operator in a taxicab or vehicle for hire business, including the details of any prior permit denial, revocation or suspension by any public agency of any type of operator's or driver's permit, license or certificate; 
(9)  A certification that no driver employed or to be employed by the operator has been convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs in any state within three calendar years preceding the date of application; 
(i)  A certification that no driver employed or to be employed by the operator has been convicted of any felony offense or sex-related offense. 
(10)  Rates to be charged to the public throughout the term of the operator's permit; 
(11)  Federal taxpayer identification or social security number of the operator; 
(12)  Satisfactory proof of insurance as provided in Section 5-11.080 of this chapter for each driver and vehicle to be operated in the City under the permit; 
(13)  Satisfactory evidence that the operator has complied and currently complies with the provisions of Government Code § 53075.5(b)(3), or any successor provision, pertaining to pre-employment and periodic testing of drivers for controlled substances and alcohol, and with provisions pertaining to payment for drug and alcohol testing programs and related reporting requirements. The operator must also provide satisfactory evidence from a City-approved lab that each driver who will operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire within the City has tested negative for drugs and alcohol as required by Government Code § 53075.5; 
(14)  Unless otherwise provided by law, evidence that the operator has procured worker's compensation insurance covering all drivers to be employed by the operator; 
(15)  Submission of Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) pull notice program requestor code number, as defined in Vehicle Code § 1808.1, issued to the operator. As a condition of accepting an operator's permit, the operator is required to notify the City immediately if it receives a DMV pull notice on one of its drivers that would affect that person's driver's permit. In the event a driver's DMV record indicates that a driver no longer qualifies for a driver's permit, the operator must require the driver to surrender the driver's permit to the Chief of Police. DMV pull notice records must be made available for review by the City upon request; 
(16)  Submission of records of any convictions in any court of any state of the United States or in any United States court with respect to any operator or driver identified in the operator's permit application; including any such convictions following a plea of no contest or nolo contendere. City Council specifically authorizes the Chief of Police or designee to receive State and local summary criminal history information in fulfilling his or her licensing duties under this chapter; 
(17)  Satisfactory proof that the business will be operated in compliance with all provisions of this chapter; and 
(18)  A City business license. 
(b)  An operator's permit shall be granted unless: 
(1)  The operator fails to submit a complete application; 
(2)  The operator makes any omission, untrue statement or material misrepresentation in the application or provides fraudulent documentation with the application; 
(3)  The operator has violated this chapter within the last three years; 
(4)  The public convenience is not served; 
(5)  The operator is not morally or financially responsible; 
(6)  Any vehicle proposed to be operated lacks the required equipment, is improperly licensed or is unsafe; 
(7)  There is an absence of satisfactory proof that the taxicab or vehicle for hire operator will comply with the provisions of this chapter; 
(8)  Additional taxicab or vehicle for hire service will have a detrimental effect on traffic and parking within the City or will otherwise be contrary to the public welfare; 
(9)  The operator has been convicted of any felony offense or sex-related offense, including any such convictions following a plea of no contest or nolo contendere, taking into consideration the nature of the conviction, the age of the operator at the time of the conviction, any evidence of rehabilitation and the relationship of the conviction to the propriety of the operator operating a taxicab or vehicle for hire; or 
(10)  The operator has not otherwise complied with this chapter. 
(c)  The issuance of an operator's permit is conditional upon such owner ensuring that each taxicab or vehicle for hire operated by such operator has a vehicle permit issued by the City and each driver of such taxicab or vehicle for hire has a driver's permit issued by the City. The operator shall notify the City immediately upon termination of employment of an employee hired to operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire in the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.040. - Vehicle permits. 
(a)  No taxicab or vehicle for hire shall operate in the City without a vehicle permit from the City. Application for a vehicle permit shall be in writing, signed by the owner, and shall set forth all information required, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  A copy of the State vehicle registration under owner's name, license plate number and corresponding vehicle identification number of each vehicle to be operated in the City; 
(2)  Make, model or type, year of manufacture and passenger-seating capacity of each motor vehicle for which such application is made; 
(3)  Certificates of insurance from the insurance carrier verifying the coverage required in Section 5-11.080 of this chapter for each vehicle to be operated in the City; and 
(4)  The sworn statement by a proprietor of a public garage or State licensed mechanic who has inspected and examined the vehicle for which the permit is requested verifying that the vehicle complies with the requirements of this chapter and is in safe operating condition, as required by Section 5-11.120 regarding equipment requirements. 
(b)  A vehicle permit shall be granted unless: 
(1)  The operator fails to submit a complete application; 
(2)  The operator makes any omission, untrue or material misstatement or provides fraudulent documentation with the application; 
(3)  The operator has violated this chapter within the last three years; or 
(4)  There is an absence of satisfactory proof of compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  An applicant for a vehicle permit must hold a valid operator's license issued pursuant to this chapter and must ensure that any driver of a taxicab or vehicle for hire has been issued a driver's permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.050. - Driver's permits. 
(a)  Any person seeking to operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire as a driver shall apply for a permit in the manner set forth in this section. The application shall be in writing, signed by the driver, and shall set forth all the information required in the permit application for, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name, age and address of the applicant; 
(2)  Any convictions in any court of any state of the United States or in any United States court, including any conviction following a plea of no contest or nolo contendere. City Council specifically authorizes the Chief of Police or designee to receive State and local summary criminal history information in fulfilling the licensing duties under this chapter; 
(3)  Applicant's past experience in operating a motor vehicle; 
(4)  Applicant's current California Class C driver's license number and a photocopy of that license; including any endorsement pursuant to Vehicle Code §§ 15275 and 15278 to operate a commercial motor vehicle; 
(5)  Name and address of all employers during the five calendar years preceding the application; 
(6)  The disclosure of whether any State driver's license, taxi driver's permit or commercial or chauffeur's driver's license, issued by the State or any state or governmental agency, held by the applicant has ever been revoked or suspended; 
(7)  Name and address of the operator by whom he or she is employed as a driver, or for whom he or she intends to operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire; 
(8)  Current certificate of negative test for drugs and alcohol, as required by Government Code § 53075.5; 
(9)  Two recent photographs of the driver (size 1½ by 1½ in.), one to be filed with the application and one to be permanently attached to the driver's permit when issued; 
(10)  State Department of Motor Vehicles driving record report; 
(11)  A list of all jurisdictions in which the applicant is permitted to operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire, including the identification number and expiration date of each permit; 
(12)  Satisfactory proof that the insurance required by Section 5-11.080 of this chapter covers the driver when operating the taxicab or vehicle for hire; 
(13)  Assent to fingerprinting by the City's Police Department; and 
(14)  Any other information the City may require which is reasonably related to the application for the driver's permit. 
(b)  A driver's permit shall be granted unless: 
(1)  The applicant fails to submit a complete application; 
(2)  The applicant makes any omission, untrue or material misstatement or provides fraudulent documentation with the application; 
(3)  Within the preceding three years Department of Motor Vehicle records of any state of the United States indicate that the department has taken administrative action which resulted in actual suspension or revocation of the applicant's driver's license, unless such suspension or revocation was based on a non-driving related matter; 
(4)  The applicant has violated this chapter within the last three years; 
(5)  There is an absence of satisfactory proof that the taxicab or vehicle for hire will be operated in compliance with the provisions of this article; 
(6)  The applicant has failed to maintain a valid California driver's license; or 
(7)  The applicant has been convicted of any felony offense or sex-related offense, including any such convictions following a plea of no contest or nolo contendere, taking into consideration the nature of the conviction, the age of the applicant at the time of the conviction, any evidence of rehabilitation and the relationship of the conviction to the propriety of the applicant operating a taxicab or vehicle for hire. 
The issuance of a driver's permit is conditional upon the driver ensuring that he or she will only operate a vehicle which has received a valid vehicle permit for an operator who has received a valid operator's permit. 
The driver's permit shall become void upon termination of such driver's employment driving a taxicab or vehicle for hire, including termination of self-employment as an independent driver, and the driver shall immediately return the driver's permit to the City upon such termination of employment. 
The issuance of a driver's permit is conditioned upon the driver complying with the mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing and program certification set forth in Government Code § 53075.5. 
The Chief of Police may, in his or her discretion, grant a temporary permit to drive or operate any taxicab or vehicle for hire pending final action on any application for a permanent driver's permit, but no such temporary permit may be issued to any person who does not have a valid, unrestricted driver's license issued by the State. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.060. - Suspension of permits. 
(a)  The Chief of Police may suspend any operator's permit, driver's permit or vehicle permit if: 
(1)  A taxicab or vehicle for hire is operating without required insurance or registration or is being operated by an unlicensed or unpermitted driver; 
(2)  A fact exists which would have been grounds for refusing to issue the permit; 
(3)  There has been a violation of any of the terms of this chapter; or 
(4)  There is damage to, or mechanical malfunction of, a taxicab or vehicle for hire such that it cannot be operated safely. 
(b)  Such permit suspension shall be lifted upon a showing that the violations have been corrected. If no such showing is made within a reasonable time, depending on the type of violation, the City may issue a notice of revocation and proceed as set forth in this chapter. It is unlawful for the permittee to exercise any of the rights granted under this chapter during the time that the permit is suspended, provided that the notice of suspension contains facts supporting a finding that the continued operation of the business, the continued operation of a taxicab or vehicle for hire, or possession of a driver's permit represents an unsafe condition for the public, and the Chief of Police so concludes. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.070. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Any permit issued by the City under this chapter may be revoked by the Chief of Police for any of the following reasons, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The existence of any fact which, at the time of application, would have caused the Chief of Police to deny the application, whether such fact existed at the time of the application or occurred thereafter; 
(2)  Any violation of laws relating to the operation of a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, reckless driving, driving under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances or other violations indicating that a driver is not competent to operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire; 
(3)  A motor vehicle accident resulting in injuries to persons or property caused by the culpable act or omission of the driver or operator; 
(4)  Failure to pay any judgment for damages arising out of the unlawful or negligent operation of any taxicab or vehicle for hire; 
(5)  Failure to maintain insurance as required by this chapter; 
(6)  Failure to maintain a taxicab or vehicle for hire in a safe and sanitary condition such that the vehicle could pass, at any time throughout the permit period, the inspection required for the issuance of a vehicle permit; or 
(7)  Any violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The permit holder shall be entitled to appeal the City's decision to revoke or suspend the permit by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten days from the date the notice of revocation is mailed. The appeal shall set forth the reasons why such action is not proper. Failure to set forth specific reasons why the action is improper or to timely file such appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal, and the proposed adverse action shall become final. 
(c)  If the permit holder files a timely request for appeal, a hearing shall be held with at least ten days' written notice of the hearing date, time and location to the appellant. The hearing shall be conducted by the City Manager. The appellant shall be entitled to present evidence and testimony in this hearing and the City Manager's decision shall be final. 
(d)  Pending the appeal hearing it shall be lawful for the permit holder to operate his or her business or operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire unless the permit at issue has been suspended, with a finding by the Chief of Police that continued operation represents an unsafe condition for the public. If the notice of revocation is affirmed on appeal, the permit at issue immediately shall be revoked and surrendered to the City. Any operator or driver whose permit has been revoked shall not be eligible to apply for another permit for one year after the effective date of revocation. City Council may establish by resolution a fee for such appeals. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.080. - Liability insurance requirements. 
To obtain an operator's permit from the City, the operator must demonstrate that it maintains, at its sole expense, liability insurance meeting the following requirements: 
(a)  General liability coverage of $2,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage. 
(b)  Separate commercial automobile liability insurance for each vehicle proposed to be operated within the City pursuant to the operator's permit, with at least the following limits of liability: $1,000,000 per accident for bodily injury and property damage. 
(c)  Evidence that the operator has procured workers compensation insurance covering all drivers to be employed by the operator. 
(d)  Required insurance must be issued by companies admitted to do business in California, with a current A.M. Best rating of no less than A:VII. Exception may be made for the State Compensation Insurance Fund when not specifically rated. 
(e)  Each insurance policy required by this Section 5-11.080 shall provide a minimum scope of insurance at least as broad as: 
(1)  Insurance Services Office Commercial General Liability coverage (occurrence Form CG 00 01). 
(2)  Insurance Services Office Form Number CA 00 01 covering Automobile Liability, Code 1 (any auto). 
(f)  The general liability and automobile liability policies are to contain the following provisions: 
(1)  The City, its officers, agents, officials, employees and volunteers must be named as additional insureds under the policies. General liability coverage shall be provided in the form of an additional insured endorsement (CO 20 10 11 85 or equivalent) to the operator's insurance policy, or as a separate owner's policy. 
(2)  For any claims related to the operator's permit or vehicle, the operator's insurance coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the City, its officers, agents, officials, employees and volunteers. 
(3)  Each insurance policy required by this Section 5-11.080 shall be endorsed to state that coverage shall not be canceled by either party, except after 30 days' prior written notice has been provided to the City. 
(4)  Any deductible or self-insured retentions must be declared to and approved by the City. At the option of the City, either: the insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-insured retentions as respects the City, its officers, officials, employees, and volunteers, or the operator shall provide a financial guarantee satisfactory to the City guaranteeing payment of losses and related investigations, claim administration, and defense expenses. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.090. - Indemnification. 
As a condition of receiving an operator's permit, the operator will be required to execute a statement agreeing to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its employees and officials from and against any and all liability, expenses, including defense costs and legal fees, and claims for damages whatsoever, including, but not limited to, those arising from bodily injury, death, personal injury, property damage, loss of use or property loss; however, the same may be caused and regardless of the responsibility for negligence. The obligation to indemnify, defend and hold harmless will include, but not be limited to, any liability or expense, including defense costs and legal fees, arising from the negligent acts or omissions or willful misconduct of the operator, its officers, employees, agents, joint venturers, subcontractors or vendors. The operator's obligations to indemnify, defend and hold harmless will apply even in the event of concurrent negligence on the part of the City, its employees and officials, except for liability resulting solely from the negligence or willful misconduct of the City employees or officials. Payment by the City will not be a condition precedent to enforcement of this indemnity. In the event of a dispute between the operator and the City as to whether liability arises from the sole negligence of the City employees or officials, the operator will be obligated to pay for the City employees and officials' defense until a final judgment has been entered adjudicating the City employees or officials as solely negligent. In the event a final judgment is entered adjudicating the City employees or officials as solely negligent, the operator will not be entitled to a reimbursement of any defense costs, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees, expert fees and costs of litigation. This indemnity will apply regardless of whether the City approved an operator's, vehicle or driver's permit or whether the City inspected or approved any vehicle used in conjunction with a permit. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.100. - Registration, licensing and conspicuous posting. 
(a)  All drivers shall carry their license to operate a motor vehicle in the State at all times while operating a taxicab or vehicle for hire in the City. 
(b)  All taxicabs and vehicles for hire within the City shall carry the State Department of Motor Vehicles registration in the vehicle at all times and all such vehicles shall be registered in the name of the operator or the driver to whom a permit has been issued. 
(c)  Every taxicab or vehicle for hire authorized to operate under this chapter shall have attached to the left rear window a current vehicle permit issued by the City in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and all expired permits will be removed. 
(d)  Every taxicab or vehicle for hire shall have conspicuously displayed in full view of the passenger or passengers a card not less than two in. by four in. in size which shall have stated thereon the name of the operator, together with the business address and telephone number of the business, and the identifying number of such vehicle, and also the rates of fare to be charged for the use of such vehicle. Rates of fare are also to be conspicuously displayed in both the front and rear of the interior of the taxicab or vehicle for hire. 
(e)  The driver's permit shall be posted in full view of the passenger at all times while the driver is operating the vehicle. Every driver's permit shall show the photograph of the driver, the driver's permit number, the name of the operator which employs the driver and the telephone number of the business. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.110. - Vehicle color scheme and markings. 
(a)  It is unlawful to operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire within the City which does not have printed or placed upon doors on both sides of the vehicle and on the rear deck of such taxicab or vehicle for hire the name and telephone number of the operator. All such lettering shall be in letters not less than two in. in height. In addition, the dome light markings shall read the same as the operator's name or fictitious name written upon the rear doors and rear of the vehicle or only shall read "Taxi." In addition, every taxicab or vehicle for hire shall have printed or placed upon the exterior in conspicuous letters of the same color not less than 3½ in. in height, of a color in contrast to the color of the taxicab or vehicle for hire, the number of such taxicab or vehicle for hire, which numbering shall be printed or placed on each side of the vehicle on the leading edge of the front door and on the rear of the trunk. 
(b)  The taxicabs or vehicles for hire of each owner holding a permit under this chapter shall be numbered from number one to a number corresponding with the total number of taxicabs or vehicles for hire for which such permit has been issued. Such vehicle numbers shall be given to the City in writing at the time of the making of the application for a permit and must be approved by the Chief of Police. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.120. - Equipment requirements. 
(a)  Every taxicab and vehicle for hire authorized by City permit must fulfill the following equipment requirements by possessing: 
(1)  A trunk device which will permit the opening of the trunk lid from the inside of the trunk; 
(2)  A permanent fixture to display the taxicab or vehicle for hire driver's permit in prominent view of the passengers; 
(3)  No fewer than four working doors, except that a handicapped accessible mini-van may be used; 
(4)  A fire extinguisher; 
(5)  Four flares; 
(6)  At least two emergency reflectors; 
(7)  Spare tire and jack; 
(8)  Windows which patrons can open from the inside; 
(9)  Working headlights, taillights, turn-signals, backup lights and brake lights; 
(10)  A light of not less than two candlepower within such vehicle, so arranged as to illuminate the entire passenger compartment. The light shall be kept constantly lighted at all times while any passengers are being loaded into or unloaded from any such vehicle from one-half hour after sunset of any day until one-half hour before sunrise of the next day, and no shades or blinds shall be drawn over the windows of any such vehicle while the same is occupied; and 
(11)  Safety belts in good working order for use of passengers. 
(b)  The operator must obtain a sworn statement, made by either the proprietor of a public garage engaged in auto repair who is licensed by the State or by a mechanic licensed by the State and employed by the applicant, who has inspected and examined such vehicles, that each taxicab and/or vehicle for hire used in its business complies with the above-listed requirements and is in safe operating condition. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any operator or driver to operate any taxicab or vehicle for hire while the same or any of the equipment used thereon or therewith is in a defective, unsafe or unsanitary condition. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.130. - Maintenance and inspection requirements. 
Any City official charged by the Chief of Police with the authority to enforce this chapter shall have the right, after displaying the proper identification, to enter into or upon any permitted taxicab or vehicle for hire in the City for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated. The scope of this inspection is limited to determining compliance with the requirements of this chapter and may be done without notice, warrant or individualized suspicion of wrongdoing. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.140. - Rates. 
The City Council may set by resolution the maximum rates to be charged per flag drop, per mile and per minute of waiting time or traffic delay time. In the event such a resolution is adopted, it shall be unlawful for the taxicab operator or driver to fix, charge, collect or receive a rate in excess of the rates established and set by resolution of the City Council. Any charge or rate in excess of the rate set by resolution of the City Council shall be cause for revocation of the operator's permit. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.150. - Standards for driver conduct. 
(a)  It is unlawful for the driver of any taxicab or vehicle for hire to solicit fares by misrepresenting in any manner the identity of the operator of the taxicab or vehicle for hire, and it is unlawful to misrepresent the location of, travel time or distance to any destination. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the driver of any taxicab or vehicle for hire to interfere in any manner with any person who is negotiating for, inquiring about transportation in or employing a taxicab or vehicle for hire. 
(c)  It is unlawful for a driver or operator to refuse a prospective fare based on the distance of the route for which the service is requested (except where that distance exceeds a total of 50 miles beyond the City limits of the City of Yuba City), or to take any action to actively discourage a prospective fare solely on the basis of race, creed, color, age, sex, sexual orientation, national origin or physical disability, including use of service animals. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.160. - Operating regulations for services provided. 
(a)  A taxicab or vehicle for hire is authorized to provide exclusive ride service, which shall mean exclusive use of a taxicab by one or more passengers at a time, and shared ride service, which shall mean nonexclusive use of a taxicab by two or more unrelated passengers, traveling between different points of origin and/or destination and traveling in the same general direction. 
(b)  Flag loads, meaning passengers soliciting a taxicab or vehicle for hire at random points on the street, may be picked up at any location within the City except when it is apparent that the prospective fare has already phoned for a taxicab or vehicle for hire operated by another person or firm and is waiting for such taxicab or vehicle for hire to arrive. 
(c)  Solicitation of fares is permitted when located at areas as may be declared open to solicitation by all properly permitted operators or drivers. No driver of any taxicab or vehicle for hire shall seek employment by repeatedly driving his or her vehicle back and forth in a short space in front of, or by otherwise interfering with, the proper and orderly access to or egress from any theater, hall, hotel, railway or other place or public gathering; or by leaving his or her vehicle or otherwise approaching and soliciting patronage by any pedestrian upon the sidewalk, in any theater, hall, hotel, railway or street railway loading point. 
(d)  All persons other than the driver shall ride in the passenger compartment of the taxicab or vehicle for hire, except passengers who are physically disabled, are unable to get into the passenger compartment or have extreme difficulty in doing so, and except where there are more passengers than can be accommodated in such compartment or where it is necessary to have someone seated with the driver in connection with the normal operation of the taxicab or vehicle for hire. 
(e)  The driver of a taxicab or vehicle for hire employed to carry passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely, lawfully and expeditiously to the destination. 
(f)  Persons engaging a taxicab or vehicle for hire shall be entitled to have such valises, small hand baggage or wheel chairs as can be conveniently carried within the vehicle loaded, conveyed and unloaded without charge. 
(g)  Every operator approved to operate under the provisions of this chapter shall regularly and daily operate his or her business to the extent reasonably necessary to meet the public demand for service. Upon abandonment of such business for a period of 30 consecutive days by such operator, approval to operate under this chapter may be revoked. 
(h)  Smoking shall be prohibited in taxicabs and vehicles for hire. The driver of the vehicle shall promptly direct any passenger smoking in a taxicab or vehicle for hire to promptly and safely extinguish any cigarette or other smoking device. The refusal of any passenger to extinguish a cigarette or other smoking device shall constitute sufficient reason for the driver to immediately suspend service to the passenger. 
(i)  Every owner or driver of a taxicab or vehicle for hire operated on a highway shall maintain safety belts in good working order for the use of the occupants of the vehicle. The driver of a taxicab or vehicle for hire shall not operate the taxicab or vehicle for hire unless (i) passengers five years of age or younger and weighing less than 60 pounds are seated in the rear seat; and (ii) passengers six years of age or over or weighing 60 pounds or more, in the front seat, are properly restrained. The driver of a taxicab or vehicle for hire shall require all passengers 16 years of age or over to be properly restrained by a safety belt when the taxicab or vehicle for hire is being driven on a public highway. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.170. - Taxicabs and vehicles for hire from other locations. 
Taxicabs and vehicles for hire which do not possess City permits and whose place of business is not located within the City, may bring passengers into the City but may neither solicit nor pick up any passenger in the City for any destination, within or outside of the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.180. - Disclaimers. 
By providing for the regulation of taxicabs, vehicles for hire and drivers in the manner provided for in this chapter, the City is protecting the general welfare. It is neither assuming nor imposing on the City, or its officers and employees, an obligation for which there may be liability and money damages to any person who claims that such breach proximately caused injury. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.190. - Violation; penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
Sec. 5-11.200. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council declares that it would have adopted this chapter, including every section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase, irrespective of whether one or more sections, subsection, sentences, clauses or phrases is held invalid. 
(§ 2, Ord. 005-10, eff. July 1, 2010)  
CHAPTER 12. - RADIO BROADCASTING INTERFERENCE 
 
Sec. 5-12.01. - Unlawful interference. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate in the City any device, appliance, equipment, or apparatus generating or causing high frequency oscillations or radiations which interfere with radio broadcast receiving apparatus; provided, however, X-ray pictures, examinations, or treatments may be made at any time if the machines or apparatus used therefor is properly equipped to avoid all unnecessary or reasonably preventable interference with radio reception and is not negligently operated; and provided, further, that neon signs shall be deemed to comply with the provisions of this chapter when such signs are properly equipped to avoid all unnecessary or reasonably preventable interference with radio reception and are not negligently operated. 
(§ 2, Ord. 234)  
Sec. 5-12.02. - Radio stations excepted. 
It is expressly understood and provided that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to radio stations, either broadcast, commercial, or amateur, licensed by the Federal government, or which are engaged in interstate communication, or to public utilities under the supervision of the Public Utilities Commission of the State. 
(§ 3, Ord. 234)  
Sec. 5-12.03. - Enforcement of provisions; right of entry. 
The Police Chief is hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. He or she may appoint or deputize such other persons as he or she deems necessary to assist him or her in such enforcement. The enforcement officer or his or her duly authorized deputies, providing they shall have a search warrant duly signed by a magistrate, shall have the right to enter upon any premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting the installation of all apparatus or equipment coming within the provisions of this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the enforcement officer or his or her duly authorized deputies in making such inspection or to refuse to permit the enforcement officer or his or her duly authorized deputies to enter the premises for such purposes providing such inspection is carried out in the manner required by law. 
(§ 4, Ord. 234)  
Sec. 5-12.04. - Discontinuance of interference; notice. 
When an inspection and test shall have been made by the enforcement officer or his or her duly authorized deputies and it is found that equipment or apparatus coming within the provisions of this chapter is being operated in violation of such provisions, the person responsible for the operation of such equipment shall be notified in writing to discontinue its use or to make additions, repairs, or modifications thereto in order that the same may be operated in a manner which complies with the provisions of this chapter. The mailing of a registered letter addressed to the owner at the premises where the equipment or apparatus is located shall constitute a sufficient notice for the purposes of this chapter. 
(§ 5, Ord. 234)  
Sec. 5-12.05. - Failure to discontinue interference. 
In the event the owner or operator of such equipment or apparatus does not, within ten days after receipt of notice to repair or discontinue the use of such equipment or apparatus, either entirely discontinue the use of such equipment or apparatus or repair the same so that it complies with the provisions of this chapter, such owner shall be deemed to be operating such machine, equipment, or apparatus in violation of the provisions of this chapter and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(§ 5, Ord. 234)  
CHAPTER 13. - SOLICITING AND CANVASSING 
 
Sec. 5-13.01. - Registration required; renewal fee. 
Any person soliciting, canvassing, or taking orders from house to house or from place to place in the City for any goods, wares, merchandise, or article to be delivered in the future, or for services to be performed in the future, which solicitation or service shall be an operation within interstate commerce in the United States, shall not be required to pay any license fee as provided by Chapter 4 of Title 3 of this Code, but each such person is hereby required to register with the City Clerk before engaging in any such soliciting or canvassing and shall, if continuously so engaged within the City, renew such registration on each January 1 thereafter and pay a fee in the amount of $10 for each such registration or renewal. 
(§ 1, Ord. 362; § 1, Ord. 1022, eff. May 11, 1987)  
Sec. 5-13.02. - Registration form. 
Such registration shall be on a form prescribed by the Police Chief and shall, as a minimum, state and contain the following information: 
(a)  The name of the applicant; 
(b)  His business address and telephone number and home address and telephone number; 
(c)  A description of the applicant; 
(d)  A declaration of his or her arrest record; 
(e)  The names of three Yuba City property owners to be used as character references; 
(f)  The name and address of the company represented; 
(g)  His last business address; and 
(h)  The type of merchandise, the location of merchandise, how payment is to be made, whether or not a contract is to be used, and, if so, a blank copy of the contract attached to the application. 
(§ 2, Ord. 362)  
Sec. 5-13.03. - Fingerprinting and photographing required. 
Prior to registration with the City Clerk or obtaining the required business license, all persons engaged in soliciting, canvassing, or taking orders from house to house or from place to place for wares, merchandise, or any article to be delivered in the future, or for services to be performed in the future, shall be fingerprinted and photographed by the Police Department at a cost to each solicitor or person of $1.50. 
(§ 3, Ord. 362)  
Sec. 5-13.04. - Transmittal of fingerprint cards. 
It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to forward copies of the fingerprint cards to both the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the California Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation for verification of the applicant's criminal record. 
(§ 4, Ord. 362)  
Sec. 5-13.05. - Return of fingerprint verification. 
No person shall proceed to solicit or canvass until verification has been returned by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the California Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation. 
(§ 5, Ord. 362)  
Sec. 5-13.06. - Renewal of registration; fingerprinting required. 
Upon re-application for a license to solicit or canvass, the applicant shall be fingerprinted and shall not be permitted to solicit or canvass until verification is received. 
(§ 8, Ord. 362)  
Sec. 5-13.07. - Prior arrests and convictions of applicant. 
(a)  Any person having been arrested for a felony or two misdemeanor offenses, either in or out of the State, shall not be issued a license or be permitted to solicit. 
(b)  Any person having been convicted of any misdemeanor mentioned in Penal Code § 290 shall not be issued a license or registration. 
(§§ 6 and 7, Ord. 362)  
Sec. 5-13.08. - Failure to register. 
Any person who fails, neglects, or refuses to register as required by the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(§ 9, Ord. 362)  
CHAPTER 14. - CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS  
Article I. - Local Franchise 
 
Sec. 5-14.101. - Preamble. 
This chapter provides policy direction governing award and operation of cable television franchises. Individual franchises may differ subject to their respective franchise agreements. This chapter and individual franchise agreements are intended to complement each other and to be read together in a consistent manner. Where there is a direct inconsistency between the provisions of this chapter and a franchise agreement, the provision of the franchise agreement shall prevail. To the extent that the public interest can be reasonably served, the grantor intends to rely wherever possible on competitive factors and the marketplace to oversee cable franchises. However, the grantor reserves all rights under federal and State law to regulate its cable franchises. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.102. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "City" shall mean the City of Yuba City, a municipal corporation of the State of California in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
(b)  "City Council" shall mean the present governing body of the grantor or any future board constituting the legislative body of the grantor. 
(c)  "Community Television Authority, CTA and JPA" shall mean a Joint Powers Authority established in cooperation with other governmental agencies to jointly administer designated portions of this chapter. 
(d)  "Chief Administrative Officer" shall mean the grantor's Manager, Administrator, or other designation of the grantor's Chief Executive Office, or any designee thereof. 
(e)  "Franchise" shall mean an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the grantor which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City as required by other ordinances and laws of this City. 
(f)  "Grantee" shall mean the person, firm or corporation granted a franchise by the grantor under this chapter, and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said person, firm or corporation. 
(g)  "Grantor" shall mean the City. 
(h)  "Street" shall mean the surface, the air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, other public right-of-way or public place, including public utility easements under control of the grantor. 
(i)  "Property of grantee" shall mean all property owned, installed or used in the jurisdiction by a grantee in the conduct of a cable television system business in the jurisdiction under the authority of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. 
(j)  "Subscriber" shall mean any person or entity who elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by a grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system, and who pays the charges therefor. 
(k)  "Cable television system" or "system," also referred to as "cable communications system," "CATV," "CTV" or "cable system," means a facility or facilities consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment, that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to one or more subscribers within the franchise area, but such term does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to transmit television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
(4)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system; or 
(5)  An "open video system" which complies with Section 653 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
(l)  "Gross revenues" shall mean the gross revenues derived annually from the operation of the cable systems to provide cable services. 
(m)  "Basic cable services," "basic services," or "basic service tier" shall mean any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.103. - Reserved.  
Sec. 5-14.104. - Franchise to operate. 
(a)  A nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate, and maintain a cable television system within the entire City may be granted by the City by ordinance, to any person, firm or corporation, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who or which offers to furnish and provide such system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
A franchise granted under the provisions of this chapter shall encompass the following purposes: 
(1)  To engage in the business of providing cable television service, and such other services as may be permitted by law, including but not limited to data services, which grantee chooses to provide to subscribers within the designated service area. 
(2)  To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets or other public places within the designated service area. 
(3)  To maintain and operate said franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals and for the delivery of cable services, and such other services as may be permitted by law, including but not limited to data services. 
(4)  To set forth the obligations of a grantee under the franchise. 
(b)  Grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable television system as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable State and Federal law. Grantor may grant an additional franchise only after conducting a public hearing on the grant of the additional franchise(s). 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.105. - Public, educational and government programming service. 
(a)  General channel requirement. Subject to the specific terms of a franchise agreement, including conditions under which one or more public, education and government (PEG) channels shall be activated for PEG use, there shall be a minimum of one channel dedicated for exclusive PEG use. The channel, in the sole discretion of the grantor, or the Community Television Authority, may be utilized in any PEG combination and may be shared with other communities or designated for exclusive use within the grantor's jurisdiction. 
(b)  Subject to the specific terms of a franchise agreement and technical feasibility, upon 120 days' written notice, grantee shall provide the capability for its system to accept video and audio signals from up to two locations within the geographical boundaries of the grantor and distribute them on the PEG channel(s) designated by the grantor or the CTA. Grantee, at no charge to the grantor or the CTA, shall be responsible for the facilities, maintenance, and operation necessary to transport the signals to its head end and through to subscribers. Not more frequently than once every three years, the grantor or the CTA may change or redesignate the locations for video and audio signal acceptance. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.106. - System design standards. 
Grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements and FCC technical standards. In addition, the grantee shall provide to grantor, upon request, a written report of the results of grantee's periodic proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to the FCC standards and guidelines. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14-107. - Subscriber complaints. 
In addition to other service regulations adopted by the grantor, and excepting circumstances beyond grantee's control, such as Acts of God, riots and civil disturbances, and in providing the foregoing services, the grantee shall: 
(a)  Limit system failures to minimum time duration by locating and correcting the malfunction promptly, but in no event longer than 24 hours after occurrence, irrespective of holidays or other non-business hours. 
(b)  Upon a complaint by a subscriber, make a demonstration satisfactory to the Chief Administrative Officer that a signal is being delivered to the subscriber which is of sufficient strength and quality to meet the standards set forth in the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. 
(c)  Render efficient service, making repairs promptly and interrupting services only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Planned interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice given to subscribers no less than 24 hours in advance and shall occur during period of minimum use of the system. 
(d)  Maintain an office in the City or at a location which subscribers may call without incurring added message or toll charges and which office shall be open during all the usual business hours, with its telephone listed in directories of the telephone company serving the grantor, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustment may be received at any time, day or night, seven days a week, or provide a local telephone directory listing and "toll free" telephone service maintained on a seven-day, 24-hour basis for the receipt of consumer complaints. 
(e)  Maintain a written or electronic record, "Log" or written complaint file listing date of complaints, identifying the subscriber and describing the nature of the complaint, and when and what action was taken by grantee in response thereto; said record shall be kept at grantee's local office, for a period of two years from the date of complaint, and shall be available for inspection during regular business hours without further notice of demand, by the Chief Administrative Officer (or his or her designee). 
(f)  Within 60 days of acceptance of the grant of a franchise, grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the grantor. The written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing specifying the subscriber's grounds for dissatisfaction. The procedures shall include a requirement that the grantee respond to any written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days of its receipt. Grantee shall file a copy of these procedures with the grantor. The grantee shall provide to each subscriber upon commencement of the subscriber's service and at least annually thereafter, a copy of the complaint procedure. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.108. - Subscriber complaints; failure to remedy. 
In addition to any other penalty provisions in the franchise, if a subscriber files in writing with the grantor a complaint for a service problem which is preventable and reasonably within the grantee's control, and if such grantee fails within a reasonable period following receipt of written notice by the grantor to remedy the problem, the grantor may levy a penalty of up to $500 for any occurrence or series of related occurrences, unless the grantee has fewer than 5,000 subscribers (in the grantor) in which case the penalty shall not exceed $200. If the grantee objects to the penalty in writing to the grantor, within a reasonable period, the grantee and grantor may, upon mutual agreement, conduct arbitration in accordance with the rules of the American Arbitration Association. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.109. - Government services. 
(a)  With respect to providing programming on the community programming channels and as set forth in a franchise agreement, the grantor and the grantee may agree that grantee shall provide, at the request of the Chief Administrative Officer, use of the grantee's studio, equipment and technical services for production of live and video-taped municipal programs, subject to scheduling requirements of the grantee. 
(b)  The grantee shall provide all basic subscriber services and connections without cost, to all public and nonprofit schools and community colleges within the grantor, and to all buildings owned and/or controlled by the grantor, including fire stations and police stations, used for public purposes and not (exclusively) for residential use. Such buildings may be designated by the Chief Administrative Officer from time to time; provided, however, that such buildings shall be located within the franchise area. Grantee shall install, without charge to grantor or such public or private schools, up to 250 ft. of service connection from the transmission cable otherwise maintained or required to be maintained by grantee for the service of paying subscribers of grantee. The grantor or any such public or private school shall pay to the grantee the costs of all labor and materials supplied by grantee for the installation of any service connection in excess of the initial 250 ft. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.110. - Interconnection. 
Grantee's system distribution plant shall be constructed such that the public service and local origination channels can be reasonably connectable with all adjoining present or future systems. The grantor, the grantee, and the CTA shall work both among themselves and with other political jurisdictions to encourage and facilitate the interconnection of this system with those of adjoining jurisdictions on a composite or exclusive basis. Grantee shall design the system to provide the ability to interconnect with other systems via either microwave and/or direct trunk transportation line extending from the system head-in or nearest hub to a point at the edge of the franchise area adjacent to each neighboring jurisdiction. The CTA is hereby authorized and encouraged to devote a portion of its funding to programs which encourage and facilitate interjurisdictional programming. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.111. - Uses permitted. 
(a)  Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system in the grantor's jurisdiction, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any public street such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and in addition, so to use, operate and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms or corporations, including, but not limited to, any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the jurisdiction. 
(b)  The granting of a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed as permission or authority to enter on, occupy or otherwise use private property without the express consent of the owner or agency in possession thereof. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.112. - Duration of franchise. 
No franchise granted under this chapter shall be for a term longer than 15 years following the date of acceptance of such franchise by the grantee or the renewal thereof unless the grantor determines that it is in the public interest to grant a franchise with a term longer than 15 years. 
Any franchise granted under this chapter may be terminated prior to its date of expiration by the grantor in the event that grantor shall have found, after no less than 30 days' notice of any proposed termination and following a public hearing at which grantee shall have the right to present testimony and cross examine witnesses, that: 
(a)  The grantee has knowingly, and willingly failed to comply with any material provision of this chapter or, by act or omission, has knowingly, and willingly violated any material term or condition of any franchise or permit issued hereunder; or 
(b)  The grantor acquires the cable system of the grantee. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.113. - Renewal. 
Any renewal of an existing franchise shall be in accordance with the requirements of Federal law. An application for renewal shall be accompanied by a renewal application deposit in the amount of $7,500. The applicant shall pay the reasonable costs of the grantor in the renewal application as set forth in the last paragraph of Section 15-14.131(c). 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.114. - Franchise payments. 
(a)  Immediately upon execution of the franchise, the grantee shall pay to the grantor, quarterly within 60 days of the end of each quarter, the sum of 5% of gross revenues as defined in Section 15-14.102(l) received for operations in the City for the preceding quarter. No other fee, charge or consideration shall be imposed except such business license fees, construction, development and inspection, and permit fees as set by the grantor and applicable to qualifying businesses and individuals in the community. 
(b)  The grantee shall file with the grantor, within 90 days after the expiration of any calendar year or portion thereof during which this franchise is in force, either an audited financial statement prepared by an independent certified public accountant or certified by an officer of grantee, certifying under penalty of perjury, and in a form satisfactory to the grantor's Financial Officer, showing in detail the gross annual receipts, as defined herein, of grantee. The statement shall fully reconcile any and all discrepancies in the fees paid in the preceding 12 months. The statement shall be prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting standards. Upon reasonable notice and during regular business hours, grantor shall have the right to inspect the grantee's record, and make copies thereof, covering its gross subscriber revenues under the franchise and the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts payable under this chapter; the cost of said audit shall be borne by grantee when the same results in increasing by more than 5% the grantee's annual payment to the grantor. No acceptance of any payments shall be construed as a release or as an accord in satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation hereunder, 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.115. - Limitations of franchise. 
(a)  Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be nonexclusive. 
(b)  No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted under this chapter except those specifically prescribed herein. 
(c)  Any privilege claimed under any franchise by the grantee in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the street or other public property. 
(d)  Transfer and assignment. 
(1)  Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, the rights granted under this franchise shall not be sold, transferred, assigned, leased, sublet or otherwise encumbered for any purpose whatsoever, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person without the prior written consent of the grantor. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the franchise may be transferred without grantor's consent to a wholly-owned subsidiary of grantee which expressly agrees, in writing, to assume responsibility for the obligations under the franchise and to comply with all provisions of the franchise if, after completion of the transfer, the subsidiary of grantee has an asset value equal to or greater than the existing grantee. At least 60 days prior to such transfer, grantee shall notify grantor in writing of the proposed transfer. The notice to grantor shall describe the proposed transfer or assignment, the asset value of the proposed transferee or assignee and the corporate structure proposed upon completion of the transfer or assignment. Grantor may request additional information regarding the transfer and grantee shall provide the additional information promptly upon receipt of the request. Grantee shall notify grantor in writing, within ten days of the completion of the transfer or assignment, that the transaction has been completed and shall provide documentation of the transaction and the name and address of the chief executive officer of the new transferee or assignee. 
(3)  The grantee shall notify the grantor of any actual or proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of, control of the franchise. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised amounting to or exceeding 25% ownership. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, the grantor shall, consistent with Federal law, only consider the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the proposed transferee to operate the cable system. The notice and request for approval of a transfer or change in control under this section shall be accompanied by a deposit in the amount of $5,000. The grantee shall pay the reasonable costs of grantor incurred in reviewing and acting upon the transfer or change in control. 
(4)  The consent or approval of the grantor to any transfer of the franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the grantor in and to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms, provisions and conditions of this franchise. 
(5)  In any absence of extraordinary circumstances, the grantor will not approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise other than to a wholly owned subsidiary, prior to substantial completion of construction of the upgraded cable system, unless the transferee expressly agrees to assume the responsibility for the completion of the rebuild as provided for in this franchise agreement. In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without the successor in interest becoming a signatory and obligor to this franchise agreement. 
(6)  Time shall be of the essence of any franchise granted under this chapter. The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this chapter or by any failure of the grantor to enforce prompt compliance. 
(7)  Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee, department or board of the grantor shall be subject to transfer by the grantor to any other officer, employee, department or board of the grantor with the exception of the power to fine and/or revoke grantee's franchise. 
(8)  The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against grantor for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or of any franchise issued hereunder or because of its enforcement. 
(9)  The grantee shall be subject to all provisions, rules, regulations, and conditions prescribed by Federal, State, City, County and local law heretofore or hereafter enacted or established during the term of any franchise granted under this chapter. 
(10)  Any franchise granted under this chapter shall not relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole or conduit space from any department of the grantor, from any utility company, or from others maintaining poles or conduits in streets. 
(11)  Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities owned, possessed, controlled or exercisable by the grantee, or any successor to any interest of the grantee, of or pertaining to the construction, operation or maintenance of any CATV system in the grantor's jurisdiction; and the acceptance of any franchise granted under this chapter shall operate, as between grantee and the grantor, as an abandonment of any and all such rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities within the grantor's jurisdiction, to the effect that, as between grantee and the grantor, any and all construction, operation and maintenance by any grantee of any CATV system in the grantors jurisdiction shall be, and shall be deemed and construed in all instances and respects to be, under and pursuant to said franchise, and not under or pursuant to any other right, privilege, power, immunity or authority whatsoever. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.116. - Rights reserved to the grantor. 
(a)  Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of grantor to acquire the property of the grantee, through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a fair market value, which if the franchise expires or is terminated in accordance with Section 5-14.112, shall not include any amount for the franchise itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the grantor's right of eminent domain. 
(b)  There is hereby reserved to grantor every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by any ordinance of the grantor, and the grantee, by its acceptance of any franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of grantor in its exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
(c)  Neither the granting of any franchise under this chapter nor any of the provisions contained herein shall be construed to prevent grantor from granting any identical or similar franchise to any other person, firm or corporation within all or any portion of the grantor. 
(d)  Grantor retains the power to amend any section or part of this chapter so as to reasonably require additional bonding, insurance or greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance or otherwise on the part of the grantee; provided, however, that any requirements in addition to those set forth at the time a franchise agreement was effective and applicable only to grantees under this chapter shall only be effective as to a particular grantee upon renewal of that grantee's franchise or with the consent of the grantee. 
(e)  Neither the granting of any franchise under this chapter nor any provision hereof shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the grantor. 
(f)  The grantor may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted under this chapter. The Chief Administrative Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of the grantee. Either the grantee or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the Chief Administrative Officer may within ten days of the decision appeal the matter to the City Council for hearing and determination. Except as otherwise herein expressly provided, the City Council may accept, reject or modify the decision of the Chief Administrative Officer, and the City Council may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of the grantee or from any provision of this chapter. The Chief Administrative Officer prior to rendering a decision may refer the matter to the CTA for advice. Nothing herein may be construed to restrict or otherwise interfere with any right of appeal available to grantee under Federal or State law. 
(g)  Any grantee licensed under this chapter is authorized to serve the grantor's entire geographic area now existing and any new territory annexed thereto in the future. Grantee must provide service to all residential dwellings requesting service, subject to grantee's line extension policy as approved by grantor as part of the franchise agreement. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.117. - Location of the property of grantee. 
(a)  Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of the grantee to be constructed or installed in streets, shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved by the Public Works Director acting in the exercise of his or her reasonable discretion. 
(b)  The grantee shall not install or erect any facilities or apparatus in or on other public property, places or rights-of-way, or within any privately owned area within the grantor's jurisdiction which has not yet become a public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the grantor, except those installed or erected upon public utility facilities now existing, without obtaining the prior written approval of the Public Works Director. 
(c)  The developer or property owner of new construction or development shall give 60 days' notice to grantee of that new construction or development. Grantee agrees to participate in any joint trench coordinating committee established within the franchise area by grantor for the purpose of participating in joint trench projects for the franchise area. 
(d)  Grantee may participate in joint trench opportunities where new development's dwelling units, when occupied, will not meet the line extension policy approved in the franchise agreement, but grantee shall participate where the new development's dwelling units, when occupied, would meet the line extension policy approved in the franchise agreement. Grantee may be involved in all design aspects of the new construction or development that relate to the infrastructure required for cable service, including the provision of specifications and engineering assistance prior to construction. The costs of easements, trenching, and construction of the conduits required to bring cable service to the new construction or development will be borne by the grantee, the developer, or the property owner, as may be agreed upon between them. Grantee will bear all costs of installing cable, amplifiers, and other equipment required to construct and operate the cable system. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.118. - Removal and abandonment of property of grantee. 
(a)  In the event that the use of any part of the CATV system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of six months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of grantee's franchise or this chapter, or the franchise has been terminated, canceled or has expired, the grantee, upon being given 60 days' notice, shall promptly at no expense to the grantor remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such system other than any which the Public Works Director may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the Public Works Director. Removal of abandoned property if not performed by grantee, may be done by the grantor and billed to the grantee at grantor's option. 
(b)  Any property of the grantee remaining in place 30 days after the termination or expiration of the franchise shall be considered permanently abandoned. The Public Works Director may extend such time not to exceed an additional 30 days. 
(c)  Any property of the grantee to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such a manner as the Public Works Director shall prescribe. Subject to the provisions of any utility joint use attachment agreement, upon permanent abandonment of the property of the grantee in place, the property shall become that of the grantor and the grantee shall submit to the Public Works Director an instrument in writing, to be approved by the City Attorney, transferring to the grantor the ownership of such property. 
(d)  Any and all streets and public ways disturbed or damaged during the construction, operation, maintenance, or reconstruction of the system, shall be promptly restored by the grantee, at its sole expense, to their original condition unless otherwise authorized in writing by grantor. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.119. - Continuity of service. 
It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive all available services insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. System interruptions or disruptions in excess of 24 consecutive hours or for 48 total hours during any month shall entitle subscriber(s) upon approval by grantor in accordance with Section 5-14.116(f) to pro rata rebates for the disrupted period. In the event of a change of grantee, the current grantee shall cooperate with the grantor to operate the system for a temporary period to maintain continuity of service to all subscribers. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.120. - Changes required by public improvements. 
The grantee, at its expense, shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street or other public place any property of the grantee when required by the Public Works Director by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installations of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks or any other type of structures or improvements by public agencies; provided, however, that the grantee in all cases shall have the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of the grantee in place, as provided in Section 5-14.118 of this chapter. If the grantee protests any requirements of the Public Works Director, the matter shall be referred to the Chief Administrative Officer, whose decision shall be final and binding. 
Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the property of grantee and grantee shall not be entitled to any surcharge or other compensation by reason of anything hereunder. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.121. - Failure to perform street work. 
Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or by its franchise to be done in any street or other public place, within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director, the Public Works Director, at his or her option, may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the grantor the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the Public Works Director to the grantee within 30 days after receipt of such itemized report. Except for emergencies when, in grantor's judgment, there is a likelihood of serious risk of injury to the public, grantor agrees to give grantee written notice of no less than 30 days, of any alleged work failure and provide for a reasonable period to cure. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.122. - Faithful performance bond. 
(a)  The grantee, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this chapter, shall furnish to the grantor and file with the grantor's Clerk, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of such franchise or any renewal thereof, at grantee's sole cost and expense, a corporate surety bond issued by a company approved by the grantors Finance Officer and in a form approved by the grantors Attorney, in an amount to be determined by grantor and established in the franchise agreement but not to exceed $1,000,000 renewable annually, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the grantee of all of the grantee's obligations under this chapter and any franchise agreement, and upon the further condition that in the event grantee shall fail to comply with any one or more of the material provisions of this chapter or of any franchise issued to the grantee under this chapter, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond any damages or loss suffered by the grantor as result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee as prescribed hereby which may be in default, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond; said condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of such franchise and any renewal thereof and thereafter until the grantee has liquidated all of its obligations with the grantor that may have arisen from the acceptance of said franchise or renewal by the grantee or from its exercise of any privilege therein granted. The bond shall provide that 30 days prior written notice of intention not to renew, cancellation, or material change, to be given to the grantor. At the end of the first two years of the term of this franchise, the amount of the aforesaid corporation surety bond which the franchise holder shall maintain in full force and effect for the remainder of the term of the franchise shall be in an amount to be determined by grantor but not to exceed $250,000 but shall correspond in all other particulars to the bond required during the first two years of the term as required hereinabove. 
(b)  Neither the provisions of this section, nor any bond accepted by the grantor pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the grantor pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the grantor thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued under this chapter or for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.123. - Customer service and reception quality. 
(a)  Customer service. Grantor reserves the right to enforce the FCC customer service standards, as now codified at 47 C.F.R. § 76.309, or hereafter amended. 
(b)  Letter of credit for customer service. Grantor may require the posting of a letter of credit to guarantee the quality of grantee's service to customers, subject to restrictions (if any) agreed upon between grantor and grantee in the franchise agreement. In no case shall grantor require a letter of credit without affording grantee a hearing to present its views on imposing such letter of credit. 
(c)  Reception quality. 
(1)  The FCC Rules and Regulations, including Part 76, Subpart K (Technical Standards), and any amendments or supplements thereto, will apply to the grantee's operations to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
(2)  The head-end of the cable system, satellite earth stations, and any hubs must be equipped with an emergency power system in order to maintain continuous power in the event of a local power outage. The standby emergency power system must be capable of providing emergency power for a minimum of three hours. 
(3)  The cable system must be designed, installed, and operated so as to comply with the following general requirements: 
(i)  Continuous 24-hour daily operation. 
(ii)  Avoid causing interference with the reception of off-the-air signals by non-subscribers. 
(iii)  Operate in a wide range of outdoor temperatures that typically occur within the franchise service area. 
(iv)  Assure that all subscribers will receive standard color and monochrome signals on the FCC-designated Class 1 channels without noticeable picture degradation or visible evidence of color distortion, or other forms of interference that may be attributable to deficiencies in the cable system. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.124. - Indemnification of grantor. 
(a)  The grantee, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this chapter shall indemnify and save harmless grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees from all claims, actions, suits, liability, loss expense or damages of every kind and description (including, without limitation, antitrust claims relating to the granting, operation or administration of a franchise if and when available), and including investigation cost, court costs, and attorneys' fees which may accrue to or be suffered or claimed by a person or persons arising out of the negligence, wrongful acts, errors or omissions of grantee in the ownership, construction, repair, replacement, maintenance and operation of said cable television system and by reason of any license, copyright, property right or patent of any article or system used in the construction or use of said system. 
(b)  Grantee shall provide and maintain in full force and effect for the term of such franchise or any renewal thereof, at grantee's sole cost and expense, general comprehensive liability insurance coverage, automobile coverage and workers' compensation in amounts and in forms established herein or in the franchise agreement and protecting grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents against liability for loss or damage for bodily injury, personal injury, death and property damage, occasioned by the operations of grantor under such franchise, with minimum liability limits of $1,000,000, for personal injury or death of any person and $500,000, for damage to property resulting from any one occurrence. Workers' compensation and employers' liability insurance shall be maintained at the statutory limits. 
(c)  Proof of insurance. Policies mentioned in the foregoing subsection shall designate the grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, as additional insured and shall contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or reduction in the limits of coverage of said policy shall be delivered to the grantor 60 days in advance of the effective date thereof; if such insurance is provided by a policy which also covers grantee or any other entity or person other than those above named, then such policy shall contain the standard cross-liability endorsement. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.125. - Inspection of property and records. 
There shall be kept in the grantee's office records which shall show the things hereafter set forth. The grantee shall provide such information in such form as may be required by the grantor for said records and provide copies thereof: 
(a)  The true and entire cost of construction of plant and facilities, of equipment, of maintenance and of the administration and operation thereof; the amount of stock issued, if any; the amount of cash paid in, the number and par value of shares; the amount and character of indebtedness, if any; the rate of taxes; the dividends declared; the character and amount of all fixed charges; the allowance, if any, for interest, for wear and tear and for depreciation; and all amounts and sources of income. 
(b)  The amount collected annually from subscribers within the grantor's jurisdiction and the character and extent of the services rendered therefor. 
(c)  The amount collected annually from other users of service and the character and extent of the service rendered therefor to them. 
(d)  The grantee at all times shall make and keep full complete plans and records showing the exact location of all CATV system equipment installed or in use in streets and other public places in the grantor. 
(e)  The grantee shall file with the Public Works Director, on or before the last day in March of each year, a current map or set of maps drawn to a scale specified by the Public Works Director, showing the location of all cable lines installed and in place in streets and other public places of the grantor's jurisdiction on base maps provided by the grantor. The grantee shall make available to grantor upon request, as-built drawings and maps showing the location of all CATV system equipment installed and in place in the streets and other public places within the jurisdiction; however, such as-built drawings and maps shall not become the property of the grantor and shall not be public record. Except in cases of emergency when grantee shall make the as-built drawings and maps available immediately upon request, grantee shall make the as-built drawings and maps available to grantor within three business days of the request. 
The information required to be provided pursuant to this section, in addition to any further data which may be required by the grantor, shall be furnished by the grantee to the grantor at the grantee's own cost and expense. The grantor shall have the right to inspect any records, receive copies of all books, records, maps, construction plans, financial statements, and other like material which are kept by the grantee on his or her premises at any time during normal business hours, and any grantee record kept at another place shall, within ten days of grantor's request, be made available at grantee's premises within the franchise area for grantor's inspection and/or copying. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.126. - Operational standards. 
(a)  The performance of grantee's cable television system shall meet the technical standards as set forth in Section 76.605 or any such other Federal Communications Commission Rules or Regulations pertaining to operating standards, or any successor section of the Federal Communications Rules, as those standards may exist from time-to-time. 
(b)  Grantee shall conduct performance tests in accordance with the requirements of Section 76.601 or any successor section of the Federal Communications Commission's Rules, as these requirements may apply or be extended from time-to-time. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.127. - Emergency use of facilities. 
(a)  Grantee shall comply with all FCC rules and regulations relating to the national Emergency Alert System (EAS). In the event of any conflict between the Federal EAS and these requirements, the Federally mandated EAS shall have priority. 
(b)  Grantee shall provide the capability to enable grantor's public safety personnel and designated public officials to remotely activate the local component of the EAS so as to provide emergency information to subscribers residing in grantor's jurisdiction. This capability shall include the ability to interrupt and override the audio signals of all cable channels using remote coded access activation devices. Grantor acknowledges that subscribers in any adjoining jurisdictions commonly served by the cable system may receive any such emergency notifications. 
(c)  The equipment necessary to remotely activate the local component of the EAS shall be provided by grantee at no expense to the grantor. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.128. - Regulation of rates and service. 
Grantor retains the right, at any time during the term of any franchise granted hereunder, to institute regulation of rates and charges, as such regulation may be permitted or authorized under then current State or Federal law. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.129. - Modifications. 
If any party to a franchise agreement determines that there have been any modifications of the applicable provisions of the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission or act of Congress which, in that party's opinion, materially affects the terms of a franchise, that party may, in writing, request that the parties meet and confer to determine what, if any, modifications are required to be incorporated into the franchise to bring the franchise into compliance with the rules, regulation or act of Congress. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.130. - Use of utility poles and facilities agreement. 
When any portion of the CATV system is to be installed on public utility poles and facilities, certified copies of the agreements of such joint use of poles and facilities shall be filed with the grantor's Clerk. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.131. - Application for an initial franchise. 
(a)  Application for an initial franchise hereunder shall be in writing, shall be accompanied by an application deposit in the amount of $15,000 nonrefundable, and shall be filed with the grantor's Clerk for transmission to the grantor and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The legal name and the structure of the entity or entities proposed to hold the franchise and the address of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall state the name and address of each partner. If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, the application shall state the names and addresses of its directors, main officers, major stockholders or members, and associates having 10% or greater financial interest in the corporation, and the names and addresses of parent and subsidiary companies. In all cases, the application shall show the percentage of ownership. 
(2)  A statement and description of the CATV system proposed to be constructed, installed, maintained, or operated by the applicant; the proposed location of such system and its various components; the manner in which the applicant proposes to construct, install, maintain or operate such system and operate any CATV equipment or facilities; a detailed description of the equipment or facilities proposed to be constructed, installed, maintained or operated therein; and the proposed specific location thereof. 
(3)  A map specifically showing and delineating the proposed service area or areas within which applicant proposes to provide CATV services and for which a franchise is requested if said area is less than the entire grantor. 
(4)  A statement or schedule setting forth the number of channels and all of the television or radio stations proposed to be received, transmitted, conducted, relayed or otherwise conveyed over the CATV system, clearly stating those services included as "basic services." 
(5)  A statement or schedule in a form approved by the Chief Administrative Officer of proposed rates and charges to subscribers for installation and services, and a copy of the proposed service agreement between the grantee and its subscribers shall accompany the application. 
(6)  A copy of any contract, if existing, between the applicant and any public utility providing for the use of facilities of such public utility, such as poles, lines or conduits. 
(7)  A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether written, oral or implied, existing between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation with respect to the proposed franchise or the proposed CATV operation. If a franchise is granted to a person, firm, or corporation posing as a front or as the representative of another person, firm or corporation, and such information is not disclosed in the original application, such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force and effect whatsoever. 
(8)  A current (within 12 months) financial statement prepared by an independent certified public accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory to the grantor showing applicant's financial status and its financial ability to construct, install, operate and maintain proposed CATV system. 
(9)  Such supplementary, additional or other information as the grantor may demand at any time, and the applicant shall provide, and which the grantor may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested franchise should be granted. 
(b)  Upon consideration of any such application, the grantor may refuse to grant the requested franchise or the grantor, by resolution, may grant a franchise for a CATV system to any such applicant as may appear from said application to be in its opinion best qualified to render proper and efficient CATV service to the television viewers and subscribers in the grantor. The grantor's decision in the matter shall be final. If favorably considered, the application submitted shall constitute and form a part of the franchise as granted. It is the intention of this chapter that the franchise shall not be granted upon a cash auction bid, but that the grantor shall consider those factors set forth in California Government Code § 53066 in granting the franchise, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Quality of service offered; 
(2)  Rates to the subscriber; 
(3)  Experience and financial responsibility of the applicant; 
(4)  Applicant's proposals for providing service to local schools and City's installations; 
(5)  Whether applicant has a contract with a public utility providing for use of facilities such as poles, lines or conduits of such public utility in the grantor; and 
(6)  Such other factors as the grantor considers necessary in protecting the public interest. 
(c)  Any franchise granted under this chapter shall include the following condition: 
"The cable franchise granted under this Ordinance shall be used for the provision of cable services." 
Inclusion of the foregoing statement in any such franchise shall not be deemed to limit the authority of the grantor to include any other reasonable condition, limitation, restriction or authorization which it may deem necessary to impose or include in connection with such franchise pursuant to the authority conferred by this chapter. 
The applicant for a franchise shall pay the reasonable costs of the grantor incurred in the processing, reviewing and awarding of the franchise, including but not limited to staff costs, legal costs and consultant costs, if any. The applicant shall submit with its application a deposit, as set forth above, towards payment of these costs, and shall submit additional deposits if notified by grantor that the prior deposits have been expended by the grantor and that additional grantor incurred costs are anticipated. The grantor will not formally consider the application unless all requested deposits have been made prior to the time of the City's consideration. All of grantor's costs shall be paid by the applicant prior to the franchise becoming effective. Should grantor determine not to grant a franchise, applicant shall only be entitled to a refund of any deposit in excess of the costs incurred by grantor in reviewing the application. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.132. - Acceptance and effective date of franchise. 
(a)  No franchise granted under this chapter shall become effective unless and until the resolution granting the franchise has become effective and, in addition, unless and until all things required in this section and Section 5-14.222(a) and (b), Section 5-14.223(a) and (b), Section 5-14.129, and Section 5-14.130 of this chapter are done and completed, all of such things being hereby declared to be conditions precedent to the effectiveness of any such franchise granted under this chapter. In the event any of such things are not done and completed in the time and manner required, the grantor may declare the franchise null and void. 
(b)  Within 30 days after the effective date of the resolution awarding a franchise, or within such extended period of time as the grantor in its discretion may authorize the grantee shall file with the City's Clerk its written acceptance of the franchise together with the bond and insurance policies required by Section 5-14.122(a) and (b), and Section 5-14.124(a) and (b), of this chapter, and this agreement to be bound by and to comply with to do all things required of him or her by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise. Such acceptance and agreement shall be acknowledged by the grantee before a notary public, and in form and content shall be satisfactory to and approved by the grantor's Attorney. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.133. - Construction schedule. 
(a)  Within 90 days after acceptance of this franchise, the grantee shall file all necessary applications to receive permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint-use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses and any other permits, licenses, and authorizations to be granted by duly-constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of the cable television system, or associated microwave transmission facilities. In connection therewith, copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission or any other Federal, State or regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction with respect to any matters affecting grantee's cable television operations shall also be submitted simultaneously to a Chief Administrative Officer. 
(b)  Within two years after the commencement of construction pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, unless the grantor in its discretion designates a shorter time in the franchise, grantee shall complete construction and installation of the entire cable television system and proceed to render service to all residents of the grantor who desire cable television service. 
(c)  The grantor may in its sole discretion levy a penalty not to exceed $500 per day for each day the grantee exceeds the construction and installation timetable pursuant to subsection (a) and subsection (b) of this section. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.134. - Line and service extensions; tree trimming. 
(a)  Line extensions. Within the franchise area, the grantee shall extend its trunk and distribution system to serve subscribers requesting service where the density of potential subscribers to be inhabited households passed by such extension is equal to or greater than 30 households per mile in areas passed by overhead cable or 50 households per mile in areas passed by underground cable, provided that all such permission as may be required from the owner of the property is reasonably available, and that service to multiple dwelling units need be provided only on terms acceptable to grantee and property owner. In new housing districts, areas with occupancy densities of occupied homes with densities or more than 50 households per mile which are contiguous to the main trunk line of the cable system will be provided with access to service to the extent service is economically feasible and technically possible. In areas with less than 30 households per mile aerial or 50 households per mile underground, service shall be offered in conformance with grantee's service extension policies. Grantee shall not be required to extend its trunk and distribution system where the area is already served by another person franchised by the grantor. 
(b)  Nonstandard installation. A grantee's maximum standard length for a service drop shall be no more than 125 aerial ft. For underground drops which require the cutting of pavement curbs, sidewalk, or similar surfaces, and for all drops greater than 125 ft., grantee may charge an installation fee equal to its cost of time and materials plus customary overhead. 
(c)  Tree trimming. Grantee or its designees are authorized to trim trees on public property, at its own expense, as may be necessary to protect its wires, facilities, and cable equipment. Grantee, in order to maintain its facilities, including its overhead wires and cables or its underground conduits may trim trees on public property. Except in cases of emergencies, at least 24 hours prior to beginning any work that will affect any tree on public property or any street tree, grantee shall notify grantor's Public Works Department and obtain permission from grantor's Public Works Department. Grantee shall not begin work until its plans and procedures have been approved by the Public Works Department. Grantee and grantor may agree to other procedures different from those set forth herein or may agree to a blanket permit to expedite tree trimming. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.135. - Community television authority. 
(a)  Intent. At grantor's sole option, grantor may provide that the public television and other community channels will be governed by Joint Powers Authority together with other governmental agencies, termed the Community Television Authority, such that these channels may be free of unlawful censorship, open to all residents and available for all lawful forms of public expression, community information, and debate on public issues. 
(b)  Functions of the Community Television Authority. If formed, the Community Television Authority shall have the following functions: 
(1)  Responsibility for program production, for management of public access channels, the community channels, and all other channels as may in the future be designated for community based programming; 
(2)  To assure that the public access and community channels are made available to all residents of the grantor on a nondiscriminatory basis; 
(3)  To assure that no unlawful censorship or control over program content exists, except as necessary to comply with FCC regulations or to prohibit material that is obscene, or constitutes a lottery; 
(4)  To devise, establish, and administer all rules, regulations and procedures pertaining to the use and scheduling of the public television and community channels; 
(5)  To prepare, in conjunction with the grantee, such regular or special reports as may be required or desirable by grantor; 
(6)  To hire and supervise staff; 
(7)  To make all purchase of materials and equipment that may be required; 
(8)  To develop additional sources of funding to further community programming, and receive, administer, and expend such funds; and 
(9)  To perform such other functions relevant to the public and community channel(s) as may be appropriate. 
(c)  Establishment of the CTA. The initial Board of Directors of a CTA shall be determined by parties to the JPA. 
(d)  Funding for the CTA. It is the intent of the grantor that the CTA obtain funding from the franchise fee, imposed pursuant to Section 5-14.114 of this chapter. 
(e)  Grantee support for the CTA. The grantee shall provide ongoing cooperation with and support to the CTA, with the detailed requirements to be specified in the franchise. As a minimum, the following shall be provided: 
(1)  The grantee shall provide a high quality studio facility for the use of the CTA as specified in this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
(2)  The grantee shall provide operational and technical personnel to support the CTA in its cable casting activities, with the minimum level of support as specified in this chapter and in the franchise. 
(3)  If the CTA is formed, the grantor, together with the other members of the CTA, shall determine the level of monetary support that shall be provided to fund the CTA and its operations. 
(f)  CTA reports. The CTA shall provide a report to the grantor at least annually, indicating CTA achievements in community-based programming and services in the form and detail specified by the grantor. The CTA also shall provide a special report to the grantor each time the grantee increases its rates indicating the level and quality of grantee's support to the CTA since any previous rate increase was implemented. 
(g)  Public access rules. Within 120 days after the creation of a CTA, the Board of Directors shall complete a set of rules for the use of the public television and community channels which shall be promptly forwarded to the grantor. The rules shall be prepared in cooperation with the grantee, and confirmed by a contractual agreement between the CTA and the grantee. The rules shall, at a minimum, provide for: 
(1)  Access on a nondiscriminatory basis for all residents of the franchise area; 
(2)  Prohibition of any presentation of lottery information, or obscene or indecent material; 
(3)  Public inspection of a log of producers, which shall be retained by the grantee for a period of two years; 
(4)  Procedures by which individuals or groups who violate any rule may be prevented from further access to the channel; and 
(5)  Free use of such reasonable amounts of channel time, cable casting facilities, and technical support as are provided in the agreement between CTA and the grantee. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.136. - Cable casting facilities. 
The franchise agreement may provide for the use of grantee's cable casting facilities by grantor. The agreement may also provide that grantee will provide cablecasting facilities to grantor for use in providing programming for the PEG channel(s). 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.137. - Subscriber protection. 
(a)  Discriminatory practices prohibited. The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, programmers, or others on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, or age. The grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of Federal, State, or local governments and shall comply with all applicable laws and executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination. 
(b)  Privacy. The grantee shall maintain constant vigilance with regard to possible abuses of the privacy or constitutional rights of any subscriber, programmer, or citizen resulting from any device, signal, or service associated with the system. The grantee shall not utilize any capability of the system for acquisition of information not a normal part of a grantor-approved service. 
(c)  Permission of the property owner required. No equipment owned by the grantee shall be installed by the grantee without first securing the written permission of the owner of any premises involved. If such permission is later revoked, the grantee upon request of owner shall remove forthwith any of its equipment which is both visible and movable. 
(d)  Sale of subscriber lists. Grantee shall comply with all requirements of State and Federal laws in the sale of subscriber lists, including but not limited to the requirements to delete a subscriber from the lists sold upon the subscriber's request. 
(e)  Unlawful monitoring and tapping prohibited. Neither the grantee, nor any other person, agency, or entity, shall unlawfully tap, or arrange for the tapping, of any cable, line, signal device, signal or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose whatsoever, except to monitor compliance with FCC standards and for the purpose of determining any unlawful act in violation of Section 5-14.141 of this chapter or any State or Federal law, regulation, or court order. Monitoring and tapping shall not include the receipt and/or processing of signals and/or information as a normal and necessary aspect or requirement of a service approved by grantor. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.138. - Service standards. 
(a)  Information to the public. It is the grantor's policy that the public shall have access to accurate and current information on presently and potentially available cable services. Grantee shall make an effective effort to provide such information utilizing both its system and other media. 
(b)  Services to be provided. A franchised system shall provide, as a minimum, the services listed in the franchise agreement. 
(c)  Changes in services. Grantee shall inform grantor at least 30 days in advance of making any substantial change in service. Upon request, grantee will confer with grantor's representative before taking any such action, and shall give due consideration to any recommendations grantor may make, either in response to grantee's statement of intention, or on grantor's owner initiative. 
(d)  Nondiscrimination. All services shall be available to all subscribers who are willing to pay the charges at the rates established. Except as provided in Federal law, grantee shall not discriminate between subscribers within one type or class in the availability of services at either standard or differential rates according to published and grantor approved rate schedules. No charges may be made for services except as listed in published schedules which are available to inspection by anyone at grantee's office, quoted by grantee on the telephone, and displayed or communicated to all potential subscribers prior to their signing a written order for service. 
(e)  Refunds. When a subscriber voluntarily discontinues service, grantee shall refund the unused portion of any advance payments in excess of $2 after deducting any charges currently due. Unused payment portions shall be the percentage of time for which subscriber has paid for service and will not receive it because of his discontinuation of service. 
(f)  Service orders. Prior to any installation or delivery of services, all subscribers shall sign and deliver to grantee a written order for service. Said order shall describe in detail all charges for installation and services, the method of payment and schedule of payment, and any grace periods, late charges, or any other information which will affect the total amount subscriber is to be charged. 
(g)  Complaint advice. Grantee shall advise each subscriber as may be set forth in the franchise that the grantor's representative is the official to whom complaints of poor service should be made if such complaints of poor service are not resolved by grantee to the satisfaction of each subscriber. 
(h)  Payment schedules. Grantee may, at its option, charge subscribers for service and installation no more than two months in advance. Billing periods shall not exceed two months. Bills may be due and payable upon mailing and shall not be delinquent sooner than 20 days after mailing. Grantee may offer subscribers various prepayment schemes at discounts not to exceed reasonable interest on the subscriber's money for the period of prepayment. 
(i)  Disconnect for cause. Grantee may disconnect a subscriber only for cause, which shall be limited to: 
(1)  Payment delinquency in excess of 15 days; 
(2)  Willful damage to or misappropriation of grantee property; 
(3)  Refusal, for more than ten days, to admit grantee to the subscriber's premises to service grantee's equipment; and 
(4)  Theft of service, or monitoring, tapping, or tampering with grantee's system, signals, or services. 
(j)  Reconnection. Grantee shall, upon subscriber's written request, reconnect service which has been disconnected for payment delinquency when payment has removed the delinquency. A published standard charge may be made for reconnection. Grantee shall not be required to make more than three reconnections for the same subscriber if the disconnections involved were caused by payment delinquency within the past 12 months. 
(k)  Installations. 
(1)  Subject only to any limitations in its franchise, grantee shall promptly provide and maintain service to all structures in the service area upon request of the lawful occupant or owner. 
(2)  Grantee shall advise each subscriber that he or she has the right to require his or her installation be done over any route on his or her property, to any location within any building thereon, and in any manner he or she may elect, which is technically and practically feasible, consistent with grantee's standard practices. Grantee may, if he or she so elects, require that any such request be made in writing. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.139. - Equal opportunity employment. 
In carrying out the construction, maintenance, and operation of the cable television system, the grantee shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, creed, color, sex, or national origin. 
The grantee shall ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during employment, without regard to their race, creed, color, sex, or national origin. Such action shall include, but not be limited to the following: employment, upgrading, demotion, or transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising, layoff or termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and selection for training, including apprenticeship. 
The grantee shall post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notice setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause. The grantee shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the grantee, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, creed, color, sex, or national origin. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.140. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to be filed with the grantor shall be filed with the City's Clerk. 
(b)  No person, firm or corporation in the existing service area of the grantee shall be arbitrarily refused service; provided, however, that the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee or monthly service charge, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.141. - Violations. 
(a)  From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street in the grantor's jurisdiction, or within any other public street in the grantor's jurisdiction, or within any other public property of the grantor, or within any privately-owned area within the grantor which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the grantor, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals through a cable television system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make or use any unauthorized connection whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable television system within this grantor for the purpose of enabling himself or herself or others to receive or use any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the owner of said system. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the grantee, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires, or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.142. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of Section 5-14.141 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $500 or be imprisoned in jail for a period not to exceed six months or be both fined and imprisoned. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.143. - Severability. 
If any material section or provision of this chapter relating to rates, system design, public access, the Community Television Authority (CTA), line-extension, service mix or levels, amendment, franchise fees, definition of basic service, duration of franchise, inner-activity of system, and studio and other production facilities, or franchise awarded under it, is held to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, grantor shall thereupon make a determination of the effect upon the public interest caused thereby. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.144. - Waiver. 
Grantor may, upon the affirmation vote of not less than a majority of the grantor, grant a written waiver of any provision of this chapter; provided, however, that the grantor first shall find that the intent and purpose of this chapter will be met with the granting of any such waiver. Upon granting of a waiver of the provisions of this chapter, the grantor may approve substitute or alternative requirements in any franchise agreement necessary to satisfy the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Article II. - State Franchise 
 
Sec. 5-14.201. - Franchise fee. 
The current cable franchise fee established within the City, for cable franchises is 5% of gross revenues. This franchise fee percentage amount shall also apply to holders of State franchises under DIVCA. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.202. - Educational and government ("EG") channels. 
(a)  The current cable franchise designates two channels for Educational and Government programming, that are operated by the City, the City of Maryville, Yuba and Sutter Counties, cooperatively. However, as provided by DIVCA, holders of State franchises under the DIVCA shall provide three EG channels. 
(b)  All State franchisees shall comply with the provisions of DIVCA related to public, educational and government ("PEG") channels. Without limiting the foregoing, the PEG channels shall all be carried on the basic service tier. To the extent feasible, the PEG channels shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier and the channel numbers for the PEG channels shall be the same channel numbers used by the incumbent cable operator unless prohibited by Federal law and shall provide picture and sound quality and channel accessibility and location equal to, or substantially equal to, that provided by the incumbent cable providers. After the initial designation of PEG channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without the agreement of the local entity unless the change is required by Federal law. 
(c)  The holder of a State franchise shall have three months from the date the City requests the PEG channels to designate the capacity. The City may require the initial activation of two channels, with the designation or a activation of the third channel upon three months' notice from the City. However, the three-month period(s) shall be tolled by any period during which the designation or provision of PEG channel capacity is technically infeasible, including any failure or delay of the incumbent cable operator to take adequate interconnection available, as required by DIVCA. Any State franchise holder who believes that the designation of provision of PEG channel capacity is technically infeasible, shall provide to City, in writing its reasons therefor and its plan for correcting or solving the infeasibility. The City may hold a hearing on the claim of infeasibility and, thereafter, take such action as it deems proper to require the designation and provision of the PEG channels on the State franchise holder's system. 
(d)  As provided by DIVCA, the holders of State franchises shall provide an additional (or fourth) PEG channel when the non-duplicated locally produced video programming televised on a given channel exceeds 56 hours per week as measured on a quarterly basis. The additional channel shall not be used for any purpose other than to continue programming additional government, education, or public access television. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Sec. 5-14.203. - PEG channel facilities fee. 
(a)  PEG channel facilities fee ("PEG fee") in the amount of 1% gross revenues of the franchisee, as defined by Public Utilities Code § 5860, per subscriber is hereby established and shall be collected by all State franchisees operating within the City. Use of the PEG fees shall be consistent with applicable State and Federal law. The holder of a State franchise may identify and collect the amount of the PEG fee as a separate line item on the regular bill of each subscriber. 
(b)  Any franchisee that believes that it is exempt from this PEG fee or subject to a different or lower fee may file a written request for a determination of the applicability of the PEG fee with the City Clerk. Said request shall be filed within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter or within 30 days of commencement of video services by the franchisee within the City, whichever occurs last. Said request shall be heard by the City Council. 
(1)  Exemptions claims may be based on State or Federal law, or on the provisions of existing franchise agreements. 
(2)  Additional exemptions for claims for and action on claims for reduction in the PEG fee to be paid to the City may be based on monetary or in kind PEG financial support provided by the claimant based, for example, on agreements between City and the franchisee for support of PEG facilities and equipment and/or institutional network facilities and support provided by the franchisee or licensee. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
Article III. - State and Local Franchise 
 
Sec. 5-14.301. - State and local franchises; customer service and protection; penalties. 
Local franchisees and holders of State franchises under the Act shall comply with the provisions of Penal Code § 637.5 and the privacy standards contained in Section 631 of the Federal Cable Act. (47 U.S.C. section 551 et seq.). Locals franchises and the holders of State franchises shall comply with the provisions of Government Code §§ 53055, 53055.1, 53055.2, and 53088.2, and any other customer service standards pertaining to the provision of video service established by Federal law or regulation or adopted by subsequent enactment of the Act. Local franchises shall comply within any customer services standards included in their franchise agreements. The City, will enforce, in the manner set forth in section 5900 of the Act, all customer service and protection standards contained in section 5900 of the Act, including without limitation those standards set forth in section 5900(c). 
The maximum monetary penalties set forth in Public Utilities Code § 5900 are hereby adopted and enacted as the applicable schedule of penalties for the material breach of DIVAC, including but not limited to section 5900 of the Act, by a holder of a State franchise, as follows: 
(a)  $500 per day for each material breach, not to exceed $1,500 for occurrence of a material breach. 
(b)  If a material breach has occurred and the City has provided notice and a fine or penalty has been assessed, for any subsequent breach of the same nature within 12 months, shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $3,000 for each occurrence of the material breach. 
(c)  If a third or further material breach of the same nature occurs within those same 12 months, and the City has provided notice and a fine or penalty has been assessed; the penalties shall be increased to a maximum of $2,500 for each occurrence of the material breach, not to exceed $7,500 for each occurrence of the material breach. 
As used herein, "material breach" is defined as set forth in the Act, Public Utilities Code § 5900. 
(§ 2, Ord. 010-07, eff. September 20, 2007)  
CHAPTER 15. - CARD ROOMS 
 
Sec. 5-15.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Person" shall mean any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, or company. 
(b)  "Card room" shall mean any space, room, or enclosure furnished or equipped with a table used, or intended to be used, as a card table for the playing of cards and similar games, and the use of which is available to the public, or any portion of the public. "Card room," as defined in this section, shall have reference to a single table used, or intended to be used, as a card table for the playing of cards and similar games, and each such table so used shall constitute a "card room" and shall be subject to the licensing provisions of this chapter; provided, however, "card room," as defined in this section, shall not apply to any bona fide nonprofit society, club, or fraternal, labor, or other organization as set forth in Section 5-15.05 of this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 504, eff. October 21, 1964, as amended by § 1, Ord. 705, eff. July 2, 1975)  
Sec. 5-15.02. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, for himself or herself or for any other person, to engage in or carry on, or to maintain or conduct, or to cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained, or conducted, any card room in the City without first having secured a license from the City so to do according to each and every requirement of this chapter, or without complying with each and every regulation contained in this chapter pertaining to such card room. 
(§ 2, Ord. 504, eff. October 21, 1964)  
Sec. 5-15.03. - Application for license. 
An applicant for a card room license shall submit his or her application to the Chief of Police on a form supplied by the Chief of Police which shall include, among other things, the address of the place where the card room is to be conducted and the true names and addresses of all persons financially interested in the business. The term "persons financially interested" shall include all persons who share in the profits of the business on the basis of gross or net revenue. The application shall also be accompanied by the fingerprints of the applicant and of persons financially interested in the business in any case where the fingerprints of such persons are not already on file in the Police Department. Such licenses may be issued only to citizens of the United States. 
The Chief of Police may deny any applicant for a card room license a license to operate such card room if such applicant is not, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, a person of good moral character. 
The action of the Chief of Police in denying such license on the basis of the applicant not being a person of good moral character shall be subject to an appeal to the Council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten days after the denial of such license. Upon failure to file such notice within such ten-day period, the action of the Chief of Police in denying such license shall be final and conclusive. 
The Chief of Police shall deny any applicant for a card room license a license to operate such card room if such license, if granted, would exceed the maximum number of card room licenses permitted in the City by the provisions of Section 5-15.08 of this chapter. 
(§ 3, Ord. 504, eff. October 21, 1964)  
Sec. 5-15.04. - License transfers. 
No card room license shall be assignable or transferable except as follows: 
(a)  A card room licensee may change the location of a card room from one building to another building within the City provided an application therefor is made to the Chief of Police and the change in locations is permitted by the Chief of Police. 
(b)  When a card room is sold or leased, and the new owner or lessee intends to continue the operation of the card room, he or she shall make an application therefor pursuant to the provisions of Section 5-15.03 of this chapter to operate a card room at the same location. If the application is approved by the Chief of Police, the old license shall be cancelled, and a new license shall be issued. The provisions of Section 5-15.08 of this chapter shall not apply to this section. 
(§ 4, Ord. 504, eff. October 21, 1964)  
Sec. 5-15.05. - Clubs excluded. 
A nonprofit society, club, or fraternal, labor, or other similar organization, when the tables are for the exclusive use of members and bona fide guests of the members of the society, club, or fraternal, labor, or other organization shall not be required to obtain card room licenses, and employees shall not be required to obtain work permits. 
(§ 5, Ord. 504, eff. October 21, 1964)  
Sec. 5-15.06. - Employee work permits. 
Any person who is hired by the licensee to manage, direct, conduct, or supervise other employees in a card room shall submit an application to the Chief of Police for a work permit within five days of such employment as manager. Such application shall be submitted on forms supplied by the Chief of Police which shall include, among other things, the true name, address, and description of the applicant, and the name and address of the employer. The application shall also be accompanied by the fingerprints of the applicant in cases where the applicant's fingerprints are not already on file in the Police Department. 
The Chief of Police may deny to such applicant a work permit if such applicant is not, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, a person of good moral character. 
Each application for a work permit shall be accompanied by a fee of $1. Such fee shall not be returned in the event such work permit is refused, revoked, or suspended as provided in this chapter. Only one such work permit shall be required each year. The holder of a work permit may be employed by any licensee within the City. 
The action of the Chief of Police in denying such work permit on the basis of the applicant not being a person of good moral character shall be subject to an appeal to the Council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten days after the denial of such work permit. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the Chief of Police in denying such work permit shall be final and conclusive. 
(§ 6, Ord. 504, eff. October 21, 1964)  
Sec. 5-15.07. - Bond required for license. 
Before issuing a card room license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the Finance Director shall require the applicant, as a condition to the issuance of the license, to post with the City a cash bond of $1,000, or a surety bond in the same amount, furnished by a corporate surety authorized to do business in the State, payable to the City. A corporate surety posting a bond for a licensee, as required by this section, shall notify, in writing, the Finance Director ten days prior to any cancellation or discontinuance of such bond. The bond shall guarantee that the licensee shall redeem all chips or any other devices used in the card games for cash, and the bond shall be kept in full force and effect by the licensee throughout the term of the license. 
(§ 7, Ord. 504, eff. October 21, 1964)  
Sec. 5-15.08. - Number of licenses restricted. 
The number of licenses issued shall be limited to one for each 5,000, or fraction thereof, of the residents of the City as determined by the last Federal census, or as determined by the latest population estimate of the Department of Finance of the State; provided, however, all persons having card table licenses on May 19, 1975, shall be issued a card room license upon the fulfillment of the conditions set forth in Section 5-15.03, Section 5-15.06, and Section 5-15.07 of this chapter on or before July 2, 1975. 
(§ 8, Ord. 504, eff. October 21, 1964, as amended by § 2, Ord. 705, eff. July 2, 1975)  
Sec. 5-15.09. - License fee. 
Every person engaged in managing, possessing, or conducting the business of maintaining a place where tables are used by the public for the playing of cards and for the use of which a fee or compensation is charged players, in addition to obtaining the permit required by the provisions of this chapter, shall pay a license fee of $225 per calendar year, payable in advance. Persons commencing such businesses after the beginning of the license year may procure a license for the remainder of that year by paying the proportion of the license tax provided for such business that such remainder of the year bears to the full year. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the card rooms of recognized fraternal organizations operating under the charter from the head of such organizations, not open to the general public, and whose membership is restricted to those persons regularly and formally elected to membership therein and paying regular dues to such organizations, but such exception shall not extend to any organization operated and maintained principally for the purpose of conducting or permitting the conduct of card games. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any occasional card game sponsored by any fraternal, religious, or social group in an establishment which is not primarily used by the public for the playing of cards. 
No such license for such establishment shall be issued by the License Collector unless and until the applicant therefor has a valid permit in effect covering the specific location in question. 
(§ 9, Ord. 504, eff. October 21, 1964)  
Sec. 5-15.10. - State law violations. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to permit the licensing of any card games declared illegal by the Penal Code of the State. 
(§ 10, Ord. 504, eff. October 21, 1964)  
Sec. 5-15.11. - Card room regulations. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a card room in violation of any of the following rules and regulations: 
(a)  Each card table shall have assigned to it a person whose duty shall be supervise the game and to see that such game is played in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the Penal Code of the State. Such person may have more than one table under his or her supervision. 
(b)  No minor shall be permitted at any card table, or to participate in any card game played thereat, or to remain in any card room, except for the purpose of transacting lawful business. 
(c)  No person who is in a state of intoxication shall be permitted in any card room. 
(d)  No person shall drink intoxicating beverages or furnish intoxicating beverages to other persons in any card room, unless the premises are licensed for that purpose by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
(e)  Only table stakes shall be permitted in any card game. 
(f)  The Chief of Police may require the licensee to post specified signs at each card table stating the name of the game, the rules of play, and other specified information. 
(§ 11, Ord. 504, eff. October 21, 1964, as amended by § 3, Ord. 705, eff. July 2, 1975)  
Sec. 5-15.12. - Closing hours. 
All card rooms subject to the provisions of this chapter shall cease operations and remain closed between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of each day. 
(§ 12, Ord. 504, eff. October 21, 1964)  
Sec. 5-15.13. - Premises to be unbarred. 
No card table whereon card games may be played shall be maintained behind any closed, locked, or barred door at any place of business in the City. The main entrance to any premises for which any permit has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall at all times remain unlocked and unbarred while any games are being played upon such premises, and at all times all premises where any games are being played shall be kept in such condition as to be accessible for inspection by all police officers. No permit for the conduct of any card game shall be issued for any portion of any premises unless such portion is in close proximity to and readily accessible by all police officers from the main entrance of such premises. 
(§ 13, Ord. 504, eff. October 21, 1964)  
Sec. 5-15.14. - Suspension and revocation of licenses and work permits. 
The Chief of Police shall have the right for cause to revoke or suspend any card room license or card room work permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and to take possession of such permits. Grounds for revocation or suspension of a license or work permit shall be as follows: 
(a)  When the licensee or permit holder fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter; 
(b)  When the licensee or permit holder has given false information in making an application for a license or permit; 
(c)  When the licensee or permit holder is convicted of a felony; and 
(d)  Where the licensee or the employees of the licensee keep or permit to be used, in conjunction with a licensed card room, any disorderly house or place in which people abide or to which people resort to the disturbance of the neighborhood, or in which people abide or to which people resort for purposes which are injurious to the public morals, health, convenience, or safety, including, but not confined to, activities such as prostitution, soliciting for prostitution, the selling or exchanging of stolen property, and the unlawful selling, furnishing, or using of narcotics and dangerous drugs. 
The action of the Chief of Police in revoking or suspending a license or work permit shall be subject to an appeal to the Council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten days after the revocation or suspension of the license or work permit. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the Chief of Police in denying such work permit shall be final and conclusive. 
(§ 14, Ord. 504, eff. October 21, 1964)  
Sec. 5-15.15. - Violation of provisions. 
Any person, society, club, or organization violating any of the terms, requirements, regulations, or provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(§ 15, Ord. 504, eff. October 21, 1964)  
CHAPTER 16. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE PARAPHERNALIA 
 
Sec. 5-16.01. - Necessity of enactment. 
As a consequence of the glamorization of paraphernalia associated with the use of controlled substances and the abhorrence with which many residents of this City view such glamorization and enticement of impressionable persons, this City Council finds that many residents of this City are being unwillingly subjected to paraphernalia displays which are to these persons objectionable and unpleasant. The City Council further finds that such unpleasantness is particularly acute when minors are present in the area where such displays are conducted as a consequence of the concern of these unwilling viewers for the welfare of this City's children. Because of the relatively recent proliferation of such drug related paraphernalia in this City and the immediate risk that impressionable young people will be unduly influenced by aggressive, commercial marketing techniques being utilized with the subject paraphernalia, it is the opinion of this City Council that there currently exists within the City an eminent danger to the children of this City should drug related paraphernalia be available to minors without there simultaneously being available guidance from adults most likely to have the welfare of each individual minor in mind. Accordingly, this City Council determines that regulation of the availability of drug related paraphernalia to minors unaccompanied by an appropriate adult must be immediately regulated.  
Sec. 5-16.02. - Minors. 
No owner, manager, proprietor, or other person in charge of any room in any place of business selling, or displaying for the purpose of sale, any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia designed or used for smoking or injecting or consuming marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any other controlled substance, as defined in the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest, or inject prescription drugs, shall allow or permit any person under the age of 18 years to be, remain in, enter or visit such room unless such minor person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or by his or her legal guardian.  
Sec. 5-16.03. - Minors excluded. 
A person under the age of 18 years shall not be, remain in, enter or visit any room in any place used for the sale, or for displaying for sale, devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia designed or used for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, unless such person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or his or her legal guardian.  
Sec. 5-16.04. - Sale and display rooms. 
A person shall not maintain in any place of business to which the public is invited the display for sale or the offering to sell, of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia designed or used for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, unless within a separate room or enclosure to which minors not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. Each entrance to such a room shall be sign posted in reasonably visible and legible words to the effect that narcotic paraphernalia are being offered for sale in such a room, and minors unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. Such separate room or enclosure shall at all times remain unlocked and unbarred and at all times shall be kept in such condition as to be accessible for inspection by all police officers and shall be readily accessible by all police officers from the main entrance of such premises.  
Sec. 5-16.05. - Violations—Misdemeanor. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by imprisonment in the County Jail for a maximum of six months or by a maximum fine of $500 or by both such fine and imprisonment.  
Sec. 5-16.06. - Violation—Nuisance. 
The distribution or possession for the purpose of sale, exhibition, or display in any place of business from which minors are not excluded as set forth in this chapter, and where devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia designed or used for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs or devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Civil Procedure Code § 731.  
Sec. 5-16.07. - Penalties mutually exclusive. 
The penalties herein provided for a violation of this chapter as set forth in Section 5-16.05 and Section 5-16.06 are hereby declared to be mutually exclusive and either penalty may be invoked without the other, in lieu of the other or following the other or in advance of the other. 
(§ 1, Ord. 835, eff. February 20, 1980.)  
CHAPTER 17. - BINGO GAMES 
 
Sec. 5-17.01. - Authority. 
Pursuant to the authority provided in Section 19(c) Article 4 of the California State Constitution and Penal Code § 326.5, the City of Yuba City establishes the following requirements for the conduct of bingo games by organizations of the type described in Penal Code § 326.5. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.02. - Bingo defined. 
As used in this chapter, the term "bingo" shall have the meaning ascribed to that term in Penal Code § 326.5. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.03. - Organizations permitted to conduct bingo games. 
Upon the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter, any organization of a type described in Penal Code § 326.5 shall be entitled to conduct bingo games within the City of Yuba City. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.04. - Rules and regulations pertaining to bingo games. 
Any bingo game conducted pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be held in strict accordance with the provisions of Penal Code § 326.5. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.05. - Hours of operation. 
Any bingo game conducted under the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted only during the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.06. - Permit required. 
No person or organization shall conduct a bingo game within the City of Yuba City without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Chief of Police. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.07. - Application for permit. 
Written application for a permit to conduct a bingo game under the provisions of this chapter shall be made under penalty of perjury and shall be filed with the Chief of Police. Such application shall contain: 
(1)  The name of the organization desiring to obtain such permit and the names and addresses of all officers of the organization; 
(2)  The days and hours of operation of any bingo game; 
(3)  Copies of certificates of letters evidencing the exempt status of the organization and its entitlement to conduct bingo games under the provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  The address of the premises where the bingo games will be conducted; 
(5)  A statement whether the applicant is the owner or lessee of the property on which the bingo games shall be conducted or whether the use of such property was donated to the organization; 
(6)  The name of each person, individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity which has a financial interest in the conduct of the bingo game; 
(7)  The name of the person responsible for the actual operation of the bingo game. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.08. - Authority of an investigation by Chief of Police. 
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to make such investigation as he or she deems necessary to determine whether the applicant or the operator of the proposed bingo game has been convicted within the past five years of crimes involving lotteries, gambling, larceny, perjury, bribery, extortion, fraud or similar crimes involving moral turpitude. If it is determined that the applicant or any person who will operate such bingo game has been convicted of such crime within the past five years, the Chief of Police may refuse to issue a permit hereunder. In addition, the Chief of Police may refuse to issue a permit hereunder if the Chief determines that the operation of the bingo game by the organization would violate any provision of this chapter or of Penal Code § 326.5 or any other provision of law. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.09. - Additional conditions and restrictions. 
If a permit is approved hereunder, the Chief of Police may include such conditions and restrictions as the Chief of Police deems to be reasonable and necessary to insure compliance with the purposes and intent of this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.10. - Other investigations. 
The permittee shall immediately report to the Chief of Police any change in the nature of the organization or in the staff operating or assisting in the operation of any bingo game for which a permit has been issued hereunder. Upon receiving notice of any such change, the Chief of Police may conduct such investigation as he or she deems appropriate under the circumstances to insure that there is no violation of the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of Penal Code § 326.5. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.11. - Fees. 
Fees for the issuance of a permit hereunder shall be established in Section 3-8.4 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982; § 5, Ord. 26-92, eff. November 5, 1992)  
Sec. 5-17.12. - Term of permit. 
Any permit granted under the terms of this chapter shall be for two years unless a shorter term is specified in the permit when issued by the Chief of Police. Upon expiration of any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, written application for renewal of such permit shall be made to the Chief of Police at least 30 days prior to the expiration date. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.13. - Permits nontransferable. 
Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable either as to permittee or location. Any attempt to transfer shall render the permit invalid. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.14. - Suspension or revocation. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police if the conduct of such bingo game is in violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of Penal Code § 326.5 or as otherwise injurious to the health, safety and morals of the people of the City of Yuba City. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.15. - Notice of hearing on revocation or suspension. 
The permittee shall be given prompt notice of any revocation of suspension of any permit issued hereunder and shall immediately desist from conducting or operating the bingo game. Such notice shall fix a time and place not less than five days, no more than 30 days after service thereof at which time the holder of said permit may appear before the City Council to appeal from the revocation or suspension by the Chief of Police. Termination by the City Council shall be final. Any organization whose permit is revoked after such hearing may not apply for a new permit to conduct bingo games in the City of Yuba City for a period of one year from the date of such revocation or cancellation of the exemption granted to such organization under the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701(d), or other provision of law, such organization may apply for reissuance of a permit upon proof of reinstatement of said exemption. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.16. - Minors. 
No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.17. - Open to public. 
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of a nonprofit charitable organization. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.18. - Staffing and operation. 
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the nonprofit charitable organization which organized it. Only an organization authorized to conduct a bingo game by permit pursuant to this chapter shall operate such game or engage in promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.19. - No profit, wages or salary. 
No person or agent of such person shall receive profit, wage, salary or other income from any bingo game authorized by this chapter except as a bona fide prize received as a participant in such bingo game. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.20. - Place conducted. 
Any organization of a type described in Penal Code § 326.5 shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned and leased by it and which property is used by such organization solely for an officer for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.21. - Separate fund for proceeds of bingo games. 
All profit derived from the bingo games shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Full and accurate records of income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with bingo game operations, conduct, promotions, supervision or any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this chapter, shall be kept by the permittee. City, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit any such records at reasonable times and places. Said records shall be retained for such period of time as required by State and federal law and for a period of no less than three years for the purposes of this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.22. - Total value of prizes. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed $250 in cash or kind or both for each separate game which is held. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.23. - Participants must be present. 
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless such person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
Sec. 5-17.24. - Enjoining violations. 
The City may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of Penal Code § 326.5. 
(§ 1, Ord. 903, eff. June 14, 1982)  
CHAPTER 18. - RETAIL SALES IN MOTEL OR HOTEL ROOMS 
 
Sec. 5-18.01. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent the occurrence of retail sales and display of merchandise in motel or hotel rooms or suites designed primarily for sleeping. The City Council finds that: 
(a)  Such activities increase demand for parking beyond that provided for motel or hotel rooms, creating hazards associated with congestion; and 
(b)  Such activities constitute a different occupancy group than do motel and hotel rooms designed for sleeping as defined by Building and Fire Codes for public safety. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1062, eff. October 6, 1988; § 1, Ord. 1086, eff. January 3, 1990)  
Sec. 5-18.02. - Prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to display for sale or sell merchandise within any motel or hotel room or suite designed primarily for sleeping. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1062, eff. October 6, 1988; § 1, Ord. 1086, eff. January 3, 1990)  
Sec. 5-18.03. - Violation. 
Any person violating the provisions of Section 5-18.02 shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1062, eff. October 6, 1988; § 1, Ord. 1086, eff. January 3, 1990)  
CHAPTER 19. - ALCOHOL RESTRICTIONS WITHIN LIMITED AREAS OF THE RICHLAND HOUSING CENTER OWNED AND OPERATED BY THE AREA WIDE HOUSING AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 5-19.01. - Alcohol restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage within the common area, including but not limited to: recreation areas such as grass, parks, and all other public use areas of the Richland Housing Center. 
(§ 2, Ord. 06-94, eff. August 4, 1994)  
Sec. 5-19.02. - Enforcement. 
The Chief of Police shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter and for enforcing the penal provisions hereof. 
(§ 2, Ord. 06-94, eff. August 4, 1994)  
CHAPTER 20. - CAMPING IN YUBA CITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 003-14 , § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 2014, effectively repealed the former Ch. 20, §§ 5-20.010—5-20.050, and enacted a new Ch. 20 as set out herein. The former Ch. 20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 001-14 , § 1, adopted March 18, 2014. See Appendix A for prior legislative history. 
 
Sec. 5-20.010. - Purpose. 
Public property and public rights-of-way within the City should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended. Such activity can constitute a public health and safety hazard that adversely impacts the neighborhoods, commercial property and general welfare of the City. 
Camping on private property without the consent of the owner and without proper sanitary measures adversely affects private property rights as well as public health, safety, and welfare. 
City services can be utilized to clean up campsites on public and private property. These cleanups can expose City workers and citizens to hazardous conditions including human infectious waste and other hazardous materials. Disposal of these materials is costly and hazardous. Temporary and permanent campsites erected within the City limits are often constructed in a fashion, and/or at a location that makes access by emergency personnel difficult during times of emergency. This puts the campers, campsite visitors, and emergency personnel at a greater risk if an injury, illness, accident or disaster should occur. 
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit, subject to certain restrictions, camping on public or private property within the City in order to maintain public or private property in a clean, sanitary and accessible condition and to adequately protect the health, safety and public welfare of the community. 
( Ord. No. 003-14 , § 1, 11-18-2014)  
Sec. 5-20.020. - Definition. 
For purposes of this chapter, "camping" is defined as residing in or using property for one or more nights for living accommodation purposes, such as sleeping activities, or making preparations to sleep (including the laying down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping), or storing personal belongings (including but not limited to clothing, sleeping bags, bedrolls, blankets, sheets, luggage, backpacks, kitchen utensils, cookware, and similar material), or making any fire or using any tents, regularly cooking meals, or living in a parked vehicle. These activities constitute camping when it reasonably appears, in light of all the circumstances, that a person(s) is using property, as a living accommodation for one or more nights regardless of his or her intent or the nature of any other activities in which he or she might also be engaging. 
( Ord. No. 003-14 , § 1, 11-18-2014)  
Sec. 5-20.030. - Camping on public property. 
It is unlawful for any person to camp in or upon any public property or public right-of-way within the City, unless otherwise specifically authorized by this Code or by a resolution of the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 003-14 , § 1, 11-18-2014)  
Sec. 5-20.040. - Exception(s). 
Notwithstanding the prohibition of Section 5-20.030, camping shall be allowed in the Yuba Sutter Boat Docks Recreational Vehicle Campground and Marina, located at #80 Second Street, Yuba City (Assessor's Parcel No. 03-290-006) and as may be permitted within City parks by the City's Community Services Director. 
( Ord. No. 003-14 , § 1, 11-18-2014)  
Sec. 5-20.050. - Camping on private property. 
(a)  [ Prohibited. ] It is unlawful to camp upon any private property within the City. 
(b)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to persons camping with the written consent of the owner, provided that such written consent is in their possession at the time and is shown upon demand of any peace officer. 
( Ord. No. 003-14 , § 1, 11-18-2014)  
Sec. 5-20.060. - Violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 003-14 , § 1, 11-18-2014)  
CHAPTER 21. - SOCIAL HOST REGULATIONS FOR UNDERAGE DRINKING 
 
Sec. 5-21.010. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter are: 
(a)  To facilitate the enforcement of laws prohibiting the service and consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors as well as to deter the service and consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors, and to promote the reduction of underage drinking; 
(b)  To establish a duty of persons having control over any premises, who knowingly host, permit or allow a gathering at the premises, to take reasonable steps to prevent the service and consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors; 
(c)  To protect public health, safety, general welfare and quiet enjoyment of property and properties neighboring the location of gatherings at which minors are served and consume alcoholic beverages; and 
(d)  To impose civil liability for the recovery of emergency response costs to such gatherings. 
( Ord. No. 003-15 , § 1, 5-19-2015)  
Sec. 5-21.020. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. 
Emergency response costs means the costs associated with responses by City law enforcement and fire personnel to gatherings, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The salaries and benefits of law enforcement and fire personnel for the amount of time responding to or remaining at gatherings, and the administrative costs attributable to such responses; 
(2)  The cost of any medical treatment to, or for, any law enforcement and fire personnel responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering; and 
(3)  The cost of repairing any City equipment or property damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment or property damaged, responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering. 
Gathering is a party, gathering or event where a group of two or more persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity. 
Legal Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of an underage person; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom an underage person has been placed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Minor means any person under 21 years of age. 
Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent or stepparent of another person. 
Premises means any residence or other private property, place or premises, including any commercial, business or industrial premises. 
( Ord. No. 003-15 , § 1, 5-19-2015)  
Sec. 5-21.030. - Prohibition on hosting, permitting or allowing a gathering at which minors consume alcoholic beverages. 
It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to knowingly host, permit or allow a gathering to take place at the premises where one or more minors consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever such person having control of the premises either: 
(1)  Intentionally serves or causes to be served an alcoholic beverage to a minor for consumption; or 
(2)  Knows or reasonably should have known a minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage and thereafter fails to immediately take appropriate action to prevent further consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor. 
( Ord. No. 003-15 , § 1, 5-19-2015)  
Sec. 5-21.040. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
(a)  Any California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control licensee at any premises regulated by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control; or 
(b)  A parent or legal guardian who provides an alcoholic beverage at a family gathering to a minor under the parent or legal guardian's care, or to any person who provides an alcoholic beverage to a minor as part of a legally protected religious activity. 
( Ord. No. 003-15 , § 1, 5-19-2015)  
Sec. 5-21.050. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person who violates Section 5-21.030 of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500, and said person is guilty of a misdemeanor for each subsequent violation and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000 and/or six months in jail. Nothing in this chapter shall limit or preclude the enforcement of any other applicable laws or remedies available for violations of Section 5-21.030 of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 003-15 , § 1, 5-19-2015)  
Sec. 5-21.060. - Civil liability for emergency response costs. 
Any person convicted of a second or subsequent violation of Section 5-21.030 of this chapter shall be civilly liable for all emergency response costs incurred by the City arising out of the second or subsequent response to the gathering. 
( Ord. No. 003-15 , § 1, 5-19-2015)  
Sec. 5-21.070. - Reimbursement for emergency response costs. 
The actual cost of emergency response costs described in Section 5-21.060 of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the City recoverable in a civil action, and shall be recoverable in a civil action, including reasonable attorneys' fees and costs. 
( Ord. No. 003-15 , § 1, 5-19-2015)  
Sec. 5-21.080. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, phrase, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or portion of this chapter, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. 
( Ord. No. 003-15 , § 1, 5-19-2015)  
CHAPTER 22. - SHOPPING CARTS 
 
Sec. 5-22.010. - Purpose. 
The accumulation of wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping carts, or parts thereof, on public or private property is found to create conditions that are hazardous to the health and safety of minors, aesthetically detrimental to the community, and potentially injurious to the health, safety and general welfare of the public. Over time these conditions can lead to the reduction in property values, the promotion of blight and deterioration, and the development of an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the overall health and safety. Responsibility for minimizing or eliminating this impact rests with individuals who use shopping carts and the businesses which provide shopping carts for their patrons. The intent of this chapter is to ensure that measures are taken by store owners to prevent the removal of shopping carts from store premises and parking lots, to make the removal of shopping carts a violation of this chapter, and to facilitate the retrieval of abandoned carts as permitted by State of California law. The presence of wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping carts, or parts thereof, on public property, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 012-17 , § 1, 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-22.020. - Required signs on carts. 
Every cart owned or provided by any business establishment in the City must have a sign permanently affixed to it that contains the following information: 
(a)  Identifies the owner of the cart or the name of the business establishment, or both; 
(b)  Notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the business premises; 
(c)  Notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the premises or parking area of the business establishment is a violation of State and City law; 
(d)  Lists a telephone number to contact to report the location of the abandoned cart; and 
(e)  Lists an address for returning the cart to the owner or business establishment. 
(Ord. No. 012-17 , § 1, 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-22.030. - Cart removal, abandonment, alteration, possession prohibited. 
It is unlawful to do any of the following if a cart has a permanently affixed sign as set forth in Section 5-21.030: 
(a)  Remove a cart from the business premises with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart. 
(b)  To be in possession of any cart that has been removed from the business premises, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart. 
(c)  To be in possession of any cart with owner identification information removed, obliterated, or altered, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart. 
(d)  To leave or abandon a cart at a location other than the business premises with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart. 
(e)  To alter, convert, or tamper with a cart, or to remove any part or portion thereof or to remove, obliterate or alter owner identification information on a cart, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart. 
(f)  To be in possession of any cart while that cart is not located on the business premises of a business establishment, with the intent to temporarily or permanent deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart. 
(Ord. No. 012-17 , § 1, 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-22.040. - Abandoned shopping cart prevention program (ASCPP). 
Every owner shall develop and implement an abandoned shopping cart prevention program (ASCPP) to prevent the removal of carts from the business premises. 
(a)  Existing businesses: Each person who owned or controlled a business in existence within the City's jurisdiction on the effective date of this ordinance who provided shopping carts for use by customers or the public, shall submit an ASCPP to the Director for review within 30 days of the effective date of this ordinance. 
(b)  New businesses: 
(1)  For new business established after the effective date of this ordinance that have a minimum of ten carts, the owner shall be required to install a standardized cart containment system with a wheel locking or stopping mechanism that is used in conjunction with an electronic or magnetic barrier along the perimeter of the store premises. 
(2)  As an alternative to a standardized cart containment system, for new businesses with nine or fewer carts, an ASCPP may be submitted per subsection (a) above. 
(3)  This subsection shall not apply to existing business that relocate, operating under the same name, to another location in the City. Said business shall not be closed for more than 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 012-17 , § 1, 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-22.050. - ASCPP contents. 
At a minimum, the ASCPP must include the following elements and a detailed description of how they will be implemented: 
(a)  Notice to customers. Written notification shall be provided to customers that removal of carts from the premises and parking lots are prohibited and a violation of state and City law. This notice may be provided in the form of flyers, warnings on shopping bags, or any other form of written notification that will effectively notify customers of the prohibition. 
(b)  Signs. Signs shall be placed in conspicuous locations proximate to exits and shopping cart collection areas that warn customers that cart removal is prohibited and constitutes a violation of state and City law. 
(c)  Loss prevention measures. A description of the specific effective measures the owner will implement to prevent shopping cart removal from the premises. These measures may include, but are not limited to, electronic or other disabling devices on the shopping carts so they cannot be removed from the premises, use of courtesy clerks to accompany customers and return carts to the store, use of security personnel to prevent cart removal, security deposit for use of cart, or other demonstrably effective measures acceptable to the Director, likely to prevent shopping cart removal from the premises. 
(d)  Mandatory cart retrieval . 
(1)  Nine or fewer carts. Cart retrieval is mandatory, however the owner shall be responsible for retrieving their own carts. 
(2)  Every owner who maintains ten or more carts for use by customers shall provide evidence of a contract with a shopping cart retrieval service with terms requiring collection of abandoned shopping carts within 24 hours of removal. The retrieval service must be approved by the City and the owner shall not place limits on daily loads or days per week to retrieve carts within the City. 
(3)  As an alternative to subsection (2) above, stores with 90 carts or less may elect to retrieve their own carts rather than enter into a contract with a shopping cart retrieval service. Abandoned shopping carts shall be retrieved within 24 hours of removal. At the discretion of the Director, should carts not be retrieved within 24 hours, the owner shall enter into a contract with a shopping cart retrieval service. 
(e)  After hours cart containment. A plan for securing shopping carts whenever the store is not open for business. 
(Ord. No. 012-17 , § 1, 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-22.060. - Director review ASCPP. 
The Director may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed plan, and notify the owner of such decision in writing, within 30 days after receipt of the plan. 
(a)  If approved, the ASCPP shall be implemented by the owner no later than 30 days from the date of approval. 
(b)  If conditionally approved, the owner may accept in writing the conditions stipulated by the Director, after which the owner shall implement the conditionally approved ASCPP within 30 days of the date of conditional approval. 
(c)  If the submitted ASCPP is denied, the reasons for denial shall be set out in writing and the owner shall have 15 days to revise and resubmit the plan. 
(d)  Even though approved, an ASCPP may be reevaluated at any time by the Director if operation of the plan demonstrates that the plan's insufficiency or inadequacy in preventing removal of carts from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 012-17 , § 1, 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-22.070. - ASCPP basis for denial. 
The Director may deny an ASCPP based upon any of the following grounds: 
(a)  Implementation of the ASCPP would violate provisions of the building, zoning, health, safety, fire, police or other provisions of the City's Code, or any county, state, or federal law which substantially affects public health, welfare or safety; 
(b)  The ASCPP fails to include all the information required by this chapter; 
(c)  The ASCPP is insufficient or inadequate to prevent removal of carts from the owner's premises; 
(d)  The ASCPP fails to address any special or unique conditions due to the geographical location of the premises as they relate to shopping cart retention and prevention efforts; 
(e)  Implementation of the ASCPP would violate a term or condition of another City policy or requirement of the municipal code; 
(f)  The owner has knowingly made a false statement of fact, or omits a fact required to be revealed in the application for the ASCPP, or in any addendum or report or other information required to be provided regarding the ASCPP; 
(g)  If the ASCPP is rejected as incomplete or inadequate, then the Director shall indicate the areas of incompleteness or inadequacy, and the owner shall have an additional 15 days in which to resubmit a corrected ASCPP; or 
(h)  An owner who fails to submit a complete ASCPP, or fails to implement approved plan measures, or fails to comply with the approved plan measures, shall be subject to enforcement of these requirements through any lawful means available to the City, including without limitation, institution of the administrative remedies provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 012-17 , § 1, 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-22.080. - ASCPP modification. 
At any time subsequent to the Director's approval of an ASCPP, the owner may submit to the Director a request of a modification of the previously approved plan to address a change in circumstances, address an unanticipated physical or economic impact of the plan or modify an inadequate or ineffective plan. The Director may also modify an approved plan which has been demonstrated to be ineffective or inadequately implemented. Grounds for Director modification include, but are not limited to, a high number of abandoned shopping carts. The Director may require the owner to install and maintain electronic or other geographic disabling devices to prevent carts from being removed from the premises. The Director shall notify the owner of a proposed modification of a previously approved plan and provide the owner an opportunity to respond within a 10-day period prior to the Director's decision. 
(Ord. No. 012-17 , § 1, 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-22.090. - Failure to prevent removal of carts. 
In the event that owner(s) fail to utilize the shopping cart retrieval service or to follow cart prevention measures which result in shopping carts being abandoned off premise resulting in City personnel picking up and storing shopping carts, and/or shopping carts are not being collected within 24 hours, the owner shall be required to install a standardized cart containment system with a wheel locking or stopping mechanism that is used in conjunction with an electronic or magnetic barrier along the perimeter of the store premises. The wheel locking or stopping mechanism shall activate when the shopping cart crosses the electronic or magnetic barrier. 
(Ord. No. 012-17 , § 1, 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-22.100. - Maintenance requirements for cart disabling devices. 
If an owner has equipped carts with disabling devices, either voluntarily or by order from the City, the owner shall conduct regular maintenance to ensure the disabling devices are working properly. If at any time, the owner determines the disabling device installed on a cart is not working properly, the cart shall be pulled from circulation until it is repaired. The owner shall inspect, test, and repair all abandoned carts returned to the owner prior to making the returned carts available for use. 
(Ord. No. 012-17 , § 1, 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-22.110. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to being charged with (i) a misdemeanor or infraction, (ii) subject to the administrative penalty and citation process set forth in Chapter 1.6 of this Code, and (iii) subject to a civil penalty of $50 for every day of non-compliance in excess of three during a six-month period. 
The remedies and penalties provided herein are cumulative, alternative and nonexclusive. The use of one does not prevent the use of any other civil, or administrative remedy or penalty authorized by, or set forth in the Yuba City Municipal Code. None of the penalties or remedies authorized by, or set forth in the City's Municipal Code shall prevent the City from using other penalty or remedy under state statute which may be available to enforce this chapter or to abate a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 012-17 , § 1, 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-22.120. - Businesses without shopping carts. 
Any person who does not own, rent, lease, or otherwise possess its own shopping carts, but whose business receives a benefit by the use of shopping carts owned by other businesses, merchants, grocers, or other similar establishments, (i) shall provide a location upon that person's premises for the storage of shopping carts and (ii) shall immediately contact the shopping cart owner or the owner's retrieval service to retrieve any shopping carts that are left on the premises. This section specifically applies to, but is not limited to, recycling centers. 
(Ord. No. 012-17 , § 1, 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-22.130. - Authority to impound. 
Pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 22435.7, the City may impound any abandoned shopping cart. The requirements for the notice, impoundment and recovery of the shopping cart shall be governed by California Business and Professions Code sections 22435 through 22435.7. 
(Ord. No. 012-17 , § 1, 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-22.140. - Enforcement of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by any enforcement personnel. Any act authorized to be performed by the City pursuant to any provision of this chapter may be performed by any enforcement personnel. 
(Ord. No. 012-17 , § 1, 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-22.150. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  "Cart" means a basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device provided by a business establishment for use by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind, including, but not limited to grocery store shopping carts. This definition shall exclude from enforcement under this chapter those devices which do not have a "basket" mounted on wheels in which goods can be placed for transport. This shall not apply to laundry carts typically found at self-service laundromats. 
(b)  "Owner" means any person or entity, who in connection with the conduct of a business, owns, leases, possesses, uses, or otherwise makes any cart available to customers or the public. For purposes of this chapter, owner shall also include the owner's onsite or designated agent that provides the carts for use by its customers. 
(c)  "Director" means the Development Services Director or their designee. 
(d)  "Premises" shall mean the entire area owned, leased, or rented and utilized by the business establishment that provides carts for use by customers, including any parking lot or other property provided by the owner for customer parking. 
(e)  "Abandoned shopping cart" means any cart that has been removed without written permission of the owner or on-duty manager from the premises of the business establishment, regardless of whether it has been left on either private or public property. Written permission shall be valid for a period not to exceed 72 hours. This provision shall not apply to carts that are removed for purposes of repair or maintenance. 
(f)  "Enforcement personnel" means any police officer, code compliance officer, or other designated City of Yuba employee designated by the Development Services Department. 
(g)  "Shopping cart retrieval service" means a contract with a commercial service to retrieve and return shopping carts to their respective owners which meets minimum service requirements as established by the Director. A contract with a commercial service to retrieve and return shopping carts to the owners which fails to meet minimum service requirements established by the Director is not a shopping cart retrieval service within the meaning of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 012-17 , § 1, 12-19-2017)  
TITLE 6. - PUBLIC WORKS  
CHAPTER 1. - CURB, GUTTER, SIDEWALK, OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS, AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 6-1.01. - Permits required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or reconstruct or remove or demolish any curb, gutter, sidewalk, or driveway in any public street, drive, alley, or right-of-way in the City without first obtaining from the Public Works Director a permit to do so, and the Public Works Director is hereby authorized to remove any curb, gutter, sidewalk, or driveway constructed in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 327)  
Sec. 6-1.02. - Standards and specifications. 
All curbs, gutters, sidewalks, off-street parking areas, and driveways shall be constructed only in accordance with standards and specifications approved by the Council or, if no such approval has been given, with standards and specifications established by the City Engineer. 
(§ 2, Ord. 327, as amended by Ord. 637, eff. March 23, 1972)  
Sec. 6-1.03. - Inspection of work. 
All curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and driveways constructed shall be subject to the inspection of the City Engineer, or his or her duly appointed representative, and in accordance with grades and elevations set on the ground by the City Engineer or his or her representative. 
(§ 3, Ord. 327)  
Sec. 6-1.04. - Fees required. 
All construction and reconstruction work for which permits are required as specified in Section 6-1.01 of this Code shall require the person doing the construction or reconstruction work for which a permit is required to pay those permit fees as established by resolution of the City Council which permit fees may be amended from time to time by appropriate amendment of the resolution establishing the fees. In addition, all such construction and reconstruction work for which a permit is required as specified in Section 6-1.01 shall be subject to inspection by the Public Works Director for which inspections there shall be a charge imposed by the Public Works Director on the person doing such construction or reconstruction or other work for which a permit is required. Inspection fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council which fees may be amended from time to time. The inspection shall be to ensure substantial conformance of the work covered by the permit to City standards and specifications. Work which is found to be substandard on inspection or not in compliance with City requirements shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the permit unless immediate compliance with the standards is made. 
Upon failure of the permittee to immediately correct such substandard work, the City may cause such work to be remedied, removed and/or replaced. Corrective work may be done by City forces or the City may choose to have the work accomplished by third persons. Any costs incurred by the City to correct deficient work shall be billed to permittee and permittee shall be responsible therefor. 
Any person constructing or reconstructing, removing or demolishing any curb, gutter, sidewalk or driveway in any public street, drive alley or right of way in the City shall be required to furnish to the City in conjunction with said person's application for the permit necessary to do the work, a certificate of insurance in support of permittee's commitment to indemnify the City, its officers, agents and employees and hold the City, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any and all liability in connection with the work covered by the permit and permittee's commitment by the issuance of the permit to indemnify the City against any and all claims for damage whether it be to person and/or to property arising out of or in any way connected with the work covered by the permit. Said certificate of insurance shall be filed with the City prior to the issuance of any such permit and prior to the exercise of any rights under the permit which certificate of insurance shall provide comprehensive liability insurance with minimal limits of $300,000 per person, $100,000 per accident and $50,000 property damage, naming both permittee, City and its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds and insuring the liability of permittee and/or City in connection with the issuance of the permit and the work covered by the permit in the course thereof. Said certificate of insurance shall provide the minimum limits herein set forth and shall provide that the insurance thereunder shall be primary insurance and only at such time as the limits of liability under the certificate have been exhausted, shall any other comprehensive liability insurance that the City may carry come into play. 
(§ 1, Ord. 828, eff. October 4, 1979)  
Sec. 6-1.05. - Scope of permit. 
The permits required by this chapter shall apply to work abutting on one subdivision lot or similar property only, and an additional permit shall be required for each additional lot or similar property abutting the work to be done; provided, however, only one permit fee and one preliminary inspection fee shall be charged for any number of contiguous lots in one ownership. No permit shall authorize any construction which will obstruct the free flow of water in any approved gutter in the City. 
(§ 5, Ord. 327)  
Sec. 6-1.06. - Permittees to be contractors, owners or tenants. 
Permits shall be issued only to contractors licensed to do such work by the State and to owners and/or tenants of property abutting on the proposed work provided such owners and/or tenants signify their intention to personally perform a major part of the physical labor involved in such work. 
(§ 6, Ord. 327)  
Sec. 6-1.07. - Completion of work. 
All such work to be done shall be commenced within 30 days of the date of issuance of the permit and shall be completed within 60 days of the date of issuance; provided, however, the Public Works Director may extend the time limits at his or her option, and for cause, not to exceed 30 days, by an endorsement on the permit. Failure to commence or complete the work within the time limits specified shall invalidate the permit. 
(§ 7, Ord. 327)  
Sec. 6-1.08. - Supplemental regulations. 
The Public Works Director is hereby empowered to establish reasonable regulations concerning the amount of notice to be given to him or her when inspections and/or surveys will be required, and permits shall be issued subject to such regulations. No permit shall be so construed as to allow the permittee to proceed with the work without the surveys and/or inspections required by the provisions of this chapter or deemed necessary by the Public Works Director. 
(§ 8, Ord. 327)  
CHAPTER 2. - EXCAVATIONS 
 
Sec. 6-2.01. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than duly authorized employees of the City, to lay pipes or conduits in the public streets or thoroughfares of the City or to open, cut, damage, or alter any roadway, street, thoroughfare, or sidewalk therein for any purpose except under a permit issued by the Superintendent of Streets and in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the Council. (§ 1, Ord. 216)  
Sec. 6-2.02. - Permit—Application. 
Any person desiring to cut the surface or excavate in any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way shall submit an application in writing to the Superintendent of Streets for a street opening permit. Such application shall include the following: 
(a)  The location, purpose, and dimensions of the openings; 
(b)  A clear sketch referencing the opening to at least two readily identifiable landmarks; 
(c)  The maximum time the excavation is to remain open (not to exceed ten days, unless extended); 
(d)  A reference to this chapter; and 
(e)  A statement for the applicant's signature obligating him or her to restore the property to its original condition to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Streets. 
(§ 2, Ord. 216)  
Sec. 6-2.03. - Permit—Form. 
The permit shall show: 
(a)  The permittee's name; 
(b)  The location and purpose of the opening; and 
(c)  A reference to this chapter setting forth the obligation of the permittee to restore the property to its original conditions to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Streets. 
On the reverse side of the permit there shall be presented a plat showing the location of such opening, the dimensions thereof, and such other details as the Superintendent of Streets may require to be shown. 
(§ 2, Ord. 216)  
Sec. 6-2.03(a). - Permit fee required together with proof of insurance. 
All permits required under this chapter shall require the applicant for such permit to pay such fees to the Public Works Director and/or Superintendent of Streets as may be established by resolution from time to time and as so amended. The work covered by the permit shall be subject to inspection by the Public Works Director or his or her duly authorized representative, for which an inspection fee shall be exacted of the applicant and which inspection fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council and which may be amended from time to time to reflect the actual costs of providing the inspection. The inspection shall be to ensure substantial conformance of the work covered by the permit to City standards and specifications. Work which is found to be substandard on inspection or not in compliance with City requirements shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the permit unless immediate compliance with said standards is made. 
Upon failure of the permittee to immediately correct such substandard work, the City may cause such work to be remedied, removed and/or replaced. Corrective work may be done by City forces or the City may choose to have the work accomplished by third persons. Any costs incurred by the City to correct deficient work shall be billed to permittee and permittee shall be responsible therefor. 
In conjunction with said person's application for the permit necessary to do the work, a certificate of insurance in support of permittee's commitment to indemnify the City, its officers, agents and employees and hold the City, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any and all liability in connection with the work covered by issuance of the permit and permittee's commitment by the issuance of the permit to indemnify the City against any and all claims for damage whether it be to person and/or to property arising out of or in any way connected with the work covered by the permit. The certificate of insurance shall be filed with the City prior to the issuance of any such permit and prior to the exercise of any rights under the permit which certificate of insurance shall provide comprehensive liability insurance with minimal limits of $300,000 per person, $100,000 per accident and $50,000 property damage, naming both permittee, the City and its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds and insuring the liability of permittee and/or City in connection with the issuance of the permit and the work covered by the permit in the course thereof. Said certificate of insurance shall provide that the insurance thereunder shall be primary insurance and only at such time as the limits of liability under said certificate have been exhausted, shall any other comprehensive liability insurance that the City may carry come into play. 
(§ 2, Ord. 828, eff. October 4, 1979)  
Sec. 6-2.04. - Permit—Term. 
The excavation shall not be permitted to remain open for a period of time exceeding ten days. The period of time the excavation may remain open may be extended at the discretion of the Superintendent of Streets and by the endorsement of the extended period of time on the permit by the Superintendent of Streets. 
(§ 2, Ord. 216)  
Sec. 6-2.05. - Length of trenches limited. 
No trench shall be opened in any public street or thoroughfare in the City for the purpose of laying pipes or conduits, or for the repair of same, for more than 600 ft. except by special consent of the Superintendent of Streets in writing. 
(§ 3, Ord. 216)  
Sec. 6-2.06. - Restoration of openings. 
It shall be the duty of every person to restore such property to the original condition thereof. Such restoration shall include, as appropriate, filling, tamping, replacing the pavement, macadam, rocks, gravel, or other forms of suitable surfacing, replacing curbing or sidewalks when removed, and removing debris and all other surplus material to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Streets. 
(§ 4, Ord. 216)  
Sec. 6-2.07. - Unsatisfactory restorations. 
If, after having made a thorough inspection of a restoration to the surface of any public street, the Superintendent of Streets shall deem such restoration not satisfactory, the Superintendent of Streets shall notify the permittee responsible for the restoration. If, within 30 days, the permittee does not completely restore the opening to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Streets, the Superintendent of Streets shall proceed to have the opening restored to his or her satisfaction. The cost of such restoration shall be paid by the permittee and shall be recoverable against him or her by appropriate civil action. A copy of the provisions of this section shall be made a part of, and a condition to, the issuance of all permits required by the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 5, Ord. 216)  
Sec. 6-2.08. - Barriers and warning lights. 
It shall be the duty of every permittee, in order to prevent injury to the public because of any opening, to place and keep adequate barriers about all openings and to place and keep an adequate number of lighted flares at night about all openings. The number and location of barriers and flares shall be under the direction of the Superintendent of Streets. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from liability for accidents or damages caused by failure or neglect to properly guard, light, or protect any openings in public streets, thoroughfares, or sidewalks during the period of opening and the restoration thereof. 
(§ 6, Ord. 216)  
Sec. 6-2.09. - Blocking streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to block by excavation, barrier, or any other means over one-half the lateral surface of any public street or thoroughfare in the City at any one time except in cases of emergency and by special written permission of the Superintendent of Streets. 
(§ 7, Ord. 216)  
Sec. 6-2.10. - Laying pipe. 
No pipe carrying water or gas shall be laid less than 18 in. below the official grade line of any street except by permission of the Superintendent of Streets. 
(§ 8, Ord. 216)  
Sec. 6-2.11. - Abandoning laid pipe. 
Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, or other structure located under the surface of any public street, thoroughfare, sidewalk, alley, or other public place, or the use thereof, is abandoned, the person owning, using, controlling, or having an interest in the same shall, within 30 days after such abandonment, file with the Superintendent of Streets a map giving in detail the location of such pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, or other structure so abandoned. 
(§ 9, Ord. 216)  
Sec. 6-2.12. - Exceptions to provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to contractors making improvements which require the opening of public streets, thoroughfares, or sidewalks within the City, which contractors are under contract with the City, provided such contract contains provisions requiring adequate restoration to such openings. 
(§ 10, Ord. 216)  
CHAPTER 3. - MANDATORY REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICES 
 
Sec. 6-3.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Collector" shall mean the refuse disposal company with whom the City has contracted to provide the residents and property owners of the City with refuse collection services. There may be more than one collector for said services. 
(b)  "Director" shall mean the Administrative Services Director of the City of Yuba City, or his/her authorized agent(s). 
(c)  "Nuisance" shall mean the accumulation and existence of refuse on any private premises, on, in, or upon any street, alley or other public place within the City may be declared to be a nuisance. No person who owns, controls, or occupies any premises in the City shall cause, permit or allow any such nuisance to exist thereon. 
(d)  "Owner" shall mean and shall conclusively be deemed to be the legal owner of any property subject to this chapter. 
(e)  "Refuse" shall mean garbage and other refuse including, without limitation: 
(i)  Accumulations of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attend the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruits, or vegetable, and containers originally used for foodstuffs; 
(ii)  Lawn and garden refuse such as leaves, grass cuttings, roots and weeds from which the soil has been removed, trimmings from trees or shrubs, plants and similar materials; 
(iii)  Rubbish and trash such as paper, rags, cardboard, fiber, metal, glass, cartons, containers, boxes, bottles or jars, and other articles or materials of a similar nature normally discarded as household or business refuse; and 
(iv)  Other trash and rubbish other than sod, rocks, concrete, bricks and similar solid material, plaster or dirt. 
"Refuse" shall not include large appliances or furniture or chemicals of a type which must be disposed of in a Class I landfill. 
(f)  "Refuse collection area" shall mean that space on the premises where refuse is deposited by occupants and where said refuse is stored until it is transferred into or onto a collection vehicle and removed from the premises. 
(g)  "Standard container" shall mean a can made of metal or other nonbreakable watertight material with a close fitting cover, cover handle and side handles, of not more than 35 gallons net capacity. 
(h)  "Cart" shall mean an 85-gallon or larger container with wheels supplied by the collector(s). 
(i)  "Report" shall mean the report of delinquent accounts compiled by the collector(s) and submitted to the Director on a monthly basis and consisting of all delinquent accounts; all accounts not less than 30 days delinquent. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.02. - Collection by the City. 
All refuse accumulated in the City shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the City, its duly authorized agents and employees, or by the collector(s) with whom the City may contract or have contracted for the collection, conveyance and disposal of refuse. The City and such contractor or contractors and their employees shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, have the exclusive right to collect, convey and transport in, along or over the public streets, alleys and highways in the City all refuse. This section shall not prohibit transportation of refuse over public ways within the City by collectors authorized by the Sutter County Health Officer to serve County areas adjacent to the City limits. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.03. - Use of City's collection service required. 
The periodic collection of refuse from all places in the City benefits all occupants of places and premises in the City and promotes and protects the health, safety and welfare of all residents of the City. Therefore, refuse collection services provided by the collector(s), City or its authorized agents, are mandatory for all owners of property within the City in or from which refuse is created, accumulated or produced; provided, however, that there may be joint or multiple use of refuse containers in certain circumstances. 
It is unlawful for any person other than the collector(s) or employees of the City to collect, remove or dispose of refuse within the City on a regularly scheduled basis for compensation; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the use of garbage disposal devices as provided in the Uniform Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.04. - Appeals. 
(a)  An owner may appeal the mandatory collection of refuse in accordance with Section 6-3.03 by filing with the Director a written request within 15 days of receiving notice from the City or its authorized agent or collector(s) that refuse service is required on the owner's property. The appeal shall set forth a statement of the action desired by owner and list the reasons for the desired action. Qualifying criteria for an appeal will include an alternative legal method of disposing of refuse or complete recycling of all existing refuse. The disposal of refuse via an alternative method shall not include hauling to a landfill, nor disposing of refuse at another person's property or place of business/employment (unless the owner's address serves as both his/her residence and business location). Physical handicaps interfering with transporting refuse containers to the curbside shall be worked out with the collector. Sections 6-3.06 and 6-3.14 of this chapter shall also be included as part of the criteria in evaluating an appeal from mandatory collection. The appeal shall be acted upon by the Director within ten days after the date of filing. The Director's determination shall be final and cannot be appealed. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.05. - Owner responsible for refuse collection. 
The owner of any property within the City in or from which refuse is created, accumulated or produced shall subscribe to and pay for refuse collection service rendered to such property by the collector(s) and shall provide at a location specified in the City's agreement with the collector(s) an adequate container or containers for deposit of refuse. The necessity for and type of refuse collection service required, the type of containers to be utilized/provided and the rates to be charged for refuse collection services shall be established by agreement between the City and the collector(s) or by resolution adopted by the City Council. 
Nothing in this section is intended to prevent an arrangement, or the continuance of an existing arrangement, under which payments for refuse collection service are made by a tenant or tenants, or any agent, on behalf of the owner. However, any such arrangement will not affect the owner's obligation to the City or to the collector(s) for the payment for such service. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.06. - Prohibition. 
(a)  No person who owns, controls, or occupies any premises shall permit refuse to accumulate for a period in excess of the period provided in this chapter or in rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto and no such person shall, following notice thereof, fail, decline or neglect to place refuse within refuse containers as provided in this chapter and in accordance with the rules and regulations established pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall throw, deposit, or leave any refuse, or permit the same to be thrown, deposited, or left on the property or premises of another without the knowledge and prior permission of the owner thereof. 
(c)  No owner of real property located in the City shall knowingly permit or countenance his/her tenants while in occupation of such property to throw, deposit or leave any refuse upon the property or premises of another. 
(d)  No person shall throw, deposit, or leave any refuse, or, being in possession or control of any refuse, shall permit the same to be thrown, buried without being properly licensed to do so, deposited, or left in or upon any street or other public place in violation of this chapter or the rules and regulations established pursuant to this chapter. 
(e)  No person shall use burning as a method of refuse disposal except where a permit has been obtained as provided in Title 4, Chapter 5, Section 4-5.02 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.07. - Responsibility for providing container. 
Every owner, occupant, manager, or person in control of the premises of any dwelling unit or units, or of any place of business or institution within the City where refuse accumulates, shall provide or cause to be provided a sufficient number of containers of adequate size to accommodate all refuse accumulated on the premises between collection days. The occupant, manager or person in control of the premises shall be primarily responsible for providing the required containers of adequate size. Making arrangements with the collector(s) to provide for a container shall meet the requirement of this section. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.08. - Failure to initiate service or to provide sufficient refuse containers. 
When an owner fails to request adequate refuse collection service within 15 days of occupancy of a property, the collector(s) will give the owner written notification that such service is required. If service is not requested by the owner within 15 days from the date of the mailing of the notice, the collector(s) may initiate and continue refuse service for said property at the owner's expense. 
When in the judgment of the collector(s) additional refuse containers are required, they shall be provided at the owner's cost upon written notification from the collector(s). If the required additional containers are not requested by the owner within 30 days from the date of the mailing of the notice, the collector(s) may provide the required containers at a cost established pursuant to agreement between the City and the collector(s) or pursuant to rules and regulations adopted hereunder. Such cost may be added to the collection fees. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.09. - Garbage and refuse container requirements. 
(a)  Any one standard container to accommodate refuse shall not exceed 35 gallons in capacity and 50 pounds in weight, including contents. Carts may be 85 gallons or larger in capacity and up to 200 pounds in weight including the contents and shall be supplied by the collector(s), so that they shall be capable of being emptied by standard cart equipment. Standard containers and carts shall be constructed of metal or other durable watertight materials, and shall be equipped with handles and a cover sufficient to prevent odors from escaping the container, flies and other insects from reaching or coming in contact with refuse, and the contents from being blown away. 
(b)  Refuse may, with Sutter County Health Officer approval, be placed for collection in sturdy, grease-resistant, waterproof, nonreturnable bags which are specifically designed for refuse disposal. Said bags shall be securely tied to prevent spillage. 
(c)  Refuse bins, drop boxes and proprietary containers, any of which may vary in capacity from one to 50 yards, shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Containers shall be constructed of substantial materials such as rolled steel, forms and plate. 
(2)  Containers where putrescible waste is deposited shall have self-closing doors or covers which are flyproof and such doors or covers shall remain closed except during loading and unloading. 
(3)  Containers where refuse is deposited and which are equipped with covers shall remain closed except during loading and unloading. Containers which are not equipped with covers should be stored in a refuse collection area screened from view from the public streets and from adjacent property by a sight barrier of not less than six ft. high or not less than the height of the container, whichever is greater. This sight barrier may be met by locating the refuse collection area completely within a building or by erecting a structure such as a wall or fence especially for this purpose. The intent of this subsection is to safeguard health and public welfare by preventing refuse from scattering and being blown away. 
(d)  The use of oil drums as refuse containers is prohibited. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.10. - Placement of containers for collection. 
Containers shall be placed at streetside for collection at ground level of the property, not within the right-of-way of a street or alley, and accessible to and not more than two ft. from the curb or sidewalk on the side of the street from which collection is to be made. Containers are to be placed at streetside for collection within 12 hours of the time of collection and shall be removed within 12 hours after collection service is rendered. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.11. - Cuttings. 
Tree limbs, branches, hedge cuttings, leaves and similar materials may also be disposed of by placing them in refuse containers in such a manner that the lid can be secured and contents may be readily emptied. Larger branches from tree and shrub trimmings may also be placed on the ground at the place of collection providing they are neatly stacked and securely tied into bundles four ft. or less in length and not more than 50 pounds in weight. In addition, said materials may be placed in cardboard cartons which are not longer than four ft. and which do not have a loaded weight exceeding 50 pounds. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.12. - Content of containers. 
Contents of containers shall be limited to refuse as defined in Section 6-3.01 herein, except as hereinafter qualified. 
(a)  Garbage. Food wastes or animal feces must be thoroughly drained and securely wrapped to prevent leakage, odor and access to flies and animals. 
(b)  Refuse. Feathers and ashes must be dampened and securely wrapped, and vacuum cleaner sweepings must likewise be securely wrapped. 
(c)  Cuttings. Grass, trees, shrub and flower trimmings, leaves and weeds must be contained as set forth in Section 6-3.11. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.13. - Prohibited materials. 
Unless written approval is granted by the Health Officer, the following materials are prohibited in refuse set out for collection: Ammunition, explosives, industrial wastes, chemicals, pathological, toxic and radioactive waste, acids, drugs, medicines, human feces, unwrapped animal feces, and items too large for the collection equipment or which may damage the collection machinery such as large pieces of metal, machine parts, logs and tree stumps. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.14. - Accumulation limitation. 
No person who owns, controls or occupies any premises shall permit refuse to accumulate for a period in excess of one calendar week, or fail, refuse or neglect to place such refuse for collection in accordance with schedules established therefor, the provisions of this chapter and rules and regulations established pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.15. - Administration of collection service. 
The Director shall administer the provisions of this chapter. In carrying out this responsibility, he/she shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  Establish rules and regulations consistent with this chapter governing storage, collection and disposition of refuse, including the determination of standards and specifications for approved containers and placement of container. The rules may permit special containers or bins where the quantity or nature of the material to be collected so requires. 
(b)  Establish additional rules and regulations consistent with this chapter as may be necessary, reasonable and proper to effect the sanitary, expedient, economical and efficient collection, removal and disposal of refuse. 
(c)  Establish the routes, hours and days of collection and he/she may change the same as he/she deems necessary and shall give notice of such routes, hours, days and changes as seems advisable. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.16. - Removal of building scraps. 
All owners, contractors and builders of structures shall both during construction and demolition and upon the completion of construction or demolition of any such structure gather up and haul away at their sole cost and expense all refuse of every nature, description or kind which has resulted from the construction activities or demolition of structures, including all lumber scraps, shingles, plaster, brick, stone, concrete and other building materials, and shall return the lot and all nearby premises utilized in connection with such construction activities in a sightly condition. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.17. - Payment for services rendered. 
(a)  All billing for refuse collection shall be coordinated and administered by the collector(s); all charges shall become delinquent if not paid within 30 days after the date due (as stated on the refuse collection bill). 
(b)  If the bill remains unpaid after the date of delinquency, the collector(s) shall be entitled to a delinquency fee. However, said delinquency fee shall not be assessed until 15 days after notification of the delinquency to the owner and recipient of service. The form and content of the delinquency notice sent by the collector(s) and the delinquency fee shall be approved by the City. Said notice shall notify the owner of the fees imposed and the process for collection of delinquent charges. If a tenant is delinquent, the owner shall receive all such delinquency notifications. 
(c)  Collector(s) may assign to the City at expiration of the 30-day period any delinquent bills for hearing and lien proceedings. The collector(s) will compile said assignments into a report of delinquent accounts which will be submitted to the Director on a monthly basis. 
(d)  Upon receipt by City of the report from the collector(s) and at the convenience of the City, the Director shall fix a time, date and place for holding a hearing with respect to the report and any appeals, protests or objections thereto. The City Clerk shall cause notice of the time and place of hearing to be mailed to the owner not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the Director shall hear and consider all appeals, objections and protests, if any, to said report referred to in said notice Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Director may adopt, revise, change, reduce or modify any charge or charges or overrule any or all objections and shall make a determination upon the charge or charges as described in said report. The Director's determination shall be final and cannot be appealed. 
(e)  After the conclusion of the hearing process, and upon confirmation of the report by the Director, the Director shall initiate proceedings to create a lien on the real property to which the refuse collection has been rendered according to Government Code § 25831. The Director is authorized by these provisions to declare that delinquency charges and penalties on refuse collection accounts, as set forth in the report by the collector(s), when recorded shall, after notice and hearing provided herein, be collected on the property tax roll. An administrative fee may be added to the lien amount in accordance with the "Fee and Service Charge—Revenue/Cost Comparison System" of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.18. - Agreements, rules and regulations. 
The City Council may, by agreement with the collector(s) or by separate resolution, implement rules and regulations to carry out and promote the provisions of this chapter. Such agreements, rules and regulations may set forth the time of collection of refuse, the rates to be charged for such collection, the time for payment of such rates, the size of containers to be utilized, the manner in which such containers or bundles of refuse are to be placed for collection and such other matters as may be necessary or appropriate to effect the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.19. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Every person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provision set forth in Chapter 2, Section 1-2.01 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 03-96, eff. June 20, 1996; Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 6-3.20. - Repeal. 
All ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed. Such repeal is to be effective concurrent with and simultaneous with the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. 05-99, § 2, eff. June 3, 1999)  
CHAPTER 4. - OBSTRUCTIONS IN GUTTERS AND DITCHES 
 
Sec. 6-4.01. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
Any driveway, ramp, pipe, culvert, or other obstruction which is so placed as to obstruct the free flow of stormwater in the public streets, drives, alleys, ditches, and other waterways of the City is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(§ 1, Ord. 328)  
Sec. 6-4.02. - Abatement. 
Upon observing evidence of a public nuisance as declared by Section 6-4.01 of this chapter, the Public Works Director is hereby authorized to notify the owner that a nuisance exists. In the event the owner takes no action to abate such nuisance and fails to obtain cancellation by the Council of the notification within 30 days thereafter, the Public Works Director is hereby authorized to have such obstruction removed at the expense of the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 328)  
Sec. 6-4.03. - Placement of garden refuse. 
No person shall deposit in the public right-of-way any garden refuse, including tree trimmings, shrub trimmings, grass clippings, and similar materials, unless such refuse is derived from the property immediately adjoining the public right-of-way and is placed in the public right-of-way between the projection of the property lines and the center of the street. The placement of such refuse shall be made in such a manner as not to clog or impede the flow of the gutter at any place. Any such refuse derived from another location, either within the City limits or outside the City limits, and deposited within the City right-of-way shall be unlawfully placed. 
(§ 1, Ord. 564, eff. March 5, 1969)  
CHAPTER 5. - WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 007-16 , § 1, adopted June 21, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 5, §§ 6-5.101—6-5.1203, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 5 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 004-11, § 3, effective Aug. 18, 2011. 
 
Article 1. - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 6-5.101. - Purpose and policy. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the maximum possible beneficial public use of City facilities through the adequate regulation of sewer construction, sewer use, and industrial wastewater discharges to provide for the equitable distribution of City costs and to provide for procedures for complying with the requirements placed upon the City by other regulatory agencies. 
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for dischargers to the publicly owned treatment works and enables the City to comply with the administrative provisions of the Clean Water Grant Regulations, water quality requirements of the Regional Water Quality Control Board and the applicable effluent limitations, State Water Resources Control Board's Sanitary Sewer Systems Waste Discharge Requirements (WDR) and Monitoring and Reporting Requirements for the Sanitary Sewer System in reference to the City's sewer system management plan (SSMP), national standards of performance, toxic and pretreatment effluent standards and all other applicable State and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). In the event that State and/or Federal wastewater discharge or treatment regulations and/or standards exist or are subsequently adopted which are more stringent and/or restrictive than the requirements of this chapter, the more stringent and more restrictive regulations shall apply. Among other things, the objectives of this chapter are: 
(a)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(b)  To prevent illicit discharges (examples: infiltration and inflow, chemical dumping, unauthorized debris and cut roots, etc.) into the sanitary sewer system; 
(c)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(d)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(e)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(f)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; 
(g)  To enable the City to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other Federal or State laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject; 
(h)  To require that sanitary sewers and connections are properly designed, constructed, and maintained; 
(i)  To ensure access in easements, rights-of-way, and any other areas where sanitary sewer system facilities are installed for maintenance, inspection or repairs of the sanitary sewer system and any portions of the service laterals and satellite collection system; 
(j)  To limit discharge of roots, fats, oils, grease, and other debris that may cause blockages; and 
(k)  To enforce any violations of this chapter. 
This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. This chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, inspections, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
Revenues derived from the application of this chapter shall be used to defray the City's cost of operating and maintaining adequate wastewater collection and treatment systems and to provide sufficient funds for capital outlay, bond service cost, capital improvements, depreciation, and/or capital replacement. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.102. - Scope. 
This chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions set forth in Section 6-5.106. of this article. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the direct or indirect discharge of all liquid-carried wastes to the facilities of the City. This chapter, among other things, provides for the regulation of sewer construction in areas within the City, the quantity and quality of discharged wastes, the degree of waste pretreatment required, the setting of waste discharge fees to provide for the equitable distribution of costs, the approval of plans for sewer construction, the issuance of permits for industrial wastewater discharges and of other miscellaneous permits, and the establishment of penalties for violations of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.103. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the City Manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter by coordinating the actions of the Assistant City Manager, the Public Works Director, and any other City department concerned. The primary responsibility for the administration, implementation, and enforcement of the parts of this chapter which relate to billing, collecting, and accounting for the fees and charges established by this chapter is assigned to the Finance Director. The primary responsibility for the administration, implementation, and enforcement of the parts of this chapter related to the operations of the wastewater treatment facility, wastewater collection system, sewer system management plan, pretreatment program, and water treatment facility is assigned to the Public Works Director. The primary responsibility for the administration, implementation, and enforcement of all other parts of this chapter is assigned to the Director of Public Works. Any powers granted to, or duties imposed upon, the City Manager, Assistant City Manager, or Public Works Director may be delegated by them to persons acting in the beneficial interests of or in the employ of the City. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.104. - Use of revenues. 
The revenues derived under the provisions of this chapter shall be placed in a fund entitled "Sewer Fund." The accounting of revenues shall be in accordance with the applicable State and/or Federal laws and regulations, and revenues may be used for any purpose so authorized. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.105. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the designated meanings: 
AHL 	Allowable headworks loading 
BMP 	Best management practices 
BOD 	Biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR 	Code of Federal Regulations 
COD 	Chemical oxygen demand 
EPA 	U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
FOG 	Fats, oils, and grease 
FSE 	Food service establishment 
gpd 	Gallons per day 
GRD 	Grease removal device(s) 
MAHL 	Maximum allowable headworks loading 
MAIL 	Maximum allowable industrial loading 
mg/l 	Milligrams per liter 
NPDES 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW 	Publicly owned treatment works 
RCRA 	Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIC 	Standard industrial classification 
SSMP 	Sewer system management plan 
SSO 	Sanitary sewer overflow 
TBLLDD 	Technically based local limit development document 
TSS 	Total suspended solids 
U.S.C 	United States Code 
 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.106. - Definitions; as used in this chapter. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act or the Act. The term "Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
Administrative order. For the purposes of this chapter, an order issued by either the City of Yuba City, City Attorney or by an Administrative Judge of the Superior Court of California, County of Sutter, compelling a user of the City's Publicly Owned Treatment Works to perform in some manner. Administrative orders are issued in response to a violation of the City's Municipal Code and State water or health and safety laws with the legal jurisdiction dictating which legal official issues the order. The orders are generally issued in the form of show cause, compliance, or consent orders depending on the nature and circumstance of noncompliance. 
Allowable headworks loading (AHL). The estimated maximum loading of a pollutant received at a POTW's headworks that should not cause the POTW to violate a particular treatment plant or environmental criterion. AHLs are developed to prevent interference or pass through. 
Approval authority. The State of California, Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region. 
Assistant City Manager. The Assistant City Manager of the City of Yuba City. 
Authorized representative of the user. 
(a)  If the user is a corporation: 
(1)  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
(2)  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(b)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(c)  If the user is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(d)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (2), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the City. 
Beneficial uses. Uses of the waters of the State which will be protected against quality degradation, including domestic, municipal, agricultural, and industrial supply, power generation, recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, navigation, and the preservation and enhancement of fish, wildlife, and other aquatic resources or reserves, and other uses, both tangible or intangible, as specified by Federal or State law. 
Best management practices (BMP). The term "best management practices" or "BMP" means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMP also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. In addition, best management practices (BMP) means activities, prohibitions, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the direct or indirect introduction of FOG into the public sewer. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees Centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Building Sewer or lateral sewer. A sewer conveying the wastewaters of a discharger from a residence, building, or other structure to a community sewer, including direct connections to a community sewer where permitted by the City. 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which applies to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR 405—471. 
Cesspool. A tank, box, or sump used for the receipt of crude sewage, containing no provision for the nitrification, clarification, or disposal of the sewage, or which discharges such sewage upon the open ground. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD). The measure of chemically-decomposable materials in domestic or industrial wastewaters as represented by the oxygen utilized as determined by the appropriate procedure described in "Standard Methods." 
Chlorine demand. The amount of chlorine required to produce a free chlorine residual of 0.1 mg/l after a contact time of 15 minutes as measured by the Idiometric Method on a sample at a temperature of 20 degrees Centigrade in conformance with "standard methods." 
City or council. The City of Yuba City or the City Council of Yuba City. 
City Manager. The City Manager of the City of Yuba City. 
Collecting sewer. Any City-owned sewer line discharging to another City-owned sewer line such as trunk line. 
Collection system. The portions of the public sewer/collecting sewer consisting of all pipes, sewers, and conveyance systems conveying wastewater to the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), excluding sewer-service lateral line connections which are not owned by the City. 
Commercial building. Any structure, building, or enclosure designed primarily for commercial use other than residential or industrial. 
Commercial user. Any user not defined as a residential or industrial user. 
Community sewer system. The sewers owned and operated by the City. "Community sewer" shall mean that portion of the community sewer system which receives wastewaters from the service lateral of a discharger. 
Compatible pollutant. The biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, and pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the City's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. 
Connection. The joining of any structure, building, or facility to any sewer line entering the sewer system of the City for the purpose of discharging sanitary or industrial sewage or wastes. 
Contamination. Any impairment of the quality of the waters of the State by wastes to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or the spread of disease. 
Council or City Council. City Council of the City of Yuba City. 
County. The County of Sutter. 
CPC. California Plumbing Code book, California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 5. 
Daily discharge. Daily discharge is defined as either: 
(1)  The total mass of the constituent discharged over the calendar day (12:00 a.m. through 11:59 p.m.) or any 24-hour period that reasonably represents a calendar day for purposes of sampling, for a constituent with limitations expressed in units of mass; or 
(2)  The unweighted arithmetic mean measurement of the constituent over the day for a constituent with limitations expressed in other units of measurement (e.g., concentration). 
The daily discharge may be determined by the analytical results of a composite sample taken over the course of one day (a calendar day or other 24-hour period defined as a day) or by the arithmetic mean of analytical results from one or more grab samples taken over the course of the day. 
For composite sampling, if one day is defined as a 24-hour period other than a calendar day, the analytical result for the 24-hour period will be considered as the result for the calendar day in which the 24-hour period ends. 
Daily maximum. The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day. 
Daily maximum limit. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. 
Director of Public Works or Public Works Director. The Director of Public Works or Public Works Director of the City or such other person as may be designated by the Director of Public Works to perform the services or make the determinations permitted or required under this chapter to be made by the Director of Public Works. 
Discharger. Any person who discharges or causes a discharge to a public sewer. 
Dissolved solids. The solid matter in solution in the wastewaters and shall be obtained by the evaporation of a sample from which all suspended matter has been removed by filtration as determined by the procedures in "standard methods." 
Dwelling unit. Each suite of one or more rooms, which includes bathroom, kitchen, and sleeping facilities, intended to be used as separate living quarters. 
Effluent. The liquid outflow of any facility designed to treat, convey, or retain wastewaters. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of the agency. 
Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG). Any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in or is a byproduct of the cooking or food preparation process and that becomes or may become viscous, or solidifies or may solidify, with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
FOG control program. A document prepared and implemented by the City to control FOG (fats, oils, and/or grease). 
Food service establishment (FSE). Any facility which prepares and/or packages food or beverages for sale or consumption, on or off site, with the exception of private residences, including but not limited to food courts, food manufacturers, food packagers, restaurants, grocery stores, bakeries, lounges, hospitals, hotels, nursing homes, churches, and schools. 
Garbage. Any solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Grease removal device(s). All food service establishments that discharge wastewater to the City's wastewater collection system are required to have City-approved and properly-sized grease removal devices, also commonly referred to as "grease traps" or "grease interceptors." 
Both devices are primary grease removal devices that separate and retain free-floating fat, oil, and grease (FOG). The differences between the two types of grease removal devices are primarily the size and physical location of the unit. 
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
Industrial wastewater or industrial user. Shall mean as defined in Article 4 of this chapter. 
Inspector. A person authorized by the Public Works Director to inspect wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, and disposal facilities. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or causes the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued hereunder, or any more stringent State or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act); the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Lot or parcel. A lot or parcel of land consisting of one lot of record in one ownership. 
Main sewer. A sewer located in a street or public easement and designated to accommodate more than one service lateral. 
Maximum allowable concentration. The maximum concentration of a pollutant which may be discharged from an industrial user (IU) into the City's collection system. Unless dictated by superseding regulations (i.e. national pretreatment or categorical standards), the maximum allowable concentration may be taken as grab or composite sample at the discretion of the Utilities Director. 
Maximum allowable headworks loading (MAHL). The estimated maximum loading of a pollutant that can be received at a POTW's headworks without causing pass through or interference. The most protective (lowest) of the AHLs (see definition) estimated for a pollutant. 
Maximum allowable industrial loading (MAIL). The estimated maximum loading of a pollutant that can be received at a POTW's headworks from all permitted industrial users and controlled sources without causing pass through or interference. The MAIL is usually calculated by applying a safety factor to the MAHL and discounting for uncontrolled sources, hauled wastewater, and growth allowance. 
Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
Monthly average. The sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
Monthly average limit. The highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(i)  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
(ii)  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(iii)  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(i)  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
A.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
B.  Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(ii)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Non-contact cooling water. Water used for cooling, which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS). US Census Bureau business classification system. 
Outside user. Any person responsible for the payment of sewer service fees for premises served outside the City limits. 
Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State, and local governmental entities. 
pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural, and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Premises. Any lot, piece, or parcel of land, any building or other structure, or any part of any building or structure used or useful for human habitation or gathering or carrying on any business or occupation. 
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
Pretreatment standard or standard. The terms "national pretreatment standard," "pretreatment standard," or "standard" mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to Section 403.5. 
Private sewer. That portion of a sewer serving an independent sewage disposal system, not connected with a public sewer, and which accommodates one or more buildings or industries. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in Section 6-5.207. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW). A "treatment works," as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the City. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in Section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
Public sewer. The main line sewer constructed in a street, highway, alley, place, or right-of-way dedicated to public use. "Public sewer" shall not include a house connection sewer or sewer lateral or service lateral. 
Public Works Director or Director of Public Works. The Public Works Director or Director of Public Works of the City or such other person as may be designated by the Public Works Director to perform the services or make the determinations permitted or required under this chapter to be made by the Director of Public Works. 
Radioactive material. A material containing chemical elements that spontaneously change their atomic structure by emitting any particles, rays, or energy forms. 
Receiving water quality standards. The requirements for City treatment plant effluent established by law or by State or Federal regulatory agencies for the protection of receiving water quality. "Standards" shall include effluent limitations and waste discharge standards, requirements, limitations, or prohibitions which may be established or adopted from time to time by State or Federal laws or regulatory agencies. 
Residential user. Any user whose premises are used solely for residential purposes. 
Sanitary sewage. The waste discharging into the City sewage system which contains human or animal excreta. 
Sanitary sewer overflow (SSO). Any overflow, spill, release, discharge, or diversion of untreated or partially-treated wastewater from a sanitary sewer system, including overflows or releases that reach waters of the United States, overflows or releases that do not reach the waters of United States, and backups into buildings and/or private property caused by conditions within the publicly owned portion of the sewer system. 
Septic tank system. A system of reservoirs or tanks which receive sanitary sewage and by septic bacterial action affect the decomposition and settlement of settleable solids and the diversion of the septic liquid for clarification and purification which take place by further bacterial action in percolation ducts extending into natural or prepared porous subsoil beds. 
Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Service lateral. A sewer conveying the wastewaters of a discharger from a residence, building, or other structure(s) to a community sewer, including direct connections to a community sewer where permitted by the City. 
Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
Sewage lift station. Any facility designed and constructed to raise wastewaters in elevation or to overcome head losses due to pipeline friction. 
Sewage treatment plant. Any arrangement of devices and structures for treating sewage. 
Sewer main. Portion of the community sewer system which receives wastewaters from the service lateral of a discharger. 
Sewer system management plan (SSMP). A document prepared by the City that describes the activities to manage the wastewater collection system effectively. 
Sewerage system. The services and facilities for the treatment and disposal of industrial wastes and sanitary sewage. 
Shall and may. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
Side sewer or lateral sewer or service lateral. A sewer conveying the wastewaters of a discharger from a residence, building, or other structure to a community sewer, including direct connections to a community sewer where permitted by the City. 
Significant industrial user. 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or a user that: 
(i)  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
(ii)  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
(iii)  Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(2)  The City may determine that an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gpd of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met: 
(i)  The industrial user, prior to the City's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(ii)  The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in Section 6-5.402.F(b), together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and 
(iii)  The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2)a. has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug discharge. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Article 2 of this chapter. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits, or permit conditions. 
Standard Industrial Classification Code (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
Standard methods. The procedures described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation. Elements of wastewater strength shall be measured by "standard methods" unless otherwise expressly stated. 
Standard specifications. A set of documents including standard details and special provisions containing design and construction standards for all sewerage works within the City. 
Storm water or stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Trade secrets. Any formula, plan, pattern, process, tool, mechanism, compound, procedure, production data, or compilation of information which is not patented and is known only to certain individuals within a commercial concern who are using it to fabricate, produce, or compound an article of trade or a service having commercial value, and which give its user an opportunity to obtain a business advantage over competitors who do not know or use it. 
Trailer court. Any parcel of land designed for residential use with two or more mobile homes, travel trailers, pickup campers, or motor homes. 
Trunk sewer. A sewer constructed, maintained, and operated by the City which conveys wastewaters to the City's treatment facilities and into which service laterals and collecting sewers discharge. 
Uncontaminated water. Any wasted water of the community not contaminated or polluted with wastewaters and which is suitable or could readily be made suitable for discharge to the municipal stormwater drainage system. 
User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge. Also defined as any person responsible for the payment of the sewer service charges for premises served as provided in this chapter. 
Waste. Sewage and any and all other waste substances, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing, or processing operation of whatever nature. 
Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater strength. The quality of wastewaters discharged as measured by its elements, including its constituents and characteristics. 
Wastewater treatment plant, wastewater treatment facility, or water reclamation facility treatment plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage/wastewater and industrial waste. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Article 2. - Rules and Regulations 
 
Sec. 6-5.201. - Discharge into streams prohibited. 
Treatment of waste is required. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any stream or watercourse any sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.202. - Privies and septic tanks prohibited. 
Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, seepage pit, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.203. - Occupancy prohibited. 
No building, industrial facility, or other structure shall be occupied until the owner of the premises has complied with all the rules and regulations of the City and this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.204. - New buildings requiring sewers. 
Before a building permit may be issued for any new building to be situated within the City which requires sewage disposal, provisions shall be made by the applicant and/or the property owner to connect the building with the City public sewer system, all in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Provisions to connect the building to the public sewer may include extension of the main sewer line at the property owner's expense if necessary to adequately serve the building as determined by the Public Works Director. The property owner shall be responsible for the proper maintenance of the service lateral, at property owner's expense, from the building(s) to the collecting sewer/community sewer, including the connection of the service lateral to the collecting sewer/community sewer. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.205. - Existing buildings requiring sewage disposal. 
Existing buildings situated within the City and requiring sewage disposal shall be required to be connected to the public sewer system of the City at the property owner's expense provided such public sewer is within 200 feet of the nearest point of the structure. Exceptions to this requirement may be permitted when the County Health Official finds that an existing septic tank system and/or private sewage disposal system is properly and adequately functioning. However, once the private sewage disposal system and/or septic tank system fails, for the structure which is within 200 feet of the serviceable public sewer line, a connection shall be required to the public sewer system at the property owner's expense. All fees shall be paid prior to issuance of a building permit. The property owner shall be responsible for the proper maintenance of the service lateral, at property owner's expense, from the building(s) to the collecting sewer/community sewer, including the connection of the service lateral to the collecting sewer/community sewer. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.206. - Ownership of the service lateral. 
Every user of the community sewer system shall be connected to the City sewer main by a sewer service lateral. Sewer service laterals shall be installed, properly maintained, and repaired by the owner of the property which the lateral serves. The entire sewer service lateral from the building connection to and including the wye connection to the sewer main shall be the owner's responsibility to install, properly maintain, and repair. 
All persons using the community sewer system of the City shall pay for such service and for the privilege of connecting to the sewer at the rates, at the times, and under the conditions set forth in this chapter and shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in this chapter relating to the use of such sewer system 
All sewer service laterals connecting a user, whether a single-family residence, commercial building, or other structure, to a City-owned sewer main located in the public right-of-way or easement shall be owned, maintained and repaired by the owner of the property being served, from and including the lateral's connection point at the City sewer main to the building or other point of use on the property. This includes both the portion on private property and the portion located beneath the sidewalk and street or any other public right-of-way or easement areas such as alleys, trails, and landscape areas, up to and including the point where the lateral connects to the City sewer main. 
The City shall have the right to conduct maintenance inspection and/or repairs to the side sewer or service lateral if needed, and it shall be the property owner's obligation to reimburse the City for the actual cost of such repair and inspection. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.207. - Private sewage disposal systems. 
(a)  Private sewer system allowed. When it has been determined by the Public Works Director that a building may be connected to a private sewage disposal system, the private system shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Permits required. Before the commencement of the construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Director of Public Works, the County Health Department, and any other permit required. 
(c)  Inspections required. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works and the County Health Department. The City shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of the construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the City and County Health Department when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. 
(d)  Design requirements. The type, capacities, locations, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all the recommendations of the Department of Public Health of the State and the County Health Department. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or any stream or watercourse. In addition, the private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable local, State, and Federal design requirements at the time of construction. 
(e)  Abandonment of facilities. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with the laws, rules, and regulations of the City, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material as determined by the Director of Public Works and County Health Department. In addition, all other applicable local, State, and Federal requirements shall apply to appropriately abandon the facility. 
(f)  Costs of maintenance by owners. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the City. 
(g)  Additional requirements. No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirement that may be imposed by any law, ordinance, rule, or regulation, or by the City or the County Health Department or the State. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.208. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through, interference or cause blockage(s) in the sanitary sewer system. These general prohibitions and the specific prohibitions in paragraph (b) below apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Centigrade) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with pH lower than 5.0 or more than 11.5, unless the works is specifically designed to accommodate such discharges; 
(3)  Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts, as determined by the City, which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids with a diameter greater than one-quarter inch; 
(4)  Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature at the point of discharge which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Centigrade); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the Public Works Director in accordance with Section 6-5.406.D of this chapter; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the City's NPDES permit; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations; 
(12)  Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, non-contact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Public Works Director; 
(13)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Public Works Director in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(17)  Fats, oils, or greases (FOG) of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l; or which will cause interference or pass through at the POTW or which will cause (i) any visible sheen on the surface of the discharged wastewater; (ii) any buildup of fats, oils, or grease in any portion of the POTW; or (iii) any obstruction of the POTW; 
(18)  FOG, as defined by the City's FOG control program and/or Public Works Director; 
(19)  Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge, or at any point in the POTW, of more than 5% or any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit of the meter; 
(20)  Releases of Pollutants which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, causes contamination of sludge which prevents its use or disposal in accordance with the City's NPDES permit; 
(21)  Cementitious materials; 
(22)  Any solid or viscous substance or particles in a quantity, either by itself or in combination with other wastes, that is capable of obstructing flow or impairing the performance of the POTW; 
(23)  Any wastewater containing strong acid iron pickling, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not; 
(24)  The discharge of any radiological, chemical or biological warfare agent or high-level, radiological waste. 
(c)  The foregoing discharge prohibitions are not exclusive and shall be in addition to any prohibitions or requirements specified in any other provision of this code or any other applicable statue, regulation, ordinance or other governmental requirement. 
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW or storm water collection system. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.209. - Pretreatment local limits. 
(a)  The Public Works Director is authorized to establish Local Limits pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c). 
(b)  In addition to general and specific prohibitions and other regulatory requirements listed in Chapter 5 of Title 6 of the Yuba City Municipal Code, pretreatment local limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. These constituents and their MAIL limit can be found in the latest technically based local limit development document (TBLLDD). Constituents listed in the TBLLDD will be apportioned according to flow volume discharge limitations defined in individual wastewater discharge permits. All loadings for metals are for "total" metals unless indicated otherwise. Categorical discharge limits apply at the discharge point from each specified regulated process. The Public Works Director will impose mass based, concentration-based and/or production based limitations for controlling pollutant loading to the POTW. Maximum allowable quantities of pollutants not listed in this subsection may be determined by the Public Works Director based on applicable water quality criteria or as determined by legally established and approved scientific methods. 
(c)  The Public Works Director may develop best management practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to implement local limits and the requirements of Section 6-5.208. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.210. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
The categorical pretreatment standards found in 40 CFR 405—471 are hereby incorporated. 
(a)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the Public Works Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(b)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Public Works Director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(c)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(d)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(e)  Discharging categorical industrial users (CIUs) shall monitor for all constituents listed in the Code of Federal Regulations (40 CFR 405—471). Wastewater discharged from such users shall be subject to any limitations therein which are not included in the local limits section of this chapter. 
(f)  Any non-discharging (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blow down wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) industrial user subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR 403 et seq. may be issued zero discharge permits. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.211. - California State pretreatment standards. 
California State pretreatment standards located at CCR Title 23, Division 7, Chapter 5.5, Sections 13370 through 13389 of the Porter Cologne Water Quality Control Act are hereby incorporated. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.212. - Right of entry: inspection and sampling. 
The Public Works Director and/or designee shall have the right to enter the premises of any user, upon providing proper credentials and identification, to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Public Works Director or designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. Access shall be provided at any time the premises are staffed with production underway. 
(a)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the Public Works Director and/or designee will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(b)  The Public Works Director and/or designee shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(c)  The Public Works Director and/or designee may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated annually or more often as deemed necessary by the POTW. 
(d)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the Public Works Director and/or designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(e)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the Public Works Director and/or designee access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.213. - Search warrants. 
If the Public Works Director and/or designee has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause indicating a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the City designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the Public Works Director may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Superior Court of California, County of Sutter. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.214. - City of Yuba City's right of revision and right to deny or condition increased contribution of changes in nature of pollutants. 
The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. Additionally, the City reserves the right to deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants flow, or changes in the nature of pollutants to the POTW by industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions may cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.215. - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The Public Works Director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.216. - Excessive sewer maintenance expense. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged either directly or indirectly, any waste that creates a stoppage, plugging, breakage, any reduction in sewer capacity, or any other damages to the sewers or sewerage facilities of the City. Any excessive sewer or sewerage maintenance expense, or any other expense attributable thereto, will be charged to the offending discharger by the City. 
Any refusal to pay excessive maintenance expenses duly authorized by the Director of Public Works shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.217. - Outside sewers. 
(a)  Permits and fees. Permission shall not be granted to connect any lot or parcel outside the City to any public sewer in or under the jurisdiction of the City unless a permit therefore is obtained from the City. Such permits shall be approved by the Council. The connection impact fees shall be paid at the option of the developer/applicant at either the issuance of the building permit or at certificate of occupancy for a proposed development project, not at the date of application for a permit. The amount of the impact fees to be paid shall be those fees in effect at the time the fees are paid at either the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy. Exceptions to this requirement may be negotiated between the developer and the City as part of the entitlement and agreement process, subject to City Council approval. The City may require the developer/applicant to pay, as determined by the Public Works Director, inspection fees at the time of building permit. 
(b)  Connection agreements. In no event shall such permission be granted unless the applicant shall first enter into a contract in writing whereby they shall bind themselves, and their heirs, successors, and assigns, to abide by all laws, rules, and regulations in regard to the manner in which such sewer shall be used and the manner of connecting therewith, and also shall agree to pay all fees required for securing the permit and a monthly fee in the amount set forth by the City for the privilege of using such sewer. 
(c)  Special outside agreements. Where special conditions exist relating to an outside sewer, they shall be the subject of a special contract between the applicant and the City. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.218. - Containment and notification of prohibited discharge. 
Any person owning or occupying premises in the City who has knowledge of any discharge from the premises that is prohibited by the provisions of this article and that has entered or will enter the public sewer system, shall immediately take all reasonable action to contain and abate the discharge and shall notify the City immediately. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.219. - Disclaimer of liability. 
The requirements set forth herein are minimum standards and this chapter does not imply that a wastewater discharge that complies with this chapter will necessarily comply with all other applicable statutes, regulations, ordinances or other governmental requirements. This chapter shall not create or impose any liability on the City, its officers or employees for any damages that result from reliance on this code or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.220. - Interceptor for other businesses. 
The Public Works Director and/or designee may require businesses other than food service establishments to install fat, oil, or grease and/or sand interceptors in accordance with City's FOG control program and/or when, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, an interceptor or interceptors or clarifier(s) are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing fat, oil, or grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptor(s)/clarifier(s) shall be installed, operated and maintained at no costs to the City, shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Public Works Director and/or designee, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
Clarifier(s) and/or interceptor(s) utilized at a commercial automotive service facility or commercial vehicle washing facility or automotive wash rack shall be pumped out by a licensed hauler at a minimum of every 365 days. The Public Works Director or designee may require an increased pump out frequency as deemed necessary. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.221. - Discharge of groundwater into the City sewer system. 
The Public Works Director may at his or her sole discretion approve a request to discharge groundwater into the City sewer system, upon execution by the person proposing the discharge of a written agreement signed and approved by the Public Works Director, specifying the terms and conditions that apply to the discharger and the discharge, and subject to the payment of any applicable charges and fee and such other requirements as may be imposed by the City or any other public agency. Any person violating any provision of the agreement shall be subject to administrative penalties pursuant to appropriate article/section of this Code, in addition to any other penalty or remedy provided by the agreement, this code or any other provision of any applicable statute, regulation or ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.222. - Food service establishment (FSE) requirements. 
All FSEs shall comply with such best management practices (BMP) requirements as outlined in the FOG control program and/or may be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council and/or Public Works Director. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.223. - Operations and maintenance of sanitary sewer system assets located within sewer easements. 
The City shall have the right to operate, inspect, maintain and repair sewer system assets located within the sewer easements. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Article 3. - Sewer Construction 
 
Sec. 6-5.301. - Building sewers, lateral sewers/service lateral, and connections. 
(a)  Permits required. No person shall construct a building sewer or lateral sewer/service lateral or make a connection with any public sewer without first obtaining a written permit from the City and paying all the fees and connection charges as required therein. 
(b)  Design and construction requirements. The design and construction of building sewers and lateral sewers, including the connections, shall be in accordance with the requirements of the City, latest edition of International Building Code and California Plumbing Code, and in accordance with the standard specifications. 
(c)  Separate sewers. No two adjacent buildings fronting on the same street shall be permitted to join in the use of the same side sewer. Every building or industrial facility shall be separately connected with a public sewer if such public sewer exists in the street upon which the property abuts or in an easement which will serve such property. However, one or more buildings located on property belonging to the same owner may be served, upon approval of the Public Works Director, with the same side sewer during the period of such ownership. Upon the subsequent subdivision and sale of a portion of such lot, the portion not directly connected to such public sewer shall be separately connected to a public sewer after obtaining appropriate permit from the City, and it shall be unlawful for the owner thereof to continue to use or maintain such indirect connection. All fee and charges associated with the separation shall be paid prior to any construction work related to the separation. 
(d)  Old building sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon inspection and test, to meet all the requirements of the City. Anyone wishing to utilize existing or old sewer laterals must submit supportive documentation such as pipe TV analysis and any other tests required by the City. The applicant shall be responsible for all costs associated with this application including preparation of the required supportive documents. 
(e)  Cleanouts. Cleanouts in building sewers shall be provided in accordance with the latest edition of California Plumbing Code, additional City requirements and the standard specifications. All cleanouts shall be maintained watertight. 
(f)  Sewers too low. In all buildings in which any building sewer is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, the sanitary sewage carried by such building sewer shall be lifted by artificial means approved by the Director of Public Works through an agreement with the conditions and discharged to the public sewer at the expense of the owner. The owner shall be responsible for the proper operation and maintenance of such system at his/her own expense. 
(g)  Connections to public sewers. The connection of the lateral sewer/service lateral into the public sewer shall be made in accordance with the standard specifications and other City requirements and at the applicant's expense. The property owner shall be obligated to install and maintain the sewer lateral at his/her sole expense from the sewer main to the building being served. Where the City has partially constructed the service lateral from the main to the property line in order to avoid the further or future tearing up of the streets, it shall be the property owner's obligation to reimburse the City for the actual cost of that portion of the sewer service lateral constructed by the City. Property owners shall be solely responsible for the entire cost of the sewer service lateral from the main to the building being serviced, which shall be collected at the time of the connection to the public sewer system. The connection to the public sewer shall be made in the presence of a City inspector and under their supervision and direction. Any damage to the public sewer shall be repaired in conformance with the standard specifications and other City requirements at the cost of the applicant. 
(h)  Maintenance of side sewers. Side sewers shall be maintained by the owner of the property served thereby. The City shall have the right to conduct maintenance inspection, and/or repair to the side sewer or lateral if needed, and it shall be the property owner's obligation to reimburse the City for the actual cost of such repair and inspection. 
(i)  Testing. All building sewers and lateral sewers shall be tested in accordance with the standard specifications. 
(j)  Prohibited cross connections. Sanitary sewer pipes shall not be connected to the storm drain system. The discharge of sanitary sewer/wastewater to the storm drain system is prohibited. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to avoid any cross connections during construction. This condition is applicable in all the circumstances, unless exceptions are approved by the Public Works Director, even if the improvement plans/drawings and construction work are approved by the City. The Public Works Director reserves the right to notify the property owner(s), after the date of adoption of this chapter, where the cross connection do exist, to eliminate the cross connections if necessary in the opinion of Public Works Director. The discharge of sanitary sewer/wastewater to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(k)  Maintenance and repair; indemnity. 
(1)  The property owner shall maintain in good condition, and shall be responsible, regardless of the cause, for all required repairs to the customer's private sewer line and all other sewer pipe(s) and appurtenances on property owner's premises. Property owner shall comply with all requirements under this code prior to excavating anywhere within the public right-of-way for the purpose of maintaining and/or repairing the private sewer line. 
(2)  The property owner shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers and employees from and against any and all claims, actions, costs (including attorney fees), damages or other liability arising from the condition, operation, maintenance or repair of any sewer line, pipe or appurtenance that the owner is required to maintain and repair hereunder. 
(l)  Private sewer lines—No infiltration or leaks. 
(1)  If any private sewer line/sewer lateral is found to have a leak or defect that could result in infiltration and/or contamination of ground water or storm runoff, or a result in a wastewater leak or overflow, and the Public Works Director determines that the leak or defect should be repaired to protect the public health, welfare or safety, or any regulatory agency requires the leak or defect to be repaired, the Public Works Director may notify the owner of the property where the private sewer line is located that the owner must repair the line, and the owner of the line shall promptly upon notification repair the line to the satisfaction of the City. The City may require reasonable inspection of work performed and the property owner shall be responsible to pay fee/costs associated with these inspections. 
(2)  If the owner of the property where the private sewer line is located fails to do so, the condition resulting from the leak or defect in the private sewer line shall be deemed to constitute a public nuisance, and the Public Works Director shall be authorized to commence and carry out proceedings for abatement of the condition and repair of the leak or defect. When, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, the leak or defect causes or threatens to cause a condition that presents an imminent danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, or the environment, or a violation of a NPDES permit, the Director may summarily abate the condition and repair the leak or defect. The owner shall be liable for the costs incurred by the City for any abatement and repair, including any related inspection and testing costs, arising from the leak or defect, and the cost therefor shall be invoiced to the owner. If the invoice is not paid within 60 days, the Public Works Director may commence proceedings for recovery of these costs in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(m)  Private sewer lines. Private sewer lines serving two or more buildings or structures located on the same lot or parcel, and all appurtenances thereto, that are not maintained by the City, shall be constructed to meet the City standards of construction of public sewer lines, unless different standards are approved by the Public Works Director. 
(n)  Separate connection requirement for each commercial and industrial business. Separate sewer connection is required for each commercial and industrial business regardless of the single and/or multiple ownership of the property location of the business. For example, if there are four businesses on one property owned by one owner, then four separate sewer connections are required. Calculation and payment of connection impact fee/charge may be paid if business were a single business. Total fee shall be paid prior to any connection to the POTW pipelines. 
(o)  Warranty; indemnity. In addition to other applicable conditions and requirements, the applicant and/or contractor shall comply with the City's standard specification and special provisions for warranty and indemnity. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.302. - Public sewer construction. 
(a)  Permits required. No person shall construct, extend or connect to any public sewer without first obtaining a written permit from the City and paying all the fees and connection charges and furnishing the bonds as required therein. Such fees shall include, but not be limited to, plan check and inspection fees, which plan check and inspection fees shall be based upon City's adopted fee schedule. Costs shall be based upon engineer's estimate as approved by the City and deducting therefrom the amount of any City contribution to the work of construction for oversizing or over-width. The provisions of this section requiring permits shall not be construed to apply to contractors constructing sewers and appurtenances under contracts awarded and entered into by the City. 
(b)  Design and construction standards. The minimum standards for the design and construction of sewers within the City shall be in accordance with the standard specifications and this article. The Director of Public Works may permit modifications or may require higher standards where unusual conditions are encountered. 
(c)  Plans, profiles, and specifications required. The application for a permit for public sewer construction shall be accompanied by a complete set of plans, profiles, and specifications, complying with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations of the City, prepared by a civil engineer registered in the State of California, showing all details of the proposed work based on an accurate survey of the ground. The application, together with the plans, profiles, and specifications, shall be examined by the Director of Public Works who shall approve them as filed or require them to be modified as he deems necessary for proper installation. When the Director of Public Works is satisfied that the proposed work is proper and the plans, profiles, and specifications are sufficient and correct, he shall order the issuance of a permit predicated upon the payment of all connection charges and fees and furnishing the bonds and deposits as required by the City. The permit shall prescribe such terms and conditions as the Director of Public Works finds necessary in the public interest. 
(d)  Subdivisions. The requirements of this chapter shall be fully complied with before any final subdivision map shall be approved by the City. The final subdivision map shall provide for the dedication for public use of streets, easements, or rights-of-way in which public sewer lines are to be constructed. 
(e)  Easements or rights-of-way. In the event an easement is required for the extension of the public sewer or the making of connections, the applicant shall procure and have accepted by the City a proper easement or grant of right-of-way having a minimum width sufficient in law to allow the laying and maintenance of such extension or connection. 
(f)  Persons authorized to perform work. Only properly licensed contractors with all required permits shall be authorized to perform the work of public sewer construction within the City. All terms and conditions of the permit issued by the City to the applicant shall be binding on the contractor. The requirements of this section shall apply to side sewers installed concurrently with public sewer construction. 
(g)  Compliance with other regulations. Any person constructing a sewer within a street shall comply with all State, County, or City laws, ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to the cutting of pavement, the opening, barricading, lighting, and protecting of trenches and the backfilling and repaving thereof and shall obtain all permits and pay all fees required by the department having jurisdiction prior to the issuance of a permit by the City. 
(h)  "As-built" drawings. As a condition of final acceptance by the City, copies of "as-built" drawings showing the actual locations and depth of all mains, structures, wyes, laterals, and other changes to the construction drawings shall be filed with the City. 
(i)  Completion of sewerage works required. Before accepting any sewerage works by the City and prior to the admission of any sewage into the system, the sewerage works shall be tested and shall be completed in full compliance with all the requirements of the standard specifications and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. 
(j)  Reimbursement agreements. Where the cost of the public sewer main extension has been deposited or paid by the person making such extension, the City may thereafter collect from any person connecting to such extension, except the person originally installing such extension, that portion of the cost of such extension as approved by the City in the reimbursement agreement. 
Such sums as are thus actually received by the City shall be paid by the City to the person originally making such extension, but the City shall in no way be obligated to assure that the person making such extension is paid the total cost thereof nor to initiate any action nor incur any expense to collect any sum to be paid such person; nor shall such refund be made from any other revenues of the City. Where more than one person contributes toward the making of the extension, such sums as are actually collected shall be refunded to such persons, pro rata, according to the amounts which they severally contribute towards the cost of the extension and pursuant to the preceding plan. Reimbursement agreement(s) shall not exceed 15 years in duration or as approved by the City Council. 
(k)  Special reimbursement agreement. Where special conditions exist, in the opinion of the City, relating to any agreement pursuant to this chapter, they shall be the subject of a special contract between the City and the person making the public sewer main extension. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.303. - Sanitary sewer design requirements. 
(a)  Design calculations. Design calculations submitted for City review shall be in a neat, acceptable form and shall indicate the date and the signature of the supervising engineer and State registration number. 
(1)  When required. Design calculations will be required for all subdivision sewers with a total ultimate tributary area of 50 acres or more or where, in the judgment of the Director of Public Works, they are necessary. Design calculations shall include all possible sewage flows. 
(2)  Sewers and pipelines. Design calculations for sewers and pipelines shall be presented in tabular form and shall include the following information for each section of sewer: the terminal manhole designation, ground elevations at the terminal manholes, incremental and cumulative tributary areas, incremental and cumulative tributary population, incremental average and maximum domestic sewage flow, incremental infiltration allowance, cumulative design flow, invert elevations or terminal manholes, length of sewer run, and sewer size, slope, capacity, and velocity. 
(3)  Pumping stations. Design calculations for pumping stations shall include soils data, structural design calculations, hydraulic calculations, including the basis for average and peak flows, calculations for wet well volumes, curves indicating force main characteristics, and individual and combined pump head capacity curves. 
(b)  Unit design factors. 
(1)  Sewage flow. 
(i)  Per capita domestic sewage flow. The following criteria shall be used to estimate the average daily flows: 
A.  110 gallons per person per day; 
B.  Three persons per dwelling unit (DU); 
C.  Six dwelling units per acre; or 
D.  2,000 gallons per acre. 
(ii)  Approval of estimated flows. All the estimated daily average flows for any design work should be approved by the Public Works Director. Public Works Director shall have the right to change the above listed criteria to estimate the daily average flows depending on the development/project type. 
(c)  Gravity sewers. 
(1)  Minimum size: main sewers. The minimum diameter for the main sewer shall be six inches. The use of six-inch pipe shall be limited, however, to the following conditions: 
(i)  No possibility of future extension; 
(ii)  Maximum tributary population of 260; and 
(iii)  Minimum slope on dead-end runs of 0.5%. 
(2)  Minimum size: side sewers. The minimum diameter for sewer services shall be four inches. For side sewers serving commercial or industrial buildings or multiple family living units, the minimum diameter shall be as required by the applicable sections of the currently adopted Uniform Plumbing Code. 
(3)  Minimum slopes. For side sewers, the minimum slope shall be 2% for four-inch and one percent for six-inch. For main sewers, the minimum slope shall be that required to obtain a velocity of two feet per second when the sewer is flowing full or one-half full. For the purposes of computing velocity, the Manning's coefficient of roughness "n" shall be .013. 
(4)  Steep slopes. For main sewers installed on steep slopes, special design features may be required. Depending upon conditions of the specific installation, such items as underdrains, check dams, special anchorage, or special pipe material may be required. Based upon the data supplied, the Director of Public Works will assess each case and recommend certain special requirements. 
(5)  Minimum depth. The minimum depth of cover for any public sewer shall be three feet. If it is impossible to obtain the specified minimum depth, the sewer shall be encased in concrete, or other acceptable protective measures shall be taken. For sewer services, the minimum depths of cover shall be three feet at the property line. Where the minimum depths of cover set forth in this subsection are impossible to obtain, concrete encased pipe or other suitable protection shall be required. 
(6)  Manholes. Manholes shall be provided at every line or grade change and at every point where the sewer changes size. In addition, manholes shall be provided at maximum intervals of 400 feet, in sewers 12 inches in diameter and smaller, and 500 feet in sewers larger than 12 inches in diameter. 
(7)  Cleanouts. Cleanouts will be permitted only on dead-end runs where the length of sewer downstream to the next manhole is less than 300 feet. 
(8)  Types of pipe permitted. The types of pipe permitted for sanitary sewers shall be as indicated in section 15 of the standard special provisions or as approved by the Public Works Director. The Director of Public Works shall be the sole judge as to what types of pipe may or may not be used for each specific project. 
(9)  Cleanouts and sewer services. Each sewer service shall have a cleanout installed as set forth in the current Uniform Plumbing Code. 
(d)  Force mains. Force mains shall be designed using a Hazen-Williams coefficient of roughness "C" of 100. 
(e)  Pumping stations. Pumping station designs vary according to the location and nature of flows. Each specific design shall be in general accordance with similar designs of existing pumping stations. The design parameters shall be thoroughly reviewed with the Director of Public Works prior to commencing with the detailed design. The Director of Public Works shall be the sole judge as to all design features for pumping stations. 
(f)  Construction specifications and details. The construction of sanitary sewers and related facilities shall be in accordance with sections 13 and 15 of the latest edition of the City standard special provisions and with the applicable City standard drawings. 
(1)  Ratio of peak to average flow. Following factors shall be used for the peaking factors. 
(i)  Peak hour = 2.0 (ratio of peak hour to average day flow = 2.0) 
(ii)  Peak day = 1.3 (ratio of peak day to average day flow = 1.3) 
(iii)  Peak day peak hour = 2.6 (peak day peaking factor × peak hour peaking factor) 
The Public Works Director shall have the right to approve the new peaking factors depending on the project type, location and other appropriate factors. 
(2)  Industrial sewage flow. Sewage flow for industrial areas shall be determined by the proposed type of industry. If the type of industry is unknown, 2,000 gallon per acre per day average design flow shall be used. In addition, above listed peaking factors and 1,000 gallon per acre per day of infiltration and stormwater inflow shall be used. 
(3)  Infiltration and stormwater inflow. An allowance of 1,000 gallons per acre per day shall be made for infiltration. 
(g)  Public Works Director's approval. Public Works Director shall have the right to change any sanitary sewer design criteria and/or to add additional requirements. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.304. - Sewer construction inspections. 
(a)  All work to be inspected. All sewer construction work shall be inspected by an inspector acting for the City to ensure compliance with all the requirements of the City. No sewer shall be covered at any point until it has been inspected and passed for acceptance. No sewer shall be connected to the City's public sewer until the work covered by the permit has been completed, inspected, and approved by the inspector. At a minimum, inspections shall take place at the stages listed below: 
(1)  Installation of bedding material. 
(2)  Installation of pipe prior to initial backfill (including sewer laterals). 
(3)  Installation of initial backfill. 
(4)  Installation of final backfill. 
(5)  Installation of manholes and cleanouts. 
All sanitary sewer lines shall be tested between manholes or between manholes and cleanouts by the test methods specified in the City's standard specifications and/or special provisions. Tests for final acceptance shall be made after the line has been backfilled and subgrade compaction requirements have been obtained within the street section. After pressure testing has been completed, all gravity sewer mains shall be cleaned and televised before permanent paving is applied. In addition, sewer manholes shall be vacuum tested for leakage. Before the sewer lines are accepted, they shall be cleaned and flushed of all foreign matter to the satisfaction of the City. In addition to these requirements, the City reserves the right to perform final cleaning and televised inspection(s), and the applicant shall be responsible to pay all the costs associated with final cleaning and televised inspections. The applicant shall be responsible to correct all the defects to the satisfaction of the City and at no cost to the City before the acceptance. 
Failure to comply with the specifications or meet the minimum requirements may result in rejection of the work. 
If the test proves satisfactory to the City and the sewer has been cleaned of all debris accumulated from construction operations, the Director of Public Works shall issue a certificate of satisfactory completion. 
(b)  Time limits on permits. If work under a permit is not commenced within six months after the date of the issuance of the permit, or if, after partial completion, the work is discontinued for a period of six months without obtaining time extension or one year with two six-month time extensions, the permit shall thereupon become void, and no further work shall be done until a new permit shall have been secured. A new permit, with fee in effect at the time of issuance of new permit, shall be obtained prior to any additional work. 
(c)  Notification. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by the permit to notify the Public Works Department that such work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work to make sure that the work will stand the tests required by the City before giving such notification. 
(d)  Condemned work. When any work has been inspected and the work condemned and no certification of satisfactory completion given, a written notice to that effect shall be given instructing the owner of the premises, or the agent of such owner, to repair the sewer or other work authorized by the permit in accordance with the laws, rules, and regulations of the City. 
(e)  All costs paid by owners. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of any sewer or other work for which a permit has been issued shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the work. 
(f)  Street excavation permits. A separate permit shall be secured from the City, County and/or State as required by owner(s) or contractor(s) intending to excavate in a public street for the purpose of installing sewers or making sewer connections. 
(g)  Liability. The City and its officers, agents, and employees shall not be answerable for any liability or injury or death to any person or damage to any property arising during or growing out of the performance of any work by such applicant. The applicant shall be answerable for, and shall save the City and its officers, agents, and employees harmless from, any liability imposed by law upon the City or its officers, agents, or employees, including all costs, expenses, fees, and interest incurred in defending the same or in seeking to enforce this provision. The applicant shall be solely liable for any defects in the performance of their work or any failure which may develop therein. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Article 4. - Industrial Wastewaters 
 
Sec. 6-5.401. - "Industrial user" defined. 
"Industrial user" shall mean any user of publicly owned treatment works identified in the 2007 North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) or latest edition of that manual (US Census Bureau). The NAICS replaced the SIC Code system in 1997. Industrial users include but are not limited to businesses listed in the following sections of the NAICS: 
(a)  Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing and Hunting (Sector 11). 
(b)  Mining (Sector 21). 
(c)  Utilities (Sector 22) 
(d)  Construction (Sector 23). 
(e)  Manufacturing (Sector 31-33). 
(f)  Transportation and Warehousing (Sector 48-49). 
(g)  Professional, Scientific and Technical Services (54). 
A user in the division listed may be excluded if it is determined that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
"Industrial user" shall also mean any discharging "non-domestic source of pollutants into the POTW regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Clean Water Act" or any other indirect discharger regulated under alternative water quality standards. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.402. - Wastewater discharge permit. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any industrial wastewaters directly or indirectly to sewerage facilities owned by the City without first obtaining a City permit for industrial wastewater discharge. 
The permit for industrial wastewater discharge may require the pretreatment of industrial wastewaters before discharge, the restriction of peak flow discharges, the discharge of certain wastewaters only to specified sewers of the City, the relocation of the point of discharge, the prohibition of the discharge of certain wastewater components, the restriction of discharge to certain hours of the day, the payment of additional charges to defray the increased costs of the City created by the wastewater discharge, and such other conditions as may be required to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.402.A. - Reserved.  
Sec. 6-5.402.B. - Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the Public Works Director and/or designee, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to Section 6-5.402.D of this chapter may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(b)  The Public Works Director and/or designee may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Articles 6 and 7 of this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State, and local law. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.402.C. - Wastewater discharge permit—Existing connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 90 days after the date, apply to the Public Works Director and/or designee for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with Section 6-5.402.E of this chapter, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 90 days of the effective date of this chapter except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the Public Works Director and/or designee. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.402.D. - Wastewater discharge permit—New connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit that proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with Section 6-5.402.E of this chapter, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.402.E. - Wastewater discharge permit application contents. 
All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The Public Works Director and/or designee may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(a)  All information required by Section 6-5.801.B of this chapter; 
(b)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(c)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(d)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
(e)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(f)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans. Details to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation. All points of discharge and the location of all chemical and/or hazardous materials storage areas; 
(g)  Time and duration of discharges; 
(h)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Public Works Director to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(i)  The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit; and 
(j)  An application fee of shall be filed with the completed application. The application fee is listed within the City Fee Schedule document. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.402.F. - Wastewater discharge permit application signatories and certification. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative of the user as defined in Section 6-5.106, and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(a)  If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to Public Works Director and/or designee prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(b)  Annual certification for non-significant categorical industrial users. A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user by the Public Works Director pursuant to Section 6-5.106 must annually submit the following certification statement signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in Section 6-5.106. This certification must accompany an alternative report required by the Public Works Director: 
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR _____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from _______, _____ to _______, _____ [months, days, year]: 
(a)  The facility described as ___________ [facility name] met the definition of a Non-Significant Categorical User as described in 6-5.106; 
(b)  The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and requirements during this reporting period; and 
(c)  The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. 
This compliance certification is based on the following information: 
___________ 
___________ 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.402.G. - Wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
The Public Works Director and/or designee will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application the Public Works Director and/or designee will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The Public Works Director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.402.H. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the Public Works Director's and/or designee's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.403. - Procedure for obtaining City permits for industrial wastewater discharges.  
Sec. 6-5.403.A. - Wastewater discharge permit duration and fees. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the Public Works Director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
A discharge permit fee shall be billed annually. The permit fee is listed within the City fee schedule document. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.403.B. - Wastewater discharge permit contents. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the Public Works Director and/or designee to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
(1)  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit issuance date, expiration date, duration, which in no event shall exceed five years and effective date; 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the City in accordance with Section 6-5.403.E of this chapter, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
(3)  Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and State and local law; 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on the applicable general pretreatment standards, local limits, and Federal, State, and local law; 
(5)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule; 
(6)  Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable Federal, State, or local law; 
(7)  Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the Public Works Director to be necessary; and 
(8)  Description or schematic representation of the effluent/discharge sampling location on site. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
(1)  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(2)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
(3)  Requirements for the development and implementation of accidental discharge/slug control and countermeasures plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
(4)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
(5)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
(6)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
(7)  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
(8)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Public Works Director and/or designee to ensure compliance with this chapter, and State and Federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.403.C. - Wastewater discharge permit appeals. 
The Public Works Director and/or designee shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the Public Works Director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 90 days of notice of its issuance. 
(a)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(b)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(c)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(d)  If the Public Works Director fails to act within 90 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(e)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Superior Court of California, County of Sutter, within 30 days. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.403.D. - Wastewater discharge permit modification. 
The Public Works Director and/or designee may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to the, the following reasons: 
(a)  To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(b)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(c)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(d)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the City's POTW, City personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(e)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(f)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(g)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(h)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or to reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.403.E. - Wastewater discharge permit transfer. 
Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days' advance notice to the Public Works Director and the Public Works Director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Public Works Director must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(a)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(b)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(c)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.403.F. - Wastewater discharge permit revocation. 
The Public Works Director and/or designee may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(a)  Failure to notify the Public Works Director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(b)  Failure to provide prior notification to the Public Works Director of changed conditions pursuant to Section 6-5.805 of this chapter; 
(c)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(d)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(e)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(f)  Refusing to allow the Public Works Director timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(g)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(h)  Failure to pay fines; 
(i)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(j)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(k)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(l)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(m)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.403.G. - Wastewater discharge permit reissue. 
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for a reissued wastewater discharge permit by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with Section 6-5.402.E of this chapter, a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Upon receipt of all required information the application shall be processed. Upon approval, a reissued discharge permit signed by representatives of the City, will be issued with one copy returned to the applicant. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.404. - Industrial wastewater sampling, analyses, and flow measurements. 
When requested by the Public Works Director and/or designee, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 90 days of the request. The Public Works Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. Minimum detection levels shall be as determined by the Public Works Director. 
(a)  Measurement devices. All dischargers making periodic measurements shall furnish and install at the control manhole or other appropriate location a calibrated flume, weir, flow meter, or similar device approved by the Public Works Director and/or designee and suitable to measure the industrial wastewater flow rate and total volume. A flow indicating, recording, and totalizing register may be required by the Public Works Director and/or designee. In lieu of the wastewater flow measurement, the Public Works Director and/or designee may accept records of water usage and adjust the flow volumes by suitable factors to determine peak and average flow rates for the specific industrial wastewater discharger. 
(b)  Inspections of measurement devices. The sampling, analysis, and flow measurement procedures, equipment, and results shall be subject at any time to inspection by the City. The sampling and flow measurement facilities shall be such as to provide safe access to authorized personnel. 
(c)  Measurement frequency. Those industrial wastewater dischargers required by the Public Works Director and/or designee to make periodic measurements of industrial wastewater flows and constituents shall annually make the minimum number of such measurements required. The minimum requirements for such periodic measurements shall be: 
(1)  At least one 24-hour measurement per year. Representative samples of the industrial wastewaters shall be obtained at least once per hour over the 24-hour period, properly refrigerated, composited according to measured flow rates during the 24 hours, and analyzed for the specified wastewater constituents; 
(2)  Dischargers required to sample on only a few days per year shall sample during the periods of highest wastewater flow and wastewater constituent discharges; and 
(3)  Industrial plants with large fluctuations in quantity or quality of wastewaters may be required to provide continuous samplings and analyses for every working day. When required by the Public Works Director, dischargers shall install and maintain in proper order automatic flow-proportional sampling equipment and/or automatic analysis and recording equipment. 
Measurements to verify the quantities of waste flows and waste constituents reported by industrial dischargers will be conducted on a random basis by personnel of the City. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.405. - Discrepancies between actual and reported industrial wastewater discharge quantities. 
Should measurements or other investigations reveal that the industrial discharger is discharging a flow rate or a quantity of biochemical oxygen demand or suspended solids significantly in excess of that stated in the industrial wastewater permit or in excess of the quantities reported to the City by the discharger and upon which the industrial wastewater treatment charges are based, the discharger shall apply for an amended industrial wastewater permit and shall be assessed for all delinquent charges, together with the penalty and interest. Before these charges shall be assessed, at least two additional 24-hour samples and flow measurements shall be obtained by the City with all the costs of sampling and analyses to be paid by the discharger. 
An industrial discharger found in violation, shall be presumed, in the absence of other evidence, to have been discharging at the determined parameter values over the preceding three years or subsequent to the previous City verification of quantity parameters, whichever period is shorter. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.406. - Pretreatment of industrial wastewater.  
Sec. 6-5.406.A. - Pretreatment facilities. 
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in Section 6-5.208 of this chapter within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State, or the Public Works Director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities, including operating and maintenance procedures, shall be submitted to the Public Works Director for review, and shall be acceptable to the Public Works Director before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the City under the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.406.B. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the Public Works Director and/or designee may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The Public Works Director and/or designee may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the Public Works Director and/or designee and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, according to the manufacturer's guidelines, by the user at their expense. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(e)  The Public Works Director may deny, condition, and limit without restriction new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, when the discharger does not meet pretreatment standards and the discharge would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.406.C. - Accidental discharge/slug control and countermeasures plans. 
(a)  Each discharger shall provide protection from the accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter. Where necessary, or as directed by the Public Works Director, retention basins, dikes, storage tanks, or other facilities designed to eliminate, neutralize, offset, or otherwise negate the effects of prohibited materials or wastes discharged in violation of this chapter shall be installed. 
(b)  Dischargers shall notify the City immediately when accidental discharges of wastes in violation of this chapter occur so that countermeasures may be taken by the City to minimize damages to the sewer system, treatment plant, treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the City on account thereof under Water Code § 13350, or for violations of Fish and Game Code § 565. 
(c)  In the event of an accidental discharge in violation of this chapter, the discharger shall furnish the City, within five days of the date of the occurrence, a detailed written statement describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrences. 
(d)  In order for employees of discharges be more fully informed of City requirements, copies of this chapter shall be permanently posted on bulletin boards of dischargers, together with such other industrial waste information and notices which may be furnished by the City from time to time directed towards more effective water pollution control. 
(e)  Sewer connections within the discharger's plumbing or drainage system shall be appropriately labeled to warn operating personnel against the discharge of any substance in violation of this chapter. 
The Public Works Director and/or designee shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs a plan or other action to control slug discharges. For industrial users identified as significant prior to November 14, 2005, this evaluation must have been conducted at least once by October 14, 2006; additional significant industrial users must be evaluated within one year of being designated a significant industrial user. For purposes of this subsection, a slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. The results of such activities shall be available to the approval authority upon request. Significant industrial users are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting potential for a slug discharge. If the POTW decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the Public Works Director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by Section 6-5.806 of this chapter; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.406.D. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  All persons owning vacuum or "cesspool" pump trucks or other liquid waste transport trucks and desiring to discharge septic tank, seepage pit, interceptor, or cesspool contents, industrial liquid wastes, or other liquid wastes to sewerage facilities of the City or to facilities that discharge directly or indirectly to such sewerage facilities shall first obtain a septage waste disposal general permit. All applicants for coverage under the septage general permit shall complete the application form, pay the appropriate fee, receive a copy of the City regulations governing discharges to sewers of liquid wastes from trucks and shall agree, in writing, to abide by these regulations. 
(b)  The septage waste disposal general discharge permit shall be valid for the time period listed therein and in no case the permit shall not exceed five years. 
(c)  Any person negligently or willfully violating the City requirements for liquid waste discharges from trucks shall be in violation of this chapter and may have their permit revoked by the Public Works Director. 
(d)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the Public Works Director, and at such times as are established by the Public Works Director. Such waste shall not violate Article 2 of this chapter or any other requirements established by the City. 
(e)  The Public Works Director and/or designee shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The Public Works Director may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The Public Works Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this chapter. 
(f)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the Public Works Director. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director and/or designee may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The Public Works Director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(g)  All septage waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name, phone number and address of the septage waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses, and phone numbers of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(h)  All septage waste haulers must provide, at the time of permit approval, a Yuba City business license, current vehicle registration, truck capacity certification for each truck listed, current Yuba and/or Sutter County "sewage pumper vehicle" permit and proof of general liability insurance (bodily injury, personal injury and property damage)/automobile liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000/$1,000,000 per occurrence or accident. These amounts may change to reflect the most current City mandated insurance requirements. The septage waste haulers shall be responsible to provide proof of all these insurance documents including endorsements per City insurance requirements. The City's current insurance requirements can be obtained from pretreatment coordinator. 
City's Public Works Department shall be exempt from these requirements. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.407. - Measurement of industrial waste. 
Any industrial or commercial user may be required to provide a metering device acceptable to the City, at the user's expense, to permit the accurate determination of the volume of wastewater discharged into the City sewage system. Where the sewage flow is not measured, and unless other arrangements are agreed upon in advance, the volume of sewage flow shall be taken as the metered water consumption. At the option of the Public Works Director, when the sewage flow is not substantially different than the metered water consumption, the volume of waste for payment may be determined by special agreement or by the use of sewage flow meters installed and maintained by qualified personnel at the user's expense. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.408. - Industrial wastewater charges. 
(a)  General. The capital interest and costs shall be determined by the required plant capacity of each industrial user. The major industrial users, currently Sunsweet Growers, Yuba City Cogeneration, Valley Fine Foods and Calpine, in addition to the operations and maintenance charges, shall be paying for the debt service and capital replacement in accordance with their existing contracts with the City and in accordance with the 2011 Wastewater Rate Study. The wastewater charges for industrial wastewater related to the debt service and capital replacement is shown the following Tables. The Public Works Director shall have the authority to negotiate and execute new agreement with the new Industrial users for the debt service and capital replacement costs. 
Sunsweet Growers Inc.—Wastewater Charges for Debt Service and Capital Replacement 
Category 	8/1/2016 to 6/30/2017 	7/1/2017 to 6/30/2018 	7/1/2018 to 6/30/2019 	7/1/2019 to 6/30/2020 	7/1/2020 to 6/30/2021 
Debt Service 	$7,680.00 	$7,680.00 	$7,680.00 	$7,680.00 	$7,680.00 
Capital Replacement 	$35,304.00 	$35,304.00 	$35,304.00 	$35,304.00 	$35,304.00 
 
Yuba City Cogeneration—Wastewater Charges for Debt Service and Capital Replacement 
Category 	8/1/2016 to 6/30/2017 	7/1/2017 to 6/30/2018 	7/1/2018 to 6/30/2019 	7/1/2019 to 6/30/2020 	7/1/2020 to 6/30/2021 
Debt Service 	$790.27 	$790.27 	$790.27 	$790.27 	$790.27 
Capital Replacement 	$600.00 	$600.00 	$600.00 	$600.00 	$600.00 
 
Valley Fine Foods Company—Wastewater Charges for Debt Service and Capital Replacement 
Category 	8/1/2016 to 6/30/2017 	7/1/2017 to 6/30/2018 	7/1/2018 to 6/30/2019 	7/1/2019 to 6/30/2020 	7/1/2020 to 6/30/2021 
Debt Service 	$562.94 	$562.94 	$562.94 	$562.94 	$562.94 
Capital Replacement 	$1,848.12 	$1,848.12 	$1,848.12 	$1,848.12 	$1,848.12 
 
Calpine Greenleaf Inc. & Gilroy Energy Center—Wastewater Charges for Debt Service and Capital Replacement 
Category 	8/1/2016 to 6/30/2017 	7/1/2017 to 6/30/2018 	7/1/2018 to 6/30/2019 	7/1/2019 to 6/30/2020 	7/1/2020 to 6/30/2021 
Debt Service 	$1,126.66 	$1,126.66 	$1,126.66 	$1,126.66 	$1,126.66 
Capital Replacement 	$600.00 	$600.00 	$600.00 	$600.00 	$600.00 
 
(b)  Industrial user rates. Industrial users will be charged the rates stated in the most recent wastewater rate study/revenue program as adopted by the Council, and will include charges for operation and maintenance costs, and administration and collection system costs. The charges shall reflect the user's contribution to the total wastewater loading of the treatment works and will recognize volume, BOD, and suspended solids (SS) to ensure a proportional distribution of costs to each user. Industrial user rates are shown in the table below in accordance with 2011 Wastewater Rate Study. The Public Works Director shall have the authority to negotiate and execute new agreement with the new industrial users for the user rates based on the latest wastewater rate study. 
Category 	8/1/2016 to 6/30/2017 	7/1/2017 to 6/30/2018 	7/1/2018 to 6/30/2019 	7/1/2019 to 6/30/2020 	7/1/2020 to 6/30/2021 
Flow Charge 
(per million gallon) 	$2,570.61 	$2,827.67 	$3,110.44 	$3,421.48 	$3,763.63 
BOD Charge 
(per lb.) 	$0.263 	$0.290 	$0.319 	$0.350 	$0.385 
SS Charge 
(per lb.) 	$0.198 	$0.218 	$0.240 	$0.264 	$0.290 
 
(c)  Billing period. During each fiscal year, there will be 13 four-week billing periods. The Assistant City Manager may divide the annual cost into 13 equal billings and combine the user's share of operation and maintenance costs, plus any assessment for additional costs caused by the user discharging wastewater in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Payment of charges and delinquent charges. All fees and charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable upon the receipt of the notice of charges. Unpaid charges shall become delinquent 45 days after mailing or delivering the notice of charges. A basic penalty charge of 10% of the unpaid amount shall be added to any fee or charge which becomes delinquent. Interest at the rate of 2% per month shall accrue on the total of all delinquent charges, plus all penalty charges. 
(e)  Determination of charges. 
(1)  Capacity. The actual plant capacity for each industrial user will be determined by the highest daily volume, pounds of BOD, and pounds of suspended solids discharged into the sanitary sewer system measured by averaging the highest three consecutive days during the prior fiscal year. The three determining factors for industrial capacity will not necessarily peak during the same period. New industrial users will estimate their plant capacity requirements and make periodic deposits as determined by the Finance Director during their first year of operation with an adjustment billing or credit, whichever the case may be, within 30 days after the end of the fiscal year. If the period of operation during the first fiscal year is not sufficient to determine a plant capacity, the second year operation capacity requirements will be used as if the industry was a new user in that year. The Public Works Director shall have the authority to negotiate and execute new agreement with the new industrial users for the debt service and capital replacement costs. 
(2)  Actual discharges. The operation and maintenance costs will be based on the actual volume, pounds of BOD, and suspended solids. It will be the industrials user's responsibility to provide composite samples of its discharges for determining the BOD and suspended solid testing. Each sample shall be marked with the beginning and ending meter reading of the volume discharge during the period the composite sample is taken. The volume measured by the meter readings and the test results of the composite samples will be used to calculate the pounds of BOD and suspended solids and will be the basis of the billing operation and maintenance charges. If there are time periods when the meter readings of the composite samples are not consecutive, the City, at its sole discretion, will determine the parts per million (ppm) of the BOD and suspended solids for that volume that a sample was not received. 
(3)  Conversion factors. 
Cubic feet × 7.48 = gallons 
Pounds per day (BOD or suspended solids) = test results (mg/L) × 8.34 × flow (million gallons per day; MGD) 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Article 5. - Sewer Service Charges 
 
Sec. 6-5.501. - Charges for service. 
(a)  All charges for the extension of, connection to, and use of the City sewerage system shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  No facilities or services of the City sewerage system shall be furnished to any premises or to any person free of charge, except the City. 
(c)  Beginning in 2017, all the charges related to the use of City sewerage collection and treatment system set out in Sections 6-5.408(b), 6-5.507(c) and 6-5.507(d) of this chapter will be reviewed by the City Council on an annual basis as part of the fiscal year budget review process, prior to the July 1 implementation of the increase for each year. The City Council will retain the authority to set by resolution the actual rates less than the maximum rates set out in Sections 6-5.408(b), 6-5.507(c) and 6-5.507(d) of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.502. - Payment of charges. 
Before connecting any premises to the City sewerage system, the owner, subdivider, or developer of such premises shall make provisions satisfactory to the Assistant City Manager for the payment of all charges. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.503. - Sewer connection charges. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the sewer connection charge is to have the property owner pay their proportionate cost of the sewerage system. 
(b)  Collection. The connection impact fees shall be paid at the option of the developer/applicant at either the issuance of the building permit or at certificate of occupancy for a proposed development project, not at the date of application for a permit. The amount of the impact fees to be paid shall be those fees in effect at the time the fees are paid at either the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy. Exceptions to this requirement may be negotiated between the developer and the City as part of the entitlement and agreement process, subject to City Council approval. The City may require the developer/applicant to pay, as determined by the Public Works Director, inspection fees at the time of building permit. 
In case of the expansions and/or alterations of the premises, a sewer connection impact charge shall be collected at the time building permit issuance of: 
(1)  The expansion and/or use of the premises which requires additional sewer facilities; and 
(2)  The construction or alteration of the premises which changes the parcel use to a higher sewer demand. 
For the customers currently not on the City's sewer system, the connection impact fees including any regular and special permit and inspection fee shall be charged at the time of connection permit issuance for the connection to the City's sewer system. 
(c)  Schedule of charges. The sewer connection impact charge shall be as set forth in Section 6-5.507. 
(1)  [ Multiple units; other facilities. ] For multiple units, the connection impact fee shall include any common facilities, such as laundry rooms and recreation areas, that would normally be provided as support facilities with multiple dwellings; however, for other facilities not the primary support of the multiple dwellings, there shall be an additional fee computed on the basis of the fixture units as hereinafter provided for commercial, industrial, public and other uses or as determined by the Public Works Director. 
(2)  Commercial and industrial users. Drainage system fixture units, as set forth in the Uniform Plumbing Code adopted by the City, for commercial users and for industrial users not included under the provisions of Article 4 of this chapter. If at any time after the payment of the connection charge there is a change of use on the premises, there shall be an additional connection charge calculated at the per fixture unit rate for the number of additional fixture units installed. 
(3)  Industrial users. Connection charges for industrial users shall be determined in accordance with Article 4 of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.504. - Sewer extension charges. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the sewer extension charge is to reimburse the City for its cost to extend the main sewer. 
(b)  Collection. The sewer extension charge for a main sewer installed by the City shall be collected before a person may connect their property to the City sewerage system. 
(c)  Schedule of charges. The sewer extension charge provides for the extension of mains. The charge shall be as set forth in Section 6-5.507. 
Corner lots and lots having more than one frontage where sewer facilities exist or are planned shall pay extension fees based on 60% of the first one hundred 175 feet of total frontage (as measured to P.I.'s of property line returns) and 100% of all frontage in excess of the first 175 feet. 
Such reduction shall apply to existing corner lots and shall not apply to corner lots which would be created by new subdivisions, parcel maps, or developments. Such parcels shall pay extension fees based on 100% of all applicable frontage as measured prior to the creation of the side street. 
Extension fees will not be applicable to lands within a subdivision or special assessment district if the sewer main was installed at no cost to the City (other than oversizing costs) unless an agreement exists providing for the repayment of extension costs to the original developer or to the special district. 
Where substantial evidence indicates that the sewer main was installed at no cost to the City (other than oversizing costs) by special assessment district, a subdivider, developer or other person, main extension charges shall not be applicable unless set forth in an agreement providing for the repayment of extension to the original installer. 
Where a sewer main only serves property on one side of the sewer line, the charge shall be double the current charge. 
(d)  Agreements. A property owner, subdivider, or developer may extend the main sewer at his or her own expense in accordance with a reimbursement agreement approved by the Council. 
(e)  Outside users. The sewer extension charge for all users whose property is outside the City limits shall be the same as the charges applicable if the user were within the City limits. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.505. - Sewer service charges. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the sewer service charge is to provide necessary revenue to operate the sewerage system as a self-sustaining operation. 
(b)  Collection. The sewer service charge shall be collected as follows: 
(1)  On premises served with City water, the billing of sewer service charges shall be added to the charges for water service, and the payment and collection of the total amount shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this Code regulating the payment of water service charges. 
(2)  On premises not served with City water, the billing and collecting of sewer service charges shall be made as determined by the Finance Director. 
(c)  Schedule of charges. The sewer service charge for property connected to the sewerage system shall be billed in accordance with the rates established in Section 6-5.507. 
(d)  Reserved for future use. 
(e)  Septage waste disposal general discharge permits. The charge for truckers discharging to the municipal sewer system shall be listed in the City fee schedule document and in accordance with rates established in Section 6-5.507. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.506. - Meters may be required. 
All sewer services may be metered at the discretion of the City. The Public Works Director may require any user, at their sole expense, to install a meter. The meter shall be approved by the Public Works Director before installation. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.507. - Summary of charges. 
All the latest and current charges shall be found in the City's fee schedule document. The City updates the fee schedule document annually and posts it on the City's website. This section shows the applicable charges from July 1, 2016, to June 30, 2017. The charges for all the subsequent years will only be available in the City's fee schedule document. 
(a)  Sewer connection charge type. 
(1)  Single-family residential and duplex (two dwellings per parcel) users: $6,665.85 per unit. 
(2)  Multiple dwelling users: $5,998.96 per unit. 
(3)  Commercial and industrial users as defined in the Uniform Plumbing Code and applicable to users other than as defined in Article 4 of Chapter 5 of Title 6 of the Municipal Code: $269.95 per fixture unit. 
(4)  Any customer that purchases a connection impact charge prior to July 1, 2000, may complete the project at any time, and is not subject to connection impact charge rate adjustments or credit of interest. Any connection impact charges paid on July 1, 2000, or later, and the project is completed within 18 months, will not be subject to any additional connection impact charges or interest credits. A project is deemed completed when all building permits are paid and a final inspection report is issued or as determined by the Public Works Director. Any connection charges paid on July 1, 2000, or later and the project is not completed within 18 months will be subject to the connection impact charge in effect at the time of project completion, and will be entitled to interest credit as to any connection impact charge increases. Interest will only be allowed as a credit toward connection impact charges increases and, in no event, shall customer be entitled to any refund of interest. Interest will accrue, beginning 18 months after the initial purchase, based on the initial connection charge payment. Interest payment will be credited semi-annually on January 1 and July 1 based on the previous average semi-annual rate of the Local Agency Investment Fund administered by the California State Treasury. Connection permits or charges cannot be sold or transferred between any parties other than Yuba City. 
(b)  Extension charges. Sewer extension charges per front foot as defined in Section 6-5.504 of the Municipal Code: $64.43 per front foot. 
(c)  Sewer service charges. Flat rate monthly sewer service charges for City single-family users (including duplex—two units per parcel), multi-dwelling unit (three or more units) users are listed in the following tables. The commercial users shall be charged in accordance with the rate schedule in the following table for commercial users. No credit shall be allowed for the vacancy. 
Single-Family Users Flat Rate Service Charge per Month per Unit 
	8/1/2016 to 6/30/2017 	7/1/2017 to 6/30/2018 	7/1/2018 to 6/30/2019 	7/1/2019 to 6/30/2020 	7/1/2020 to 6/30/2021 
Charge/month 	$44.58 	$49.04 	$53.95 	$59.34 	$65.27 
 
Note: Single-family users include: single-family dwelling units, duplex units (two-dwelling units per parcel). This rate shall be applicable to multi dwelling units (three or more per parcel) if each unit (two dwelling units or less) is billed individually. 
Multi-Dwelling Units Flat Rate Service Charge per Month per Unit 
	8/1/2016 to 6/30/2017 	7/1/2017 to 6/30/2018 	7/1/2018 to 6/30/2019 	7/1/2019 to 6/30/2020 	7/1/2020 to 6/30/2021 
Charge/month 	$35.67 	$39.24 	$43.16 	$47.48 	$52.23 
 
Note: Multi-dwelling users include: three or more apartments, mobile homes or trailers on one parcel. The single-family user rate shall apply if each unit (two dwelling units or less) in the multi-dwelling units is billed individually. 
Commercial Monthly Rate Service Charge per Month (Base Charge + Flow Charge) 
	8/1/2016 to 6/30/2017 	7/1/2017 to 6/30/2018 	7/1/2018 to 6/30/2019 	7/1/2019 to 6/30/2020 	7/1/2020 to 6/30/2021 
C1 
(Base Charge)* 	$44.58 	$49.04 	$53.95 	$59.34 	$65.27 
C2 
(Base Charge)* 	$50.16 	$55.18 	$60.69 	$66.76 	$73.44 
C3 
(Base Charge)* 	$60.75 	$66.83 	$73.51 	$80.86 	$88.95 
Flow Charge* 
(per 100 CF) 	$1.76 	$1.93 	$2.13 	$2.34 	$2.57 
 
* Note: The charges to a commercial user will be based on the applicable base charge as shown the table above plus the flow charge for the actual water usage. 
Commercial user Monthly Charge = Base Charge + (Flow Charge × actual water usage in 100 CF) 
Category C1 shall include the types listed below. The Public Works Director shall have the right to expand the list or to move any listed type to a different category. 
Retail/office/other 
Auditorium/hall 
Storage 
Church 
Animal shelter 
Beauty/barber shop 
Florist 
Library 
Day care 
Bowling alley 
Doctor/dentist 
Fitness center 
Laundromat 
Car wash 
Fairgrounds 
Hospital 
Municipal jail 
Theatre/cinema 
Veterinary clinic 
Gas station (no market/disposal) 
Bakery/deli/café (no disposal) 
Restaurant/bar (no disposal) 
Assisted living/convalescent hospital 
Category C2 shall include the types listed below. The Public Works Director shall have the right to expand the list or to move any listed type to a different category. 
Bed/breakfast 
Hotel/motel 
Dry cleaners 
Auto sales 
Autobody shop 
Funeral home 
Category C3 shall include the types listed below. The Public Works Director shall have the right to expand the list or to move any listed type to a different category. 
Fast food 
Market 
Gas station (with market) 
Bakeries and delis (with disposal) 
Restaurant/bar (with disposal) 
(d)  Sewer service charges for schools. Sewer service charges for schools are listed in the table below. 
Per Student Service Charge per Year* for Schools 
	8/1/2016 to 6/30/2017 	7/1/2017 to 6/30/2018 	7/1/2018 to 6/30/2019 	7/1/2019 to 6/30/2020 	7/1/2020 to 6/30/2021 
Charge/Year 	$20.47 	$22.52 	$24.77 	$27.25 	$29.97 
 
* Average daily attendance (ADA) for past school year for number of students. Yuba City Unified School District is billed once a year after July 1 for the previous year. 
Septic haulers/truckers discharge charges. Septic tank trucks discharging at the City wastewater treatment plant shall be charged using the following formula based on the 10,000 gallon monthly average wastewater flow estimate for single family dwelling unit and 77% of the service charges of treatment and disposal of septage including administration and pretreatment. The price per gallon and minimum charges are shown the table under this subsection. 
  
Septic Discharge Charges per Gallon* 
	8/1/2016 to 6/30/2017 	7/1/2017 to 6/30/2018 	7/1/2018 to 6/30/2019 	7/1/2019 to 6/30/2020 	7/1/2020 to 6/30/2021 
Charge ($) per gallon 	0.343 	0.378 	0.415 	0.457 	0.502 
Minimum Charge ($) 
400 gallons per dump 	$137.28 	$151.01 	$166.11 	$182.72 	$200.99 
Minimum Charge ($) 
500 gallons per dump 	$171.50 	$189.00 	$207.50 	$228.50 	$251.00 
Minimum Charge ($) 
1,000 gallons per dump 	$343.20 	$377.52 	$415.27 	$456.80 	$502.48 
Minimum Charge ($) 
1,500 gallons per dump 	$514.80 	$566.28 	$622.91 	$685.20 	$753.72 
 
* Minimum charge per dump shall be greater than (1) 400 gallons per dump or (2) full registered tank capacity of the dumping vehicle. 
(e)  Permitted industrial user charges. Industrial users permitted through the City's pretreatment program shall be required to pay the charges in accordance with Section 6-5.408 of this chapter. 
(f)  Annual adjustments. Annually on July 1 of each year fees and charges in the following sections shall be adjusted based on the previous April value of the Twenty City Average of Engineering News Record Construction Index: Section 6-5.507(a), Section 6-5.507(b) and Section 6-5.508. 
The wastewater discharge permit fees in reference to Section 6-5.403.A shall be adjusted annually based on the wastewater service charge increases. The following table shows the new fees schedule. 
Wastewater Discharge Permit Fee Schedule 
Category 	8/1/2016 to 6/30/2017 	7/1/2017 to 6/30/2018 	7/1/2018 to 6/30/2019 	7/1/2019 to 6/30/2020 	7/1/2020 to 6/30/2021 
Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User 	$450.59 	$495.65 	$545.22 	$599.74 	$659.71 
Permitted Industrial User 	$716.06 	$787.66 	$866.43 	$953.07 	$1,048.38 
Ground Water 	$716.06 	$787.66 	$866.43 	$953.07 	$1,048.38 
Septic Hauler 	$450.59 	$495.65 	$545.22 	$599.74 	$659.71 
Significant Industrial User 	$1,145.69 	$1,260.26 	$1,386.29 	$1,524.92 	$1,677.41 
 
Industrial users with more than one wastewater effluent discharge monitoring point shall be assessed an additional $500 annual fee per additional effluent monitoring point. 
(g)  Outside City user's charges. Reserved for future use. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.508. - Special sewer connection fee. 
All charges contained in this section shall be found in the City's fee schedule document. 
(a)  Purpose and application. A special sewer connection fee shall be applied solely and strictly to the service area shown on the map named "Sewer Trunk Line Facilities For West Yuba City Area" in accordance with the City Resolution 02-097 dated July 16, 2002. The Sewer Trunk Line Facilities For West Yuba City Area map is on file at the office of the Public Works Director. The general boundaries of the service area are: Pease Road to the north, Bogue Road to the south, Township Road to the west and variable locations, west of State Route 99, to the east. 
(b)  Schedule of special connection fee and collection thereof. All the latest and current charges shall be found in the City's fee schedule document. The City updates the fee schedule document annually and posts it on the City's website. This section shows the applicable charges from July 1, 2016, to June 30, 2017. The charges for all the subsequent years will only be available in City's fee schedule document. 
West Yuba City Sewer Trunk, Residential: $1,589.35/lot 
West Yuba City Sewer Trunk, Commercial: $63.52/plumbing fixture unit 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Article 6. - Administrative Enforcement Remedies 
 
Sec. 6-5.601. - Public Works Director enforcement.  
Sec. 6-5.601.A. - Notification of violation. 
When the Public Works Director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Public Works Director may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Industrial user in noncompliance may be required to provide, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Public Works Director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Public Works Director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.601.B. - Consent orders. 
The Public Works Director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections 6-5.601.D and 6-5.601.E of this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.601.C. - Show cause hearing. 
The Public Works Director may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the Public Works Director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 30 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.601.D. - Compliance orders. 
When the Public Works Director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Public Works Director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.601.E. - Cease and desist orders. 
When the Public Works Director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Public Works Director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(a)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(b)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.601.F. - Administrative fines. 
(a)  When the Public Works Director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Public Works Director may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $25,000 per violation, per day. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(b)  Unpaid fines under this section shall, after 60 days, constitute a lien against the real property of the discharger from which the discharge originated. The lien shall have no force and effect until recorded with the county recorder after which its applicability will remain, in accordance with provisions of California Civil Procedure Code §§ 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive. 
(c)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the Public Works Director to reconsider the fine, along with full payment of the fine amount, within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the Public Works Director may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The Public Works Director may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(d)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
The City has established an administrative penalty (noncompliance fee) for specific violations incorporated below. The following penalty schedule provides guidance as to the level of fine appropriate for that type of violation. The actual fine, if any, is determined based on the specific circumstances of each individual violation. Noncompliance fees are based on the actual time (staff hourly rates) and monitoring and testing costs incurred by the City in the investigation and resolution of noncompliance events. The responsible party shall be responsible to pay any type of administrative fines. 
Violation 	Penalty Schedule 
Failure to submit discharge permit application by NOV deadline 	$500 
Failure to submit discharge permit renewal by NOV deadline 	$500 
Failure to meet schedule set forth in Administrative Order for discharge permit application or renewal 	$750 
Failure to submit report by NOV deadline 	$500 
Submittal of chronically late or unacceptable reports 	$500 
Failure to comply with sampling/monitoring requirements of NOV and/or Warning Letter 	$750 
Failure to comply with pretreatment, sampling, or monitoring equipment installation/maintenance requirements of NOV and/or Warning Letter 	$750 
Publication of SNC 	$750 
Frequent (insignificant) exceedances of discharge limit (permit, local limit, and/or categorical) 	$500 
 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.601.G. - Emergency suspensions. 
The Public Works Director may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The Public Works Director may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(a)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution to the POTW. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Public Works Director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Public Works Director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in Section 6-5.601.H of this chapter are initiated against the user. 
(b)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Public Works Director prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under Sections 6-5.601.C 6-5.601.H of this chapter. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.601.H. - Termination of discharge. 
In addition to the provisions in Section 6-5.403.F of this chapter, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(a)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(b)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(c)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(d)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; 
(e)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in Article 2 of this chapter; or 
(f)  Failure to comply with the other requirements of this chapter. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section 6-5.601.C of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the Public Works Director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.601.I. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
The Public Works Director shall publish annually, in a newspaper(s) of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW of industrial users, a list of the users, which, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates paragraphs (c), (d) or (h) of this section) and shall mean: 
(a)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceeded (by any magnitude) a numerical pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by Article 2; 
(b)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by Article 2 multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(c)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by Article 2 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Public Works Director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(d)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Public Works Director's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(e)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(f)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(g)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(h)  Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of Best Management Practices, which the Public Works Director determines, will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Article 7. - Judicial Enforcement Remedies 
 
Sec. 6-5.701. - Injunctive relief. 
When the Public Works Director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Public Works Director may petition the Superior Court of California, County of Sutter through the City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The Public Works Director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.702. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the City for a maximum civil penalty of $25,000 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  The Public Works Director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.703. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  Any user who negligently violates any provision of Water Code § 13387(a)1—6, upon conviction, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $25,000 per violation, per day, or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than one year, or both. 
(b)  A user who willfully or knowingly introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine of not less than $5,000 nor more than $50,000, or be subject to imprisonment, in State prison, for not more than three years, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under State law. 
(c)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a civil penalty of not more than $5,000 per violation, per day. 
(d)  In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100,000 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six years, or both. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.704. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The Public Works Director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the City's enforcement response plan. However, the Public Works Director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the Public Works Director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.705. - Damages to City facilities. 
Any unauthorized entering, breaking, damaging, destroying, uncovering, defacing, or tampering with any structure, equipment, or appurtenances which are a part of the City's sewerage system shall be a violation of this chapter. Damages to the City's facilities as a result of such unauthorized entering, breaking, damaging, destroying, uncovering, defacing, or tampering shall be paid by the responsible party or parties. The responsible party shall also be responsible to pay any type of fines resulting from damages to the POTW. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.706. - Persons responsible for payment. 
(a)  [ Municipal water system connection. ] Where the premises are connected to the municipal water system, the sewer service charges shall be billed to the person who requested such connection to the water system, or their successor in interest, or to any person requesting that such bill be charged to him. 
(b)  [ Non-municipal water system connection. ] Where the premises are not connected to the municipal water system, the sewer service charges shall be billed to the person who requested such connection to the sewerage system, or their successor in interest, or, if no such request was made, to the owner of record of such premises on the date on which such premises are required hereby to be connected to the sewerage system, or to the successor in interest of such person, or to any person requesting that such bill be charged to him. 
(c)  Enforcement of payment. In each case where a bill for sewer services becomes delinquent, the City Manager or Finance Director shall order the premises shut off from the municipal water system. In the event of continued or repeated delinquencies, the City Manager or Finance Director may order the premises disconnected from the municipal water system and/or the sewerage system. When any premises has been shut off or disconnected from either the municipal water system or the sewerage system for the nonpayment of sewer service charges, such water or sewer service shall not be restored and such premises shall not be reconnected until all the delinquencies have been paid to the Finance Department, together with such reasonable charges for reconnecting as may be established. 
(d)  Owner responsible. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, the property owner shall be additionally responsible for payment of all unpaid water/sewer bills and other fees owed to the City. Any agreement between landlords and tenants to the contrary will not relieve the landlord or record owner of the property of the responsibility for payment of the water and/or sewer service charges to the City. 
(e)  Collection of delinquent sewer charges. All rates, charges, penalties and interest which remain delinquent as of June 30 of each year may be collected in the same manner as the general taxes for the City for the forthcoming fiscal year, as follows: 
(1)  The City's Finance Department shall prepare a written report, which shall be filed with the City Clerk. The report that shall describe each parcel of real property for which there are any delinquencies in any rates or charges for services rendered to each parcel during the preceding year, and the amount of the delinquency. The report of delinquent sewer charges may be combined with the report of any other delinquent charges, as long as the report identified the delinquent charges for each service for each parcel. 
(2)  The City Clerk shall publish notice of the report's filing and of the time and place of hearing on the report, prior to the date set for the hearing. The notice shall be published once a week for two successive weeks prior to the hearing. The City Clerk shall also mail written notice of the report's filing to each property owner whose property or parcel is identified as being subject to delinquent charges setting forth individually each property and each of the services and charges due for that property. 
(3)  At the time stated in the notice, the City Council shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the report concerning the delinquencies. Thereafter the City Council may adopt, revise, change, reduce or modify any delinquency or overrule any or all objections thereto. The City Council shall then make its determination on each delinquency identified in the report; the City Council's determination shall be final. 
(4)  Following the hearing, on or before August 10 of each year, the City Clerk shall file with the City's Finance Director a copy of the signed report to submit to the County. The Finance Director will submit a request to the Sutter County to include the amount of delinquencies on the bills for taxes levied against the properties identified in the report. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.707. - Violations infractions. 
In addition to the foregoing, violations of this chapter shall be infractions as provided in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.708. - Appeals to the City Manager. 
(a)  Procedure. Except for any decision, action or determination made by the City Council, any permit applicant, permit holder, or other discharger affected by any decision, action, or determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the City in interpreting or implementing the provisions of this chapter, or any permit issued hereunder, may file with the City Manager a written request for reconsideration within ten days after such decision, action, or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the request. The City Manager may elect to hold a hearing on the request. The request for reconsideration shall be acted upon, by the City Manager, within ten days after the date of filing or the close of the reconsideration hearing. The decision, action, or determination shall remain in effect during such period of review by the City Manager. 
(b)  Action by the City Manager. If the ruling made by the City Manager is unsatisfactory to the person requesting reconsideration, he may, within ten days after notice of the action by the City Manager, file a written appeal to the Council. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.709. - Appeals to the Council. 
Any person who shall be dissatisfied with the action of the City Manager may appeal to the Council in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Code. In the event of such an appeal, the City Manager shall transmit to the Council a report setting forth the reasons for the action taken. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Article 8. - Reporting Requirements 
 
Sec. 6-5.801. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Public Works Director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the Public Works Director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
(i)  The user shall provide the following information: 
A.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated process for existing sources. 
B.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the Utilities Director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. 
C.  Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. 
D.  The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Sections 6-5.810 and 6-5.811 of this chapter. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documents as required by the Utilities Director or the applicable standard to determine compliance with the standard. 
(ii)  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph. 
(iii)  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the control authority. 
(iv)  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with Sections 6-5.810 and 6-5.811 of this chapter. 
(v)  The Utilities Director may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures. 
(vi)  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
(6)  Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in Section 6-5.802. of this chapter. 
(8)  Signature and Report Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 6-5.402.F of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.802. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required in Section 6-5.801.b.7 of this chapter: 
(a)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(b)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(c)  The user shall submit a progress report to the Public Works Director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(d)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the Public Works Director. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.803. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Public Works Director a report containing the information described in Section 6-5.801(b) of this chapter. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 6-5.402.F of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.804. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the Public Works Director but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the Utilities Director or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 6-5.402.F of this chapter. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant at appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the Public Works Director, using the procedures prescribed in Section 6-5.811 of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.805. - Reports of changed conditions. 
Each user must notify the Public Works Director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 180 days before the change. 
(a)  The Public Works Director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under Section 6-5.402.E of this chapter. 
(b)  The Public Works Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under Section 6-5.402.G of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under Section 6-5.403.D of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(c)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.806. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug discharge or slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the Public Works Director and/or his designee of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the Public Works Director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (a), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(d)  Significant industrial users are required to notify the Public Works Director immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.807. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the Public Works Director as the Public Works Director may require. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.808. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the Public Works Director and/or designee within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Public Works Director and/or designee within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the Public Works Director and/or designee monitors at the user's facility at least once a month for the pollutant that is exceeding permitted limits or if the Public Works Director and/or designee samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling, or if the City has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.809. - Discharge of hazardous waste. 
The City prohibits the discharge of any hazardous waste into the POTW. (As defined in 40 CFR 261.) 
Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste, whether illegally, accidentally or otherwise, shall immediately notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of Sections 6-5.801, 6-5.803 and 6-5.804 of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.810. - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the Public Works Director or other parties approved by the EPA. Minimum detection levels shall be as approved by the Public Works Director. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.811. - Sample collection. 
(a)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(b)  Sample collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of the conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
(c)  Except as indicated in paragraphs (d) and (e) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Public Works Director. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the City, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the City, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with Instantaneous Limits. 
(d)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(e)  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in Section 6-5.801 and 6-5.803 (40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)), a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil, and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the Public Works Director may authorize a lower minimum. For reports required by paragraphs Section 6-5.804 (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.812. - Timing. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.813. - Record keeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with Best Management Practices established under Section 6-5.208(b). Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the City, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Public Works Director. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Article 9. - Miscellaneous Provisions 
 
Sec. 6-5.901. - Pretreatment program fees. 
The City may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the City's pretreatment program. Fees may include; 
(a)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
(b)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(c)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(d)  Fees for filing appeals; and 
(e)  Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the City. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.902. - Severability. 
If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any provision of this chapter, the remaining provisions shall not be effected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.903. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations.  
Sec. 6-5.903.A. - Upset. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (c), below, are met. 
(c)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the Public Works Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
(i)  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
(ii)  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
(iii)  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(f)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.903.B. - Bypass. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section: 
(1)  "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. "Severe property damage" does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  Bypass notifications. 
(1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the Public Works Director, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the Public Works Director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Public Works Director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(d)  Bypass. 
(1)  Bypass is prohibited, and the Public Works Director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(i)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(ii)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of unwanted wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
(iii)  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (c) of this section. 
(2)  The Public Works Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the Public Works Director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (d)(1) of this Section. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Article 10. - Enforcement Response Plan for Industrial user Noncompliance 
 
Sec. 6-5.1001. - General overview. 
(a)  Purpose of enforcement response plan. This enforcement response plan (ERP) in this article represents enforcement actions, and their respective time frames that may be taken by the City of Yuba City, against an industry for noncompliance of permit conditions, this chapter of the Yuba City Municipal Code or Federal and State regulations. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Major violations—Significant noncompliance (SNC). Any violation of pretreatment requirements (limits, sampling, analysis, reporting and meeting compliance schedules, and regulatory deadlines) is an instance of noncompliance for which the industrial user is liable for enforcement, including monetary penalties. Instances of SNC are industrial user violations, which meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(i)  Significant violations of wastewater discharge limits: 
A.  Chronic violations. 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceeded (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in Article 2; 
B.  Technical Review criteria (TRC) violations. 33% or more of the measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period. Equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by Article 2 multiplied by the applicable criteria; 
There are two groups of TRCs: 
Group I for conventional pollutants 
(BOD, TSS, fats, oils, and/or grease) 
TRC = 1.4 
Group II for all other pollutants except pH 
TRC = 1.2; 
C.  Any other violation(s) of pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by Article 2 that the Public Works Director determined has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference (e.g., slug loads) or pass-through; or endangered the health of the sewage treatment personnel or the public; 
D.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health/welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the treatment plant's emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
E.  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestones, contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order, for staring construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance by 90 days; 
F.  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
G.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
H.  Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, which the Utilities Director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(2)  List of violators. The Public Works Director shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation in the Yuba City area, a list of the industrial users who significantly violated applicable pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during the 12 previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the industrial user(s) during the same 12 months. 
(3)  Officials responsible. The Public Works Director or designee, in accordance with this chapter of the Yuba City Municipal Code, will notify the City Attorney of civil action or municipal code enforcement required. The District Attorney will prosecute criminal violations of State water or health and safety laws. 
(c)  Notice of violation and follow-up. When a violation occurs (with the exception of certain, insignificant/minor first offenses), a notice of violation (NOV) or a warning letter is sent via a certifiable means (U.S. Mail, Fed-Ex, UPS, etc.) to the responsible party at the place of business. A written response by the industrial user may be required, which states the cause of the violation, the corrective actions which will be taken to prevent recurrence, and the time frame to complete corrective actions. 
(1)  If an industrial user fails to correct its problems, if the violation appears to be a part of a recurring pattern, or if the level of the violation is of a large magnitude, a formal meeting will be arranged, with representatives of the firm and the Public Works Director or designee to discuss the problem or possible corrective actions. At this time, the firm may be issued an administrative order containing or requesting a time schedule for compliance and additional monitoring requirements and/or fines. 
(2)  Any industrial user who intentionally or willfully violates any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or intentionally or willfully discharges waste or wastewater which causes pollution or who violates any cease and desist order, established effluent limitations, national standard of performance or national pretreatment or toxicity standard shall be fined not more than $50,000 for each offense. The Public Works Director, after determining the existence of a violation, may levy fines, which shall be in accordance with this chapter of the Yuba City Municipal Code and applicable State and Federal law. Each day on which a violation may occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(3)  In instances where the firm is a significant violator (in significant noncompliance or SNC), or in situations where a discharge may pose a threat to the safety of operation of the POTW or its personnel, the industrial user will be issued a cease and desist order. This order, issued by the Public Works Director, may order the firm to comply immediately or impose additional requirements on the industry. 
(4)  Violations believed to be caused through deliberate acts or intentional discharge of hazardous wastes, as specified in 40 CFR 413 and 433, will be referred to the City Attorney for further enforcement. The City Attorney may then petition the Superior Court of California, County of Sutter for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the required performance. 
(d)  Appeal. Any permit applicant, permit holder, or other discharger affected by any decision, action, or determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the Public Works Director may file with the Public Works Director a written request for reconsideration within ten days of such decision, action, or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the request. The Public Works Director will then decide whether to hold a hearing on the request. The Director shall act upon a request for reconsideration within ten days from the date of filing or the close of the reconsideration hearing. The decision, action, or determination shall remain in effect during such period of review by the Director. 
If the ruling made by the Public Works Director is unsatisfactory to the person requesting reconsideration, he may, within ten days after notice of the action by the Director, file a written appeal to the City Manager. 
The written appeal shall state all pertinent aspects of the matter, and shall include the hearing record if one was requested. Within 30 days after the written appeal is received, the City Manager shall hold a hearing after due notice to the appellant. The City Manager may establish rules and regulations governing the hearing of such appeals. The City Manager shall make a final ruling on the appeal within ten days after close of the hearing. The decision, action, or determination shall remain in effect during such period of review by the City Manager. 
Any person who shall be dissatisfied with the action of the City Manager may appeal to the Council in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Code. In the event of such an appeal, the City Manager shall transmit to the Council a report setting forth the reasons for the action taken. 
(e)  Civil and criminal penalties. If the industrial user fails to comply with the administrative cease and desist order, the City may pursue any of the alternative civil remedies herein against any discharger. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.1002. - Enforcement response plan outline. 
The following is an outline of the City's enforcement response plan (ERP) enforcement procedures. These procedures were developed according to the September 1989 EPA guidelines for "Developing Control Authority Enforcement Response Plans." This section is sometimes referred to as the enforcement response guide or ERG. 
(a)  Administrative. 
(1)  Phone call and reminder letter to notify industrial user of violation. Includes request for explanation of violation from industrial user. 
(i)  Done as soon as possible upon discovery of violation. 
(2)  Notice of violation (written): 
(i)  Sent by certifiable means (U.S. Mail, Fed-Ex, UPS, etc.) within five working days after violation. 
(3)  Fines assessed by City for violation(s): 
(i)  Intent to punish the industrial user (IU) for noncompliance. 
(ii)  No court intervention unless IU contests fine. 
(4)  Administrative fines: 
(i)  Assessed for repeated or serious violations. 
(ii)  Attached to an administrative order. 
(5)  Administrative orders types: 
(i)  Show cause order; allows the industrial user (IU) to appear before the Public Works Director or representative and explain the noncompliance and why more severe enforcement actions should not be taken. 
(ii)  Enforcement documents; direct industrial users to implement corrective or remedial measures (compliance orders). 
(iii)  Cease and desist order(s). 
(iv)  Consent orders; negotiated settlement agreed upon by the City and the IU. 
(v)  Revocation of permit. 
A.  Failure of an industrial user to factually report the sewage constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
B.  Failure of an industrial user to report significant changes in operations, site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans or sewage constituents and characteristics; or 
C.  Refusal of reasonable access to an industrial user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring. 
(vi)  Industrial wastewater service termination. 
(b)  Judicial enforcement. 
(1)  Civil Litigation; 
(i)  Lawsuits filed against IU to: 
A.  Recover costs associated with noncompliance; 
B.  Impose civil penalties; 
C.  Seek injunctive relief; 
D.  Court order issued to return IU to compliance. 
(ii)  Process of litigation: 
A.  City decides to sue; 
B.  City Attorney files complaint with court; 
C.  IU responds to complaint by filing an answer; 
D.  Depositions and interrogations; 
E.  Trial date set; 
F.  Settlement negotiations, if any; 
G.  Trial occurs; 
H.  Verdict is issued; 
I.  Appeals are made. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  Purpose: 
(i)  To punish noncompliance rather than recover costs; 
(ii)  To deter future noncompliance; 
(2)  City must prove intent and/or negligence; 
(3)  Criminal prosecution process: 
(i)  Discovery of the crime; 
(ii)  Gathering evidence; 
(iii)  Initiating criminal prosecution; 
(iv)  Defendant's pretrial options: 
A.  Plead guilty; 
B.  Jury trial; 
(4)  The criminal trial; 
(5)  Sentencing and appeals. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.1003. - Enforcement response plan procedures. 
(a)  Unauthorized discharges (no permit or approval). 
Noncompliance 	Violation 	Initial Response; Follow-Up 	Officials Responsible 
(1) Non-permitted discharge (where permit would be required) 	Discharger unaware of wastewater discharge permit requirement. No environmental or POTW damage 	Issue Warning Letter and/or phone call. Deadline for application submittal not to exceed 30 days 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Discharger unaware of wastewater discharge permit requirement; Results in violation of POTW NPDES permit, or potential harm to POTW, environment or personnel 	Administrative Order to immediately halt discharge; fine or civil litigation seeking penalties up to $10,000 per day, or terminate service 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Industrial waste discharge without permit and evidence of intentional dumping or discharge of toxic pollutants of concern (metals and/or priority organics) 	Administrative Order to immediately halt; Issue NOV with time schedule. Deadline for application submittal not to exceed 15 days, Administrative Fine; Civil/Criminal Action 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Failure to submit acceptable discharge permit application by deadline 	Issue NOV with time schedule. Deadline for application submittal not to exceed 15 days 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Failure to submit acceptable discharge permit application by NOV deadline 	Issue Administrative Order and fine; Civil Action; Terminate service 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
(2) Non-permitted discharge (expired permit or significant change in discharge has occurred) 	Failure to apply for permit renewal. No environmental or POTW damage. Less than 30 days late 	Issue Warning Letter and/or phone call. Deadline for application submittal not to exceed 30 days 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Failure to submit acceptable discharge permit application by deadline 	Issue NOV with time schedule. Deadline for application submittal not to exceed 15 days 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Failure to submit acceptable discharge permit application by NOV deadline 	Issue Administrative Order and fine; Civil Action; Terminate service 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
 
(b)  Discharge violations. 
Noncompliance 	Violation 	Initial Response; Follow-Up 	Officials Responsible 
(1) Industry exceeds final limits (categorical, local, or prohibited) 	Isolated, not significant violation 	Telephone call and/or NOV; Require follow-up sampling. 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Frequent, insignificant (repeated offense) 	Notice of Violation 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Frequent, insignificant (any offense) 	Notice of Violation Administrative fine may be omitted 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Significant Violation(s) that are SNC 	NOV 
SNC Publication and/or 
Fine 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Causes known; environmental or POTW damage (endangerment of life) 	Administrative Order to halt discharge, terminate service, fines and/or civil litigation 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Failure to meet requirements specified in any NOV 	Meet with Industrial User and/or issue Administrative Order, Administrative Fine 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
(2) Slug load discharge without notifying City 	Isolated— no known damage 	Notice of Violation; Require industry to develop a spill control program 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Isolated with known interference, pass through, or damage results 	Fine up to $50,000 per day and/or civil action 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Recurring 	Fine up to $50,000 per day and/or civil action, terminate service 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
 
(c)  Sampling, monitoring, and reporting violations. 
Noncompliance 	Violation 	Initial Response; Follow-Up 	Officials Responsible 
(1) Late Report 
(any type) 
(includes incomplete report) 	Once; Report less than five days late 	Telephone call or Warning Letter 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Report less than 30 days late 	NOV 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Report greater than 30 days late 	NOV and/or Fine 
SNC publication 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Twice during any consecutive four-quarter period 	NOV and/or Fine 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Three times during any consecutive four-quarter period 	NOV and/or Fine 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
(2) Improper Signature or Certification 	Report is improperly signed or certified 	Phone call or Warning Letter 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Report is improperly signed or certified after notice by City 	NOV and/or Fine 	
(3) Failure to Sample during Monitoring Period 	Once (Sample collected less than 30 days late) 	Telephone call or Warning Letter; 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Sample collected greater than 30 days late 	NOV and/or Fine and/or SNC 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Twice during any consecutive four-quarter period 	NOV and/or Fine 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Three times during any consecutive four-quarter period 	NOV and/or Fine 
SNC 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
(4) Improper Sampling 	Incorrect sample type and/or missed hold time 	Warning Letter 
Resample within 30 days 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Repeated incorrect sample type and/or missed hold time and/or resample later than 30 days 	NOV and/or Fine 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
(5) Failure to Report Instances of Noncompliance 	Failure to report discharge limit violation, spill, upset, bypass or changed discharge (no harm) 	NOV 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Failure to report discharge limit violation, spill, upset, bypass or changed discharge (results in harm to POTW, personnel, environment, and/or any City discharge limit) 	Administrative Order and Fine, Terminate Service, Civil Action 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Repeated failure to report discharge limit violation, spill, upset, bypass or changed discharge 	Civil Action 
Terminate Service 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
(6) Failure to install monitoring equipment 	Delay of less than 30 days 	Warning Letter and/or phone call 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Delay of greater than 30 days 	NOV and/or Administrative Order and/or Fine 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Recurring violation of Administrative Order 	Civil Action, Criminal Investigation, Terminate Service 	
(7) Failure to properly operate and maintain pretreatment facility 	No harm 	NOV 
Compliance Order 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Results in harm 	Show Cause Hearing, Administrative Order and Fine, Civil Action, Terminate Service 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Harm to POTW, environment or personnel 	Administrative Order and Fine, Civil Action, Terminate Service 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
(8)  Reporting False Information; Falsification 	Falsification of any type, including but not limited to reporting and sampling 	Referral to City Attorney for criminal investigation; Civil litigation and/or criminal prosecution seeking maximum penalties allowed by State law; terminate service 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
 
(d)  Compliance schedule violations. 
Noncompliance 	Violation 	Initial Response; Follow-Up 	Officials Responsible 
(1) Missed milestone date 	Less than 30 days or will not affect final milestone 	Telephone call or letter (Notice of Violation) or Administrative Order with Fine 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Missed by more than 30 days, or will affect final milestone Violation for good cause (weather, materials unavailable, etc.) 	Meeting to change final date (Notice of Violation) and/or Administrative Order with fine 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Missed by more than 30 days, or will affect final milestone. Violation without good cause 	Show cause hearing, seek civil penalties of $500 per day of violation 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
(2) Failure to meet compliance schedule, reporting requirements 	Did not submit report but did complete milestone 	Telephone call or letter (Notice of Violation) 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Did not submit report or meet milestone 	Meeting, Administrative Order and/or fines 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
(3) Missed final date 	Good cause 	Telephone call (Notice of Violation) 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	30 days or more outstanding; failure or refusal to comply without good cause 	Show cause hearing, Administrative Order with fines, judicial action 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
 
(e)  Spill incidents. 
Noncompliance 	Violation 	Initial Response; Follow-Up 	Officials Responsible 
(1) Spill incident 	Reported by industry 	Notice of Violation, meeting 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Failure to report spill 	Notice of Violation and/or Administrative Order with fines 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
(2) Repeated spill incidents 	Failure to develop an upgrade spill prevention program 	Notice of Violation, Administrative Order with fines, show cause hearing 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Failure to act on a decision of compliance meeting and results in known environmental damage and/or POTW damage 	Judicial action, terminate service 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
 
(f)  Violations detected through industrial inspections/investigations. 
Noncompliance 	Violation 	Initial Response; Follow-Up 	Officials Responsible 
(1) Entry Denial 	Entry denied or consent withdrawn 
Copies of records denied 	Obtain warrant and return to IU 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
(2) Illegal Discharge 	No harm 	NOV and/or Administrative Order with fine 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Results in harm to POTW, environment or personnel 	Show cause Hearing, Administrative Order with fine, Civil Action, Terminate Service 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Harm to POTW, environment or personnel and evidence of "willful or neglect" action 	Civil Action, Criminal Investigation, Terminate Service 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
(3) Improper sampling 	Unintentional; incorrect location, incorrect sample type, incorrect sample technique/preservation 	Phone call/correct at site and/or warning letter and/or NOV 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
(4) Inadequate record keeping 	Inspector finds files incomplete or missing, and no evidence of "willful or negligent" action 	NOV 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Inadequate record keeping continues after notice by City 	Administrative Order with fine 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Incomplete or missing files and evidence of "willful or negligent" action 	Criminal Investigation, Criminal Action, Terminate Service 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Inspector finds additional files/data 	NOV 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
(5) Failure to report additional monitoring 	No harm to POTW, et al 	NOV 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Failure to report additional data after notice from City 	Administrative Order with fine 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
 
(g)  Other permit violations. 
Noncompliance 	Violation 	Initial Response; Follow-Up 	Officials Responsible 
(1) Waste streams are diluted in lieu of treatment 	Initial violation 	Administrative Order 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Dilution continues in lieu of treatment after notification by City 	Show Cause Order, 
Civil Action, 
Terminate Service 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
(2) Failure to Mitigate noncompliance or halt production 	Does not result in harm 	NOV 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
	Results in harm to POTW, environment, or personnel 	Administrative Order with fine, Civil Action, Terminate Service, Criminal Investigation 	Public Works Director or duly authorized representative 
 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Article 12. - Fats, Oils, and Grease Discharge from Food Service Establishments 
 
Sec. 6-5.1201. - General overview. 
Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the maximum beneficial public use of the City's sewer services and facilities while preventing blockages of the sewer lines resulting from discharges of fats, oils, and greases (FOG) from residential, industrial, and food service establishments (FSE) to the sewer facilities, and to specify appropriate FOG discharge requirements for FSEs. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.1202. - Regulations. 
(a)  Permits. All nonresidential facilities, including not-for-profit and governmental facilities, that prepare, process or serve food as determined by the Public Works Director or designee may be required to keep a valid wastewater discharge permit issued by the City as outlined in the provisions of Section 6-5.402. 
(1)  The wastewater discharge permit for any facility shall be renewed whenever there is a change in operation including facility expansion, remodeling, or change in ownership. Permits are issued for a specifically named establishment at a particular location and are not transferable. 
(2)  A limited food preparation establishment is not considered a FSE and is exempt from obtaining a wastewater discharge permit. Exempt establishments shall be engage only in reheating, hot holding, or assembly of ready to eat food products and as a result, there is no wastewater discharge containing significant FOG. A limited food preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food. 
(b)  Discharge limitations. No FSE shall discharge FOG or cause FOG to be discharged into the public sewer that causes an SSO, exceeds a concentration level set forth in Section 6-5.208 or that may accumulate and/or cause or contribute to blockages in the public sewer. 
(c)  Prohibitions. FSEs are prohibited from doing any of the following: 
(1)  Installing food grinders in the plumbing system of new construction. All FSEs that undergo a change in operations or remodeling shall remove any existing food grinders concurrent with such change or remodeling, except as otherwise expressly allowed by the Public Works Director; 
(2)  Introducing any additives into an FSE's plumbing system, grease trap and/or grease interceptor for the purpose of emulsifying FOG, biologically and/or chemically treating FOG for grease remediation and/or as a supplement to grease interceptor maintenance; 
(3)  Disposing waste cooking oil into the public sewer or storm drain. All waste cooking oils shall be collected and stored properly in receptacles such as rendering bins, barrels or drums for recycling or other acceptable methods of disposal; 
(4)  Discharging wastewater from dishwashers to any grease removal device; 
(5)  Discharging wastewater with temperatures in excess of 140 degrees Fahrenheit into any grease control device, including grease traps and interceptors; 
(6)  Discharging wastes containing fecal materials from toilets, urinals, wash basins or other fixtures to waste lines directed to grease interceptors and/or other grease control devices; 
(7)  Discharging FOG and solid materials removed from a grease control device to the public sewer. Grease removed from grease interceptors shall be waste hauled to an approved disposal site as part of the operation and maintenance requirements for grease interceptors; 
(8)  Operating grease interceptors with FOG and solids accumulation exceeding 25% of the design hydraulic depth of the grease interceptor (25% rule); 
(9)  Discharging FOG and other pollutants above the local discharge limits set forth in Section 6-5.208. 
(d)  Violations. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit, BMP, or any requirement or prohibition of the FOG control program shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee and/or FSE to the sanctions set out in Articles 6 and 7 of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.1203. - Requirements. 
(a)  Design. All grease removal devices shall be designed and sized in accordance with the standards outlined in the most recent version of the California Plumbing Code (CPC) or as required by the City. 
(b)  Installation. 
(1)  The owner of every newly constructed, remodeled or converted commercial or industrial FSE with one or more grease generating activities, including FSEs with new or replacement kitchens for which a building permit is issued, shall install an approved grease interceptor for each grease generating activity, of a size equal to or greater than the minimum size requirements as set forth in the most recent CPC. 
(2)  Existing FSEs, which do not currently have a grease interceptor installed, which have caused or contributed to grease-related blockage in the sewer system, or which have sewer laterals connected to hot spots, or which have been determined to contribute significant FOG to the sewer system by the City based on inspection or sampling, shall be deemed to have reasonable potential to adversely impact the sewer system, and shall install grease interceptors within 180 days upon notification by the Public Works Director or designee. 
(3)  All grease removal devices must be installed in a location that allows for easy accessibility for inspections and maintenance. 
(c)  Variance. A FSE may obtain a variance from the grease interceptor requirement to allow alternative pretreatment technology that is, at least, equally effective in controlling the FOG discharge in lieu of a grease interceptor, if the FSE demonstrates that it is impossible or impracticable to install, operate or maintain a grease interceptor. The Public Works Director or designee's determination to grant a variance will be based upon, but not limited, to evaluation of the following conditions: 
(1)  There is no adequate space for installation and/or maintenance of a grease interceptor. 
(2)  There is no adequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing fixtures and the grease interceptor and/or between the grease interceptor and the private collection lines or the public sewer. 
(3)  The FSE can justify that the alternative pretreatment technology is equivalent or better than a grease interceptor in controlling its FOG discharge. 
(d)  Conditional waiver. An existing FSE may obtain a conditional waiver from installation of a grease interceptor if the FSE demonstrates that it has negligible FOG discharge and insignificant impact to the sewer system. The Public Works Director or designee's determination to grant or revoke a conditional waiver shall be based upon, but not limited to, evaluation of the following conditions: 
(1)  Quantity of FOG discharge as measured or as indicated by the size of FSE based on seating capacity, number of meals served, menu, water usage, amount of on-site consumption of prepared food and other conditions that may reasonably be shown to contribute to FOG discharges. 
(2)  Adequacy of implementation of BMPs and compliance history. 
(3)  Sewer size, grade, condition based on visual information, FOG deposition in the sewer by the FSE, and history of maintenance and sewage spills in the receiving sewer system. 
(4)  Changes in operations that significantly affect FOG discharge. 
(5)  Any other condition deemed reasonably related to the generation of FOG discharges by the Public Works Director or designee 
(e)  Maintenance. 
(1)  Grease interceptors/traps shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of the full content of the device, which includes wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge, and solids. This includes scraping the sides of the device to remove any build up on the walls, baffle, and inlet or outlet tees. 
(2)  Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned by a licensed hauler at a minimum of every 90 days. The Public Works Director or designee may change the required maintenance frequency at any time to reflect current operating conditions or frequency when one or more of the following conditions occur: 
(i)  25% or more of the wetted height, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils, or grease prior to 90 days; or 
(ii)  The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH or other pollutant levels established by the City; or 
(iii)  A history of noncompliance issues. 
(3)  If the grease interceptor, at any time, contains FOG and solids accumulation that does not meet the requirements described in Section 6-5.1203(e)(2), the FSE shall be required to have the grease interceptor serviced immediately such that all fats, oils, grease, sludge, and other materials are completely removed from the grease interceptor. If deemed necessary, the Public Works Director or designee may also increase the maintenance frequency of the grease interceptor from the current frequency. 
(4)  Grease traps shall be cleaned at a minimum of once per month or as often as necessary to prevent pass through of grease into the collection system. Grease traps shall be cleaned and inspected by a licensed grease hauler at a minimum of once per year or as often as necessary as determined by the Public Works Director and/or designee. Grease traps shall be maintained free of all food residues and any FOG waste removed during the cleaning and scraping process. 
(5)  Grease interceptors/traps shall be periodically inspected to ensure the device remains in good working condition, including any plumbing, pipes, fittings and manhole covers. Any repairs deemed necessary by the Public Works Director or designee to the device must be completed within 14 days and must be done at the sole expense of the establishment. 
(6)  Wastes removed from each interceptor shall be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive such wastes. In no way shall the wastes be returned to any private or public portion of the collection system, storm drain, or the wastewater treatment plant. 
(7)  FSEs may be required to provide a collection drum or container for the purpose of physically segregating oils, greases and greasy solids (such as fryer oil). FSEs shall establish procedures for personnel to practice maximum segregation of oils, greases, greasy solids to the collection drum or container prior to washing and other water cleaning which goes to the sewers. The FSE is responsible for the proper removal and disposal by a licensed rendering company of the material captured from either grease pretreatment devices on wastewater lines or the collection drum. 
(8)  All costs associated with proper maintenance and cleaning of the grease interceptor/trap shall be borne by the FSE. 
(9)  Property owners of commercial properties or their official designee(s) shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of the grease interceptor serving multiple FSEs that are located on a single parcel. 
(f)  Record keeping. The FSE shall be required to keep all manifests, receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the grease control device, disposal carrier and disposal site location for no less than three years. The FSE shall, upon request, make the manifests, receipts, and invoices available to any City representative, or inspector. These records shall include: 
(1)  A logbook of grease interceptor, grease trap or grease control device cleaning maintenance practices. 
(2)  A record of BMPs being implemented including employee training. 
(3)  Copies of records and manifests of waste hauling interceptor contents. 
(4)  Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG and solids accumulation in the grease interceptor. 
(5)  Records of any spills and/or cleaning of the lateral or sewer system. 
(6)  Any other information deemed appropriate by the Public Works Director or designee to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(g)  Best management practices (BMPs). All FSEs are required to implement BMPs in its operations to reduce grease discharged to the sanitary sewer system. Detailed requirements for BMPs shall be specified in the FOG Control Program. All FSEs are required to comply with the BMPs as set forth therein as well as any additional BMPs established by the Public Works Director or designee. 
(h)  Falsifying information or tampering with process. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document that is filed with the City, or to tamper with or knowingly render inoperable any grease control device, monitoring device or method or access point required under this chapter. 
(i)  Facility closure notification. All FSEs are required to notify the Public Works Department of the facilities closure within 30 days of going out of business. It is the responsibility of the facility to conduct a final cleaning and pump out of any grease removal device on hand. In the event the facility should fail to conduct a final pump out of the grease removal device, the City reserves the right to perform such work at the expense of the property owner and/or utility customer. 
(j)  Right of entry. The Public Works Director or designee shall be provided reasonable access to all parts of the wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the purposes of inspection and sampling during all times the FSE is open, operating, or any other reasonable time. No persons or occupants of premises shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to the director, an inspector and/or an enforcement officer attempting to inspect any facility involved directly or indirectly with a discharge of wastewater to the public sewer. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.1204. - Sewer system overflows, public nuisance, abatement orders and cleanup costs. 
FSEs found to have contributed to a sewer blockage, SSOs or any sewer system interferences resulting from the discharge of wastewater or waste containing FOG shall be ordered to install and maintain a grease interceptor, and may be subject to a plan to abate the nuisance and prevent any future health hazards created by sewer line failures and blockages, SSOs or any other sewer system interferences. SSOs may cause threat and injury to public health, safety, and welfare of life and property and are hereby declared public nuisances. Furthermore, sewer lateral failures and SSOs caused by FSE alone or collectively, are the responsibility of the private property owner or FSE, and individual(s) as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE. If the City must act immediately to contain and clean up an SSO caused by blockage of a private or public sewer lateral or system serving a FSE, or at the request of the property owner or operator of the FSE, or because of the failure of the property owner or FSE to abate the condition causing immediate threat of injury to the health, safety, welfare, or property of the public, the City's costs for such abatement may be entirely borne by the property owner or operator of the FSE, and individual(s) as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE and may constitute a debt to the City and become due and payable upon the City's request for reimbursement of such costs. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.1205. - Monitoring and reporting conditions. 
(a)  Monitoring for compliance with permit conditions and reporting requirements. 
(1)  The Public Works Director or designee may require periodic reporting of the status of implementation of BMPs. 
(2)  The Public Works Director or designee may require visual monitoring at the sole expense of the FSE to observe the actual conditions of the FSE's sewer lateral and sewer lines downstream. 
(3)  The Public Works Director or designee may require reports for self-monitoring of wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics of the FSE needed for determining compliance with any conditions or requirements as specified in the discharge permit, BMPs, or this chapter. Monitoring reports of the analyses of wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics shall be in the manner and form approved by the Public Works Director or designee and shall be submitted upon request of the Public Works Director or designee. Failure by the FSE to perform any required monitoring, or to submit monitoring reports required by the Public Works Director or designee constitutes a violation of this chapter and be cause for the City to initiate all necessary tasks and analyses to determine the wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics for compliance with any conditions and requirements specified in the FOG control program, FSE discharge permit, or in this chapter. The FSE shall be responsible for any and all expenses of the City in undertaking such monitoring analyses and preparation of reports. 
(4)  Other reports may be required such as compliance schedule progress reports, FOG control monitoring reports, and any other reports deemed reasonably appropriate by the Public Works Director or designee to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.1206. - Inspection and sampling conditions. 
(a)  Inspection. The Public Works Director or designee may inspect or order the inspection and sample of the wastewater discharges of any FSE to ascertain whether the intent of this chapter is being met and the FSE is complying with all requirements. The FSE shall allow the City access to the FSE premises, during normal business hours, for purposes of inspecting the FSE's GRD, reviewing the manifests, receipts and invoices relating to the cleaning, maintenance and inspection of the GRD. 
(b)  Sampling. The Public Works Director or designee shall have the right to place or order the placement on the FSE's property or other locations as determined by the Public Works Director or designee, such as devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where a FSE has security measures in force, the FSE shall make necessary arrangements so that representatives of the City shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.1207. - Notification of spill and/or sewer system overflow. 
(a)  In the event a FSE is unable to comply with any permit condition or any section of this chapter due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error or the FSE has reasonable opportunity to know that his/her/its discharge will exceed the discharge provisions of the FSE discharge permit of this chapter, the discharger shall immediately notify the City. If the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or result in sewer blockages or SSOs, the discharger shall immediately notify the local health department and the City. 
(b)  Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the Public Works Director or designee at the address specified in the FOG control program no later than five working days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring. 
(c)  Such notification shall not relieve the FSE of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the City or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the FSE of any fees or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-5.1208. - Notification of planned changes. 
FSE shall notify the City at least 60 days in advance prior to any facility expansion/remodeling, or process modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOG discharges or a change in the nature of the discharge. FSE shall notify the City in writing of the proposed expansion or remodeling and shall submit any information requested by the City for evaluation of the effect of such expansion on FSE's FOG discharge to the sewer system. 
( Ord. No. 007-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
CHAPTER 6. - WATER SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 6-6.01. - General provisions. 
(a)  Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Yuba City Water Regulations." 
(b)  Words and phrases. For the purposes of this chapter, all words used in this chapter in the present tense shall include the future tense, all words in the plural number shall include the singular number, and all words in the singular number shall include the plural number. 
(c)  Water system. The City shall furnish a system, plant, works, and undertaking used for and useful in obtaining, conserving, and distributing water for public and private uses, including all parts of such system, all appurtenances to such system, and lands, easements, rights in land, water rights, contract rights, franchises, and other water supply, storage, and distribution facilities and equipment. 
(d)  Separability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase in this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(e)  Pressure conditions. All applicants for service connections or water service shall be required to accept such conditions of pressure and service as are provided by the distribution system at the location of the proposed service connection and to hold the City harmless for any damages arising out of low pressure or high pressure conditions or interruptions in service. 
(f)  Tampering with City property. No one, except an employee or representative of the City, shall at any time in any manner operate the curb cocks or valves, main cocks, gates, or valves of the City's system or interfere with meters or their connections, street mains, or other parts of the water system. 
(g)  Penalties for violations. For the failure of the customer to comply with all or any part of this chapter, or any ordinance, resolution, or order fixing rates and charges of the City, a penalty for which has not hereafter been specifically fixed, the customer's service shall be discontinued, and the water shall not be supplied to such customer until he or she shall have complied with the rule, regulation, rate, or charge which he or she has violated or, in the event he or she cannot comply with such rule or regulation, until he or she shall have satisfied the City that in the future he or she will comply with all the rules and regulations established by the laws of the City and with all rates and charges. In addition thereto, he or she shall pay the City all fines and fees established in Section 6-6.18 and Section 6-6.20 of this chapter. 
(h)  Rulings final. All rulings of the Council shall be final. All rulings of the City Manager shall be final unless appealed in writing to the Council within five days. When appealed, the Council ruling shall be final. 
(i)  Repeals. Ordinance Nos. 272, 307, and 506, and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter, are hereby repealed. 
(j)  [Effective date.] The effective date of this chapter is July 1, 1975. 
(k)  [ Plan check and inspection fee. ] In connection with any work of construction required by the terms of this chapter, a plan check and inspection fee shall be charged, the amount thereof being as set forth in the City's fee schedule. 
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. July 1, 1975 as amended by § 5, Ord. 969, eff. April 17, 1985; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
Sec. 6-6.02. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Council shall mean the City Council of the City. 
(b)  City shall mean the City of Yuba City, and the City Council of the City performing functions related to the City water service, together with the City Manager, the Public Works Director, the Finance Director, and other duly authorized representatives. 
(c)  Distribution mains shall mean water lines in streets, highways, alleys, and easements used for public and private fire protection and for the general distribution of water. 
(d)  Service or service connection shall mean the pipe line and appurtenant facilities, such as curb stop, meter, and meter box, if any, all used to extend water service from a distribution main to premises. Where services are divided at the curb or property line to serve several customers, each such branch service shall be deemed a separate service. 
(e)  Public fire protection service shall mean the service and facilities of the entire water supply and storage and distribution system of the City, including the fire hydrants affixed thereto and the water available for fire protection, excepting house service connections and appurtenances thereto. 
(f)  Regular water service shall mean the water service and facilities rendered for normal domestic, commercial, and industrial purposes on a permanent basis and the water available therefor. 
(g)  Temporary water service shall mean the water service and facilities rendered for construction work and other uses of limited duration and the water available therefor. 
(h)  Private fire protection service shall mean the water service and facilities for building sprinkler systems, hydrants, hose reels, and other facilities installed on private property for fire protection and the water available therefor. 
(i)  Premises shall mean a lot or parcel of real property under one ownership, except that any separate structure may be deemed separate premises. Apartment houses, motels, office buildings, and structures of like nature may be classified as single premises. 
(j)  Cross-connection shall mean any physical connection between the piping system from the City service and that of any other water supply that is not, or cannot be, approved as safe and potable for human consumption, whereby water from the unapproved source may be forced or drawn into the City distribution mains. 
(k)  Owner shall mean the person owning the fee, or the person in whose name the legal title to the property appears, by deed duly recorded in the County Recorder's office, or the person in possession of the property or buildings under claim of, or exercising acts of ownership over the same for himself or herself, or as executor, administrator, guardian, or trustee of the owner. 
(l)  Person shall mean any human being, individual, firm, company, partnership, association, private, public, or municipal corporation, the United States of America, the State of California, and any district, political subdivision, governmental agency, and subsidiary thereof. 
(m)  Cost shall mean the costs of labor, materials, transportation, supervision, engineering, and all other necessary or reasonable expenses. 
(n)  Dwelling shall mean any residence, apartment, habitation, or other structure customarily occupied by a single person or family and which contains facilities for the preparation of meals. 
(o)  Resale shall mean any change of ownership by sale, or transfer, of real property as recorded by the Sutter County Recorder, except sale or transfer between members of an immediate family. Immediate family being limited to husband-wife, brother-sister, parent-child. 
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. July 1, 1975; § 2, Ord. 1015, eff. January 1, 1987; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
Sec. 6-6.03. - Notices. 
Notices from the City to a customer shall normally be given in writing and either delivered or mailed to their last known address. When conditions warrant and in emergencies, the City may resort to notification either by telephone or messenger. 
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. July 1, 1975; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
Sec. 6-6.04. - Administration. 
(a)  Council. The management, control, and care of the Municipal Water System of the City shall be vested in and under the direction of the Council. 
(b)  Finance Director. The Finance Director shall operate under the direction of the City Manager and shall be in charge of the billing, collecting, and maintenance of the bookkeeping system for the Municipal Water System. The Finance Director shall be responsible for the collection and banking of all money due the City and shall keep controlling records which shall reflect monthly transactions of individual accounts. 
(c)  Public Works Director. The Public Works Director shall operate under the direction of the City Manager and shall perform all the duties connected with, and have supervision of, the water works system, other than the office of bill collection and bookkeeping, and shall perform such other duties as may be required by the City Manager. 
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. July 1, 1975; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
Sec. 6-6.05. - Application for regular water service. 
(a)  Applications for service to premises with a service connection. Applicants requesting service to commence during regular business hours will be connected without charge, provided a good payment history has been established with the City. Other customers may be requested to provide payment in advance and/or credit references before connection. There will be a service charge, as determined by Section 6-6.18 of this chapter, for customers requesting turn-on or turn-off to be performed on weekends, holidays, and after hours. 
(b)  Applications for water service. No existing service connection. Applications for regular water service where no main extension is required shall be made upon a form provided by the City. 
(c)  Undertaking of applicant. Each application shall signify the customer's willingness and intention to comply with the regulations relating to the regular water service and to make payment for the water services required. 
(d)  Payment for previous service. An applicant shall not be honored unless payment in full has been made for water services previously rendered to the applicant by the City. 
(e)  Delinquencies on accounts in the name of a commercial or residential tenant. In the event that a tenant of a residential or commercial rental property, where water service is furnished in the tenant's name, leaves delinquent and unpaid water charges when the tenant vacates the premises, the City may require any future service to be only in the name of the property owner and not in the name of any subsequent tenant. 
(f)  Tenant application. A tenant applying for water services must provide to the City a valid signed lease or rental agreement along with identification for all persons listed on the agreement over the age of 18. Identification provided must be in the form of a California identification card, military identification card, California driver's license, or other valid picture identification. The required advanced payment will also be collected at the time of application as described in Section 6-6.10(g). 
(g)  Installation of services. Regular water service shall be installed at the location desired by the applicant. The size of such service shall be finally determined by the City. Service installations may be made only to property abutting on public streets or abutting on such distribution mains as may be constructed in alleys or easements, at the convenience of the City. Services installed in new subdivisions prior to the construction of streets or in advance of street improvements shall be accepted by the applicant in the installed location. 
(h)  Changes in customers' equipment. Customers making any material change in the size, character, or extent of the equipment or operations utilizing water service, or whose change in operation results in a large increase in the use of water, shall immediately give the City written notice of the nature of the change and, if necessary, amend their applications. 
(i)  Installation charges. Charges for installing a water service line from the main to the curb stop shall be established by Section 6-6.18 of this chapter. 
(j)  Extension charges. Extension charges provide for the extension of mains and the installation of necessary fire hydrants within the street right-of-way only, based on property zoned R-1 and R-2 paying one-half the cost of an eight-in. line and all other property paying one-half the cost of a ten-in. line. The extension charge shall be as set forth in Section 6-6.18 of this chapter. 
Corner lots and lots having more than one frontage where water mains exist or are planned shall pay extension fees based on 60% of the first 175 ft. of total frontage (as measured to PI's or property line returns) and 100% of all frontage in excess of the first 175 ft. 
This reduction shall apply only to existing corner lots and shall not apply to corner lots which would be created by a new subdivision, parcel map, or development. Such parcels shall pay extension fees based on 100% of all applicable frontage as measured prior to the creation of the side street. 
Extension fees will not be applicable to lands within a subdivision or Special Assessment District if the water main was installed at no cost to the City (other than oversizing costs) unless an agreement exists providing for the repayment of extension costs to the original developer or to the Special District. 
Where a water main only serves property on one side of the water line, the charge shall be double the current extension fee. 
(k)  Connection charges. The connection charge is designed to recover the capital costs of the treatment plant, reservoirs, and transmission lines. 
The charge shall be paid at the owner's option at either the issuance of a building permit or at certificate of occupancy, not at the date of application for a building permit. The amount of the connection charges to be paid shall be those charges in effect at the time of building permit issuance. Charges shall be paid at the same time the owner chooses to pay all other development impact fees, if any. If no building permit is to be obtained, the charge shall be collected before service is established. 
When a user requires a larger service than that which was previously serving the parcel, the user shall pay the difference between the old service and the new service based on those charges in effect at the time of the request as set forth in Section 6-6.18 of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. July 1, 1975, as amended by § 1, Ord. 728, eff. October 20, 1976 and §§ 1, 2, Ord. 816, eff. August 1, 1979, and § 2, Ord. 849, eff. July 1, 1980; § 1, Ord. 918, eff. July 1, 1983; § 4, Ord. 1091, eff. March 7, 1990; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
Sec. 6-6.06. - Main extensions. 
(a)  Main extensions. The following rules are hereby established: 
(1)  Determination. Upon the receipt of any application for water service or request for an application form, the City shall determine whether, in its judgment, a main extension is necessary to provide service. A main extension shall be installed in the manner provided in this section whenever, in the judgment of the City, such main extension is necessary to provide regular water service to the property described in such application or request. 
(2)  Applications. Any owner or subdivider of one or more lots where, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, an extension is required shall make a written application. Such application shall contain a legal description of the property to be served, a map showing the location of the proposed connection, and any additional information which may be required. 
(3)  Investigations. Upon the receipt of the application, the City shall make an investigation of the proposed extension and reject, amend, or approve the application. 
(4)  City lines. All extensions provided for in accordance with these regulations shall be and remain the property of the City. 
(5)  Dead-end lines. No dead-end lines shall be permitted, except as approved by the Public Works Director. 
(6)  Extent and design. All main extensions shall extend to the far property line of developed property. All main extensions shall be subject to design approval by the City. 
(b)  General. Where the City, at its own expense, extends a main to serve property within the corporate limits of the City, the extension charge shall be governed by the applicable portion of subsection (h) of Section 6-6.05 of this chapter. 
(c)  Main extensions by applicants. If the cost of a main extension is in excess of what the City is prepared to appropriate, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide for the main extension at his or her own expense to the standards established by the City and in accordance with an agreement for such extension. 
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. July 1, 1975; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
Sec. 6-6.07. - Main extensions to subdivisions. 
Where water main extensions are required for subdivisions, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or subdivider to pay the entire cost for the complete installation of all water facilities required within the subdivision and for the extension of water transmission mains from the subdivision to the nearest existing main of adequate capacity for the area to be served. Such transmission mains shall be subject to all the requirements set forth in the subdivision regulations (Chapter 2 of Title 8 of this Code) and to any and all modifications and supplements to such regulations. Upon official acceptance by the City, the City shall assume the full ownership, maintenance, and control of such mains. 
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. July 1, 1975; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
Sec. 6-6.08. - General use regulations. 
(a)  Number of services per premises. The applicant may apply for as many fire or landscape services as may be reasonably required for the parcel and approved by the Public Works provided the pipeline system from each service shall be independent of the others and they shall not be interconnected, except for approved internal loops. The cost of all services shall be borne by the applicant. No connection shall provide service to more than one parcel. 
(1)  Minimum size of service: Single-family—one-in. diameter. 
(2)  Residential, single-family, and multi-family: Only one domestic service and meter shall be allowed per parcel. 
(3)  Commercial/industrial: Only one domestic service and meter shall be allowed per parcel without approval from the Public Works Director. 
(b)  Water waste. No customer shall permit leaks or the waste of water. When water is wastefully or negligently used on a customer's premises, the City may discontinue the service if such conditions are not corrected. 
(c)  Responsibility for equipment on customer premises. All facilities installed by the City on private property for the purpose of rendering water service shall remain the property of the City and may be maintained, repaired, or replaced by the City without the consent or interference of the owner or occupant of the property. The property owner shall use reasonable care in the protection of the facilities. No payment shall be made for placing or maintaining such facilities on private property. No person shall place or permit the placement of any object in a manner which will interfere with the free access to a service cock or meter box or which will interfere with the reading of the meter. The City is responsible for all piping and equipment up to and including the water meter and check valve. The property owner is responsible for all equipment, piping, and appurtenances downstream of the water meter and check valve. 
(d)  Damages to water system facilities. The customer shall be liable for any damages to the City-owned customer water service facilities when such damages are from causes originating on the premises by an act of the customer or his or her tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees, or permittees, including the breaking or destruction of locks by the customer or others on or near a meter, and any damage to a meter which may result from hot water or steam from a boiler or heater on the customer's premises. The City shall be reimbursed by the customer for any such damage promptly on presentation of a bill. No seal placed on a meter by the City shall be altered or broken except by an authorized employee. 
(e)  Control valve on customer property. The property owner is responsible for all equipment, piping and appurtenances downstream of the water meter and check valve. The property owner shall install a shutoff valve as required by the building code. The customer shall not use the service curb stop to turn water on and off for their convenience. 
(f)  Cross-connections. See Cross-Connection Control Program, Section 6-6.21 of this chapter. 
(g)  Direct connections to stationary steam boiler, hydraulic elevators, power pumps, and similar apparatus. See Cross-Connection Control Program, Section 6-6.21 of this chapter. 
(h)  Ingress and egress. Representatives from the City shall have the right of ingress and egress to the customer's premises at reasonable hours for any purpose reasonably connected with the furnishing of water service. 
(i)  Commercial and industrial cooling systems. See Cross-Connection Control Program, Section 6-6.21 of this chapter. 
(j)  Pools and tanks. See Cross-Connection Control Program, Section 6-6.21 of this chapter. 
(k)  Responsibility for equipment. The customer shall, at his or her own risk and expense, furnish, install, and keep in good and safe condition all equipment which may be required for receiving, controlling, applying, and utilizing water. The City shall not be responsible for damages to property caused by faucets, valves, and other equipment which is open when water is turned on at the meter, either originally or when turned on after a temporary shutdown. 
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. July 1, 1975; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
Sec. 6-6.09. - Meters. 
(a)  Installation. All services as specifically designated by this chapter, or those as ordered so by the Public Works Director, shall be metered. The sum of money set forth in subsection (i) and subsection (j) of Section 6-6.05 of this chapter shall be paid to the City prior to the installation of the meter facilities to pay all the costs of such installation, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. The service connection, whether located on public or private property, shall be the property of the City, unless specifically otherwise provided, and the City hereby reserves the right to repair, replace, and maintain such service connection, as well as to remove it upon the discontinuance of service. Meters shall be located as close to the street as possible; preferably, within one ft. of back of sidewalk. 
(b)  Meters—General. All services shall be metered. 
(c)  Change in location of meters. Meters moved for the convenience of the customer shall be relocated at the customer's expense. Meters moved to protect the City's property shall be moved at the City's expense. 
(d)  Changes in size of meter. Changes in the size of the meter shall be made on the request of the customer at his or her own expense. An allowance not to exceed one-half of the current cost of the replaced meter may be made. 
(e)  Meter reading. Meters shall be read as nearly as possible on the same day each month. 
(f)  Meter testing. Upon the deposit of a sum as determined by Section 6-6.18 of this chapter by any consumer, the City shall test the meter. The consumer shall be notified when the test is to be performed and may be represented at such test. 
If the meter is found to over-register more than 2%, an accurate meter shall be installed, the deposit shall be repaid to the depositor and the excess charge for the time service was rendered the customer requesting the test or for a period of six months, whichever shall be the lesser, shall be refunded to the customer. 
If the meter is found to be correct or to register less than the actual quantity of water passing through it, the deposit shall be retained by the City. 
If a meter tested at the request of a customer is found to be more than 25% slow, in the case of domestic services, or more than 2% slow, for other than domestic services, the City may bill the customer for the amount of the undercharge based upon corrected meter readings for the period, not exceeding six months, the meter was in use. 
All meters shall be tested prior to installation, and no meter which registers more than 2% fast shall be installed. 
(g)  Nonregistering meters. If a meter is found to be not registering, the charges for service shall be at the minimum monthly rate, or based on the estimated consumption for a comparable period, or by such other method as is determined by the City, and its decision shall be final. 
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. July 1, 1975; § 3, Ord. 849, eff. July 1, 1980; § 1, Ord. 918, eff. July 1, 1983; § 1, Ord. 1015, eff. January 1, 1987; § 3, Ord. 11-92, eff. July 2, 1992; § 3, Ord. 07-98, eff. September 17, 1998; § 3, Ord. 02-00, eff. July 1, 2000; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
Sec. 6-6.10. - Billing. 
(a)  Billing period. The regular billing period shall be monthly for all services. Unmetered services shall be payable in advance. 
(b)  Opening and closing bills. Opening and closing bills for less than the normal billing period may be prorated. Closing bills may be estimated by the City for the final period as an expediency to permit the customer to pay the closing bill prior to the time service is discontinued. See Section 6-6.05 for requirements for opening an account. 
(c)  Payment of bills. Bills for water service and sanitary sewer service shall be rendered at the end of each billing period. Bills shall include the charges for water and sewage and shall be inseparable. Delinquency in any part of the bill shall be sufficient cause for the discontinuance of water service. Bills shall be payable on presentation. On each bill for water and sewer service rendered by the City shall be printed substantially the following: "If this bill is not paid on or before the 45th day after the bill was sent, service may be discontinued. A delinquency charge will be made and collected prior to renewing service following a discontinuance." 
(d)  Separate billing. Separate bills may be rendered for any service which has a separate connection to a City line. All meters shall be billed separately. 
(e)  Responsibility. Where there is more than one usage charge on a single parcel being served through a single service, there shall be charged and collected from the parcel owner, the water charge for the entire parcel. 
(f)  Liability for services rendered. The owner of single- and multi-family residential property served by the City shall be charged with, and shall be personally responsible for, the water bills incurred for water service to such property. The owner of nonresidential property served by the City may assign responsibility for the water bills incurred for water service to such property to the owner's tenants or lessees. 
(g)  Residential rental account. Advanced payment of $60 is required. 
(h)  Delinquent charges. Where a rental property owner has past due charges for utility services, no new account can be established for service at the same property until payment is rendered for those same charges. 
(i)  Owner responsible. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, the property owner shall be additionally responsible for payment of all unpaid water/sewer bills and other fees owed to the City. Any agreement between landlords and tenants to the contrary will not relieve the landlord or record owner of the property of the responsibility for payment of the water and/or sewer service charges to the City. 
(j)  Collection of delinquent water charges. All rates, charges, penalties and interest which remain delinquent as of June 30 of each year may be collected in the same manner as the general taxes for the City for the forthcoming fiscal year, as follows: 
(1)  The City's finance department shall prepare a written report, which shall be filed with the City Clerk. The report that shall describe each parcel of real property for which there are any delinquencies in any rates or charges for services rendered to each parcel during the preceding year, and the amount of the delinquency. The report of delinquent water charges may be combined with the report of any other delinquent charges, as long as the report identified the delinquent charges for each service for each parcel. 
(2)  The City Clerk shall publish notice of the report's filing and of the time and place of hearing on the report, prior to the date set for the hearing. The notice shall be published once a week for two successive weeks prior to the hearing. The City Clerk shall also mail written notice of the report's filing to each property owner whose property or parcel is identified as being subject to delinquent charges setting forth individually each property and each of the services and charges due for that property. 
(3)  At the time stated in the notice, the City Council shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the report concerning the delinquencies. Thereafter the City Council may adopt, revise, change, reduce or modify any delinquency or overrule any or all objections thereto. The City Council shall then make its determination on each delinquency identified in the report; the City Council's determination shall be final. 
(4)  Following the hearing, on or before August 10 of each year, the City Clerk shall file with the City's Finance Director a copy of the signed report to submit to the County. The Finance Director will submit a request to the Sutter County to include the amount of delinquencies on the bills for taxes levied against the properties identified in the report. 
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. July 1, 1975; § 4, Ord. 849, eff. July 1, 1980; § 1, Ord. 918, eff. July 1, 1983; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011) 
( Ord. No. 008-16 , § 1, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-6.11. - Discontinuance of service. 
(a)  Discontinuance of service for nonpayment. Service may be discontinued for the nonpayment of bills on or after the 45th day after the bill was sent. The failure of the City to send, or any such person to receive, such notice shall not affect the City's power hereunder. A customer's water service may be discontinued if water service furnished at a previous location is not paid for within the time fixed in this subsection for the payment of bills. If a customer receives water service at more than one location, and the bill for service at any one location is not paid within the provided time for payment, water service at all locations may be turned off. Domestic service, however, shall not be turned off for the nonpayment of bills for other classes of service (landscape or fire service). 
(b)  Delinquency charges. A delinquency charge as determined by Section 6-6.18 of this chapter shall be made and collected on the date of scheduled shut-off and thereafter for nonpayment or other violations of this chapter. When bills are delinquent, the City may demand that the full amount of both delinquent and current bills be paid. 
(c)  Unsafe apparatus. Water service may be refused or discontinued to any premises where apparatus or appliances are in use which might endanger or disturb the service to other customers. 
(d)  Fraud or abuse. Service may be discontinued if necessary to protect the City against fraud or abuse. 
(e)  Noncompliance with regulations. Service may be discontinued for noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or regulations relating to water service. 
(f)  Vacation of premises. Customers desiring to discontinue service shall so notify the City in order to be relieved of continued liability for service charges. 
(g)  Short-term disconnections. Upon notification to the City, short-term disconnections shall be made where the time involved comprises multiples of the minimum billing period. 
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. July 1, 1975; § 5, Ord. 849, eff. July 1, 1980; § 1, Ord. 918, eff. July 1, 1983; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
Sec. 6-6.12. - Collection by suit. 
(a)  Suits. All unpaid rates and charges provided for in this chapter may be collected by suit. 
(b)  Costs. The defendant shall pay all the costs of suit in any judgment rendered in favor of the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. July 1, 1975; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
Sec. 6-6.13. - Public fire protection. 
(a)  Use of fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be for use by the City or by organized fire protection agencies. Other persons desiring to use fire hydrants for any purpose shall first obtain written permission from the City prior to use and shall operate the fire hydrant in accordance with instructions issued by the City. Unauthorized use of fire hydrants shall be prosecuted according to law and are subject to enforcement measures established in Section 6-6.20. 
(b)  Moving fire hydrants. When a fire hydrant has been installed in the location specified by the proper authority, the City shall have fulfilled its obligation. If a property owner or other person desires a change in the location of the fire hydrant, he or she shall bear all costs of such changes, without refund. Any change in the location of a fire hydrant shall be approved by the City. 
(c)  Public fire protection service. Where water is furnished for public fire protection through the public distribution system, within and outside the corporate limits of the City, the City may make a charge for such protection. 
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. July 1, 1975; § 4, Ord. 11-92, eff. July 2, 1992; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
Sec. 6-6.14. - Private fire protection service. 
(a)  Adequate prevention—General. A private fire protection service connection, two-in. pipe size and larger, shall be furnished only if adequate provision is made to prevent the use of water from such services for purposes other than fire extinguishing. 
(b)  Unlawful connections. No person shall make, or allow to exist, any connection to any portion of any line used exclusively for unmetered private fire service or for any other purpose. 
(c)  Check valves and bypass meters. There shall be installed on all fire line connections, two-in. pipe size and larger, used exclusively for unmetered private fire services, a detector check valve of a type approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters and equipped with a bypass meter. Such installations shall be located within public streets, alleys, rights-of-way, or easements. 
(d)  Payment. If the City installs the private fire protection service, the applicant shall make a deposit, in advance, of the estimated cost of installing the private fire protection service. The charge for such installation shall be based on the City's total cost of all labor, materials, equipment, and other costs incidental to the installation, including the cost of the detector check valve and bypass meter assembly if installed by the City. 
(e)  Title. The service connection and all equipment appurtenant thereto, including the detector check valve and bypass meter assembly, shall be the sole property of the City, and no part of the cost shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(f)  Use. The unmetered private fire service line shall be used only for fighting accidental fires and for testing the fire prevention system. No charge shall be made for water used for these two purposes. 
Water lost through leakage, or used in violation of these regulations, shall be paid for by the applicant at double the rate charged for general use. 
The City shall read such bypass meters for the purposes of detecting any unauthorized use of water through the system. If water is used in violation of these regulations, the City may, at its option, discontinue and remove the service. 
(g)  Rates. There will be no monthly service charge for fire protection systems. 
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. July 1, 1975; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
Sec. 6-6.15. - Temporary service. 
(a)  Duration of service. Temporary service connections shall be disconnected and terminated within six months after their installation, unless an extension of time is granted in writing by the City. 
(b)  Deposits. A deposit shall be paid for temporary service per Section 6-6.18 of this chapter. Upon the discontinuance of the service, the actual cost of installing and removing the facilities required to furnish such service, exclusive of the cost of salvageable materials, as determined by the City, an adjustment will be made as an additional charge, refund, or credit. 
If service is supplied through a fire hydrant, the applicant shall be charged a flat charge per connection for the installation, moving and removal of service facilities including the meter and a deposit as determined by Section 6-6.18 of this chapter. The City will be notified when the service is no longer required. Billing for the usage of water will be at the metered rate schedule and deducted from the deposit, or an additional billing will be made if the usage exceeds the amount of the deposit. 
(c)  Installation and operation. All facilities for temporary service to the customer connection shall be made by the City and shall be operated in accordance with its instructions. 
(d)  Responsibility for meters and installation. The customer shall use all possible care to prevent damages to the meter or any other loaned facilities of the City which are involved in furnishing the temporary service from the time they are installed until they are removed, or until 48 hours after notice in writing has been given to the City that the contractor or other person is through with the meter and the installation. If the meter or other facilities are damaged, the cost of making repairs shall be paid by the customer. 
(e)  Temporary service from fire hydrants. If temporary service is supplied through a fire hydrant, a permit for the use of the fire hydrant shall be obtained from the City. It is specifically prohibited to operate the valve of any fire hydrant other than by the use of a spanner wrench designed for such purpose. 
(f)  Unauthorized use of hydrants. Tampering with any fire hydrant, or the unauthorized use of water therefrom, or for any other purpose, shall be unlawful and are subject to enforcement measures established in Section 6-6.20. 
(g)  Rates. The rates for temporary service shall be in accordance with regular service. The minimum charge for water shall be as set forth by Section 6-6.18 of this chapter. 
(h)  Credit. The applicant shall pay the estimated cost or service in advance or shall be otherwise required to establish credit. 
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. July 1, 1975; § 6, Ord. 849, eff. July 1, 1980; § 1, Ord. 918, July 1, 1983; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
Sec. 6-6.16. - Vacancies. 
If vacancies occur in any unmetered housing units, other than those on a reduced rate with no credit for vacancies, and if the water pipelines within and/or without any building or combination of buildings have been provided by owners with shutoff valves, there shall be no charge for such unit or units after such valve or valves have been closed and sealed by the City. The type of shutoff valves to be installed shall be approved by the City, and they shall be located in readily accessible places. 
Where there are unusual circumstances which result in a substantial hardship upon the property owner from the strict application of the provisions of this section, the City Manager may grant a variance to these provisions; provided, however, such variance shall be conditioned to the faithful and accurate reporting of vacancies and service renewals which shall be checked by the City and verified in lieu of the turning on or off of the shutoff valve and, provided, further, such variance shall be revoked automatically if it is found by the City that service renewals have not been promptly, accurately, and faithfully reported by the owner or person in responsible charge, and such persons shall not be allowed to declare any vacancies unless each unit is equipped with a shutoff valve as specified in this section. 
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. July 1, 1975; § 3, Ord. 816, eff. August 1, 1979; § 7, Ord. 849, eff. July 1, 1980; § 1, Ord. 918, eff. July 1, 1983; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
Sec. 6-6.17. - Reserved.  
Sec. 6-6.18. - Summary of charges. 
All the latest and current charges shall be found in the City's fee schedule document. The City updates the fee schedule document annually and posts it on the City's website. This section shows the applicable charges from July 1, 2016, to June 30, 2017. The charges for all the subsequent years will only be available in City's fee schedule document. 
Beginning in 2017, all the charges related to the use of City water treatment and distribution system set out in Section 6-6.18(j) of this chapter will be reviewed by the City Council on an annual basis as part of the fiscal year budget review process, prior to the July 1 implementation of the increase for each year. The City Council will retain the authority to set by resolution the actual rates less than the maximum rates set out in Section 6-6.18(j) of this chapter. 
(a)  Charges for installing a water service line from the main to the curb stop. 
1" service without meter 	$4,097.00 
1" meter 	$ 555.00 
1" residential dual water meter (w/fire service) 	$ 703.00 
1 1/2" service without meter 	$4,958.00 
1 ½" meter 	$ 752.00 
2" service without meter 	$ 5,285.00 
2" meter 	$ 969.00 
 
Service lines larger than two-inch shall be charged for actual time and materials (service and/or meter). A deposit will be required based on the cost estimate furnished by the Public Works Department. 
(b)  Other fees. 
Relocate existing water meter 	$ 966.00 
Fire system flow test 	$ 248.00 
Hot Tap—4" 	$4,263.00 
Hot Tap—6" 	$4,463.00 
Hot Tap—8" 	$4,920.00 
Hot Tap—10" 	$6,081.00 
 
(c)  Extension charges (Section 6-6.05(j)). 
Parcels zoned 	Extension fee per front foot* 
R-1 and R-2 	$57.90 
All others 	$62.47 
 
* The indicated extension fee includes a surcharge of $4 per front foot for fire hydrant installations where the City has installed, or plans to install, street fire hydrants serving the property. 
(d)  Connection charges (Section 6-6.05(k)). 
Meter Size 	Maximum Continuous Flow 	Factor 	Fee 
1" 	25 GPM 	1.00 	$ 7,822.06 
1½" 	50 GPM 	2.00 	$ 15,644.13 
2" 	100 GPM 	4.00 	$ 31,288.25 
3" 	400 GPM* 	16.00 	$ 125,153.00 
4" 	800 GPM* 	32.00 	$ 250,306.00 
6" 	1,500 GPM* 	60.00 	$ 469,324.00 
8" 	3,500 GPM* 	140.00 	$ 1,095,089.00 
 
* Compound meter 
Meter type for connections two inches size and larger will be determined by Yuba City after consultation with the new customer. Any customer that will utilize, in any month, totaling more than 5% of the maximum continuous meter rating shall have a separate connection charge based on the customer's individual usage characteristics. 
Any customer that purchases a connection charge prior to July 1, 2000, may complete the project at any time, and is not subject to connection charge rate adjustments or credit of interest. Any connection charges paid on or after July 1, and the project is completed within 18 months, will not be subject to any additional connection charges or interest credits. A project is deemed completed when all building permits are paid and a final inspection report is issued. Any connection charges paid on or after July 1, 2000, and the project is not completed within 18 months will be subject to the connection charge in effect at the time of project completion, and will be entitled to interest credit as to any connection charge increases. Interest will only be allowed as a credit toward connection charges increases and, in no event, shall customer be entitled to any refund of said interest. Interest will accrue, beginning 18 months after the initial purchase, based on the initial connection charge payment. Interest payment will be credited semi-annually on January 1 and July 1 based on the previous average semi-annual rate of the Local Agency Investment Fund administered by the California State Treasury. Connection permits or charges cannot be sold or transferred between any party other than Yuba City. 
(e)  Meter test deposit (Section 6-6.09(f)): $56.00. 
(f)  After hours service charge: $103.00. 
(g)  Delinquency charges (Section 6-6.15(b)): $10 or 10% of the outstanding bill (whichever is greater). 
(h)  Temporary service deposit (Section 6-6.15(b)): $110.00 per inch size of service desired size. 
(i)  Fire hydrant use (Section 6-6.15(b)). 
Connection and removal of meter 	$64.00 
Move meter from one hydrant to another 	$64.00 
Deposit (for usage charge) 	$193.00 
Deposit (for damage to meter) 	$939.00 
Minimum monthly usage charge: 
 Metered 	5,000 cubic ft. at current rate 
 Flat rate (minimum monthly) 	$64.00 
 
(j)  Water service rates. 
(1)  Quantity charges. A rate per 100 cubic feet (HCF) is hereby established with a minimum billing for all metered services as set forth in subsection (2) of this subsection. 
(2)  Monthly water rates. 
Meter Size 	Baseline HCFs* 	Existing Rate 	8/1/2016 to 6/30/2017 	7/1/2017 to 6/30/2018 	7/1/2018 to 6/30/2019 	7/1/2019 to 6/30/2020 	7/1/2020 to 6/30/2021 
=1" 	11 	$21.59 	$28.50 	$33.91 	$39.49 	$41.01 	$42.59 
1.5" 	22 	$43.18 	$57.00 	$67.83 	$78.98 	$82.03 	$85.18 
2" 	44 	$86.37 	$114.01 	$135.67 	$157.99 	$164.07 	$170.39 
3" 	176 	$345.47 	$456.02 	$542.66 	$631.93 	$656.26 	$681.53 
4" 	352 	$690.95 	$912.05 	$1,085.34 	$1,263.88 	$1,312.54 	$1,363.08 
6" 	660 	$1,295.52 	$1,710.09 	$2,035.00 	$2,369.76 	$2,461.00 	$2,555.74 
8" 	1,540 	$3,022.89 	$3,990.21 	$4,748.36 	$5,529.46 	$5,742.34 	$5,963.42 
Water Flow Rate: 
Per Excess HCF 	$1.430 	$1.430 	$1.701 	$1.981 	$2.057 	$2.137 
 
* 1 HCF = 748 gallons 
(3)  Unmetered service. Reserved. 
(k)  Meter surcharge for unmetered services. Reserved. 
(l)  Annual adjustments. Annually on July 1 of each year fees and charges in the following sections shall be adjusted based on the previous April value of the Twenty City Average of Engineering News Record Construction Index: 6-6.18(a), (b), (c) and (d). 
Annually on July 1 of each year fees and charges in the following sections shall be adjusted based on the previous April value of the California Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all urban consumers: 6-6.18(e), (f), (h), (i), (m) and (n). 
Annually on July 1 of each year fees and charges in the following sections shall be adjusted as shown in that section: 6-6.18(j). 
(m)  Fees for cross-connection control program. 
(1)  Application for backflow tester:       $56.00 
(2)  Backflow test tags:       $11.00 per tag 
(3)  Air gap inspection/sticker: 
      $56.00 per vehicle/equipment piece 
(n)  Water service disconnection. 
(1)  Disconnect service 
(for non-payment):       $59.00 
(2)  Meter lock-off 
(continued non-payment and/or illegal use):       $70.00 
(3)  Meter removal 
(continued non-payment and/or illegal use):       $116.00 
(4)  After hours reconnection:       $103.00 
(5)  Notice served in lieu of disconnect service (plus delinquency charge):       $36.00 
(§ 2, Ord. 918, eff. July 1, 1983; § 3, Ord. 1015, eff. January 1, 1987; § 2, Ord. 1069, eff. July 1, 1989; § 5, Ord. 1091, eff. March 7, 1990; § 2, Ord. 11-92, eff. July 2, 1992; § 2, Ord. 07-98, eff. September 17, 1998; § 2, Ord. 02-00, eff. July 1, 2000; § 1, Ord. 02-01, eff. June 14, 2001; § 1, Ord. 03-01, eff. May 15, 2001; § 2, Ord. 04-01, eff. July 19, 2001; § 1, Ord. 019-03, eff. January 1, 2004; § 1, Ord. 009-04, eff. August 5, 2004; § 2, Ord. 011-07, eff. October 4, 2007; § 1, Ord. 002-09, eff. March 5, 2009; § 1, Ord. 002-11, eff. May 5, 2011; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011) 
( Ord. No. 008-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-6.19. - Emergency water restrictions. 
Upon declaration of the City Council that water supply conditions are such that they dictate and justify the implementation of emergency water restrictions, the following mandatory regulations shall apply to the use of water from the City's municipal public water supply system: 
(a)  Lawn watering is permitted only as follows: 
(1)  Wednesdays and Saturdays for those whose address ends with an even number; 
(2)  Thursdays and Sundays for those whose address ends with an odd number; and 
(3)  New lawns may be watered three times each day for the first three weeks after planting provided that notification is given to the City Public Works Department of the new planting either at the time of planting or as soon thereafter as is practicable. 
(4)  Lawn watering is prohibited after 8:00 a.m. and before 8:00 p.m. on any day listed above in Section 6-6.19(a)(1), (2) and (3) during the emergency water restrictions implementation period. 
(b)  Cleaning of sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, buildings and other impermeable surfaces by the use of water is prohibited. 
(c)  All evaporative coolers must be of the recirculating type. 
(d)  Public agencies and/or commercial/industrial companies using City water to irrigate large turf areas greater than 0.5 acre shall submit an irrigation schedule for approval by the Public Works Director. This schedule shall provide for a reduction of water use based on a percentage of previous usage. The actual percentage and base year of usage shall be established by the Public Works Director as approved by the City Council and will be in accordance with the severity of the water shortage declared by the City Council. 
(e)  An automatic shutoff nozzle shall be attached to all hoses for all uses except lawn watering as set forth in subsections (a) and (d) above. The use of free flowing hoses is prohibited. 
(f)  Car washing will be allowed on the owner's residential property. All other car washing must be done at a commercial car wash facility. Washing of cars in parking lots or other commercial or industrial areas is prohibited except for vehicles owned by the person or agency who leases or owns said property. 
(g)  Leaking customer pipes, sprinklers, or other water facilities shall be repaired promptly, and not later than five days after being notified of such leak by the City. In the event of a severe leak, as determined by the City, the repairs shall be made in the shortest time reasonably possible. 
(h)  Commercial nurseries will be allowed to apply water to plant materials located on their property as needed to maintain said plant material. Watering shall be by a method which does not allow the waste of water. This permission does not apply to turf or lawn material. Turf or lawn materials shall be watered in accordance with either subsection (a) or (d) of this section. 
(i)  Watering of trees, shrubs, hedges and other plant materials excepting lawns shall be done with a drip system, by a hand held hose with an automatic shutoff nozzle, or by use of a water bucket. There shall be no runoff caused by watering of these plant materials. 
(j)  Decorative water facilities such as ponds or fountains are prohibited unless they are equipped with a recycling device approved by the City. 
(k)  All restaurants and other food and drink establishments shall furnish water only at the request of the customer. 
(l)  Allowing water to run off beyond the owner's property lines is prohibited. 
(§ 2, Ord. 03-91, eff. April 17, 1991; § 1, Ord. 08-91, eff. June 19, 1991; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011) 
( Ord. No. 008-16 , § 3, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-6.20. - Enforcement measures. 
(a)  For each violation of any of the provisions/regulations set forth in this chapter, there shall be assessed against the responsible party for the property on which the violation occurs, i.e. the owner, lessee, person in possession of said property, or the person reflected in the Yuba City utility records as the party to whom the water bill is sent, the following penalties: 
(1)  First violation: A written warning of such violation. 
(2)  Second violation: $50 surcharge which shall appear on the next monthly water billing. 
(3)  Third violation: $100 surcharge which shall appear on the next monthly water billing. 
(4)  Fourth and subsequent violations: $250 surcharge which shall appear on the next monthly water billing. 
(b)  For each violation of any of the cross-connections or other provisions/regulations as set forth in Section 6-6.08 or 6-6.21 there shall be assessed against the responsible party for the property on which the violation occurs, i.e. the owner, lessee, person in possession of said property, or the person reflected in the Yuba City utility records as the party to whom the water bill is sent, the following penalties: 
(1)  First violation: A written warning of such violation and five times the value of the water. 
(2)  Second violation: $500 surcharge and ten times the value of the water, which shall appear on the next monthly water billing. 
(3)  Third and subsequent violation: $5,000 surcharge and ten times the value of the water, which shall appear on the next monthly water billing. 
(§ 3, Ord. 03-91, eff. April 17, 1991; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
Sec. 6-6.21. - Cross-connection control program. 
A cross-connection control program is established as provided in this section. 
(a)  Purpose/references/case history. 
(1)  Purpose. 
(i)  To protect the public water supply against actual or potential cross-connection by isolating within the premises contamination that may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises; 
(ii)  To eliminate existing connections between drinking water systems and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human consumption; 
(iii)  To eliminate cross-connections between drinking water systems and sources of contamination; 
(iv)  To prevent the making of cross-connections in the future; 
(v)  This section is adopted pursuant to the State of California Code of Regulations, Title 17 and 22 Public Health, and entitled "Regulations Relating to Cross-Connections." Requiring the water supplier to administer a program to ensure cross-connection devices are installed, maintained and tested annually. 
(2)  References. 
(i)  Under Public Law 99-339 the Safe Drinking Water Act inclusive of amendments; 
(ii)  California Plumbing Code Chapter 6602.0602.1 602.2 602-3 602-4; 
(iii)  California Administrative Code Titles 17 and 22; 
(iv)  City of Yuba City Standard Details 408408A 410 413; 
(v)  Manual of Cross Connection Control, 9th Edition, published by University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. 
(3)  Case History. Manual of Cross Connection Control, 9th Edition, published by University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Air-gap separation (AG) shall mean a physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving vessel. The air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case less than one in. 
(2)  Approved backflow prevention device shall mean devices which have passed laboratory testing and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing organization which has demonstrated their competency to perform such tests to the (AWWA) American Water Works Association and possess a valid certification. 
(3)  Approved water supply shall mean any water supply whose potability is regulated by a State or local health agency including water supplier. 
(4)  Auxiliary water supply shall mean any water supply on or available to the premises other than the approved water supply. 
(5)  AWWA standard shall mean an official standard developed and approved by the American Water Works Association (AWWA). 
(6)  Backflow shall mean a flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources other than an approved water supply source, whether caused by back siphonage, backpressure or otherwise. 
(7)  Contamination shall mean a degradation of the quality of the potable water by any substance which creates a hazard to the public health or which may impair the usefulness or quality of the water. 
(8)  Cross-connection shall mean any actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply water for potable purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome and potable. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices or any other devices through which backflow could occur, shall be considered to be cross-connections. 
(9)  Double check-valve assembly shall mean an assembly of at least two independently acting check-valves including tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the check-valve assembly and test cocks available for testing the water-tightness of each check-valve. 
(10)  Health agency shall mean the California Department of Public Health. 
(11)  Local health agency shall mean the Sutter County Environmental Health. 
(12)  Person shall mean an individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, municipality, public utility or other public body or institution. 
(13)  Premises shall mean any and all areas on a property which is served or has the potential to be served by the public water system. 
(14)  Public water system shall mean water provided by the City of Yuba City. 
(15)  Reclaimed water shall mean a wastewater which as a result of treatment is suitable for uses other than potable use. 
(16)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall mean an assembly incorporating two or more check-valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, a tightly closing shut-off valve on each side of the check-valve assembly, and equipped with necessary test cocks for testing. 
(17)  Service connection shall mean and refers to the point of connection of a water user's piping to the water supplier's facilities. 
(18)  Unprotected cross-connection shall mean any cross-connection not outfitted with an air-gap separation, double check-valve assembly or reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. 
(19)  Water supplier shall mean the City of Yuba City who operates the approved water supply system. For the purposes of this document, the term "water supplier" shall mean the City. 
(20)  Water user shall mean any person obtaining water from an approved water supply system of the City of Yuba City. 
(c)  Cross-connection protection requirements. 
(1)  General provisions. 
(i)  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation at any time to make or maintain or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or permanently, for any period of time whatsoever, any cross-connection between plumbing pipes of water fixtures being served with water by the City and any other source of water supply, or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurtenances or fixtures which by reason of their construction may cause or allow backflow of water or other substances into the water supply system of the City and/or the service of water pipes or fixtures of any water user of the City. 
(ii)  Unprotected cross-connections with the City's water supply are prohibited. 
(iii)  Whenever the water supplier, health agency or local health agency determines that backflow protection is required on a premises, the City will require the water user to install an approved backflow prevention device at his/her expense for continued services or before a new service will be granted or continued. 
(iv)  Wherever the water supplier, health agency or local health agency determines that backflow protection is required on a water supply line entering a water user's premises, then any and all water supply lines from the City's mains entering such premises, buildings or structures shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention device, to be installed at the water user's expense. The type of device to be installed will be in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(v)  Every fire protection system served by the water supplier shall be separately connected to the public water system, and not interconnected to plumbing systems serving domestic or irrigation water unless approved by the Public Works Director. 
(vi)  All services to commercial or industrial users who apply for new construction or remodel permits shall at that time upgrade all service connection points to current standards. This includes domestic/irrigation/fire water service connection points. 
(vii)  Any current device that does not meet current standards must be replaced. The water user must retrofit their assembly to meet current standards at the water user's expense. 
(viii)  Backflow preventive assemblies shall have at least the same cross-sectional area as the water meter or less than the cross sectional area with exception of those in parallel. In those instances where a continuous water supply is necessary and, two sets of backflow preventive assemblies shall be installed in parallel, if the water supply cannot be temporarily interrupted for the testing of or the repair of the assemblies. 
(ix)  Cross-connections. The customer shall comply with State and Federal laws governing the separation of dual water systems or installations of backflow protective devices to protect the public water supply from the danger of cross-connections. Backflow protective devices shall be installed as near the service as possible and shall be open to tests and inspections by the City. Plans for the installation of backflow protective devices shall be approved by the City prior to installation. 
(x)  In special circumstances, where the customer is engaged in the handling of especially dangerous or corrosive liquids or industrial or process waters, the City may require the customer to eliminate certain plumbing or piping connections as an additional precaution and as a protection to the backflow preventive devices. 
(xi)  As a protection to the customer's plumbing system, a suitable pressure relief valve shall be installed and maintained by him or her, at his or her expense, when check valves or other protective devices are used. The relief valve shall be installed between the check valves and the water heater. The devices shall be serviced, overhauled, or replaced whenever they are found defective, and all costs of repair, replacement, and maintenance shall be borne by the customer. 
(xii)  Direct connections to stationary steam boiler, hydraulic elevators, power pumps, and similar apparatus. No person shall draw water from City pipes directly into any stationary steam boiler, hydraulic elevator, power pump, or similar apparatus. 
(xiii)  Where City water is used to supply a steam boiler, hydraulic elevator, or power pump, its owner shall provide tankage of sufficient capacity to afford a supply of at least 12 hours, into which the service pipe shall be discharged. 
(xiv)  Commercial and industrial cooling systems. All commercial and industrial businesses shall be required to equip all air conditioning and evaporative cooler units using City water with cooling towers and/or recirculating water pumps in order to conserve City water. 
(xv)  Responsibility for equipment. The customer shall, at his or her own risk and expense, furnish, install, and keep in good and safe condition all equipment which may be required for receiving, controlling, applying, and utilizing water. The City shall not be responsible for damages to property caused by faucets, valves, and other equipment which is open when water is turned on at the meter, either originally or when turned on after a temporary shutdown. 
(2)  Where protection is required. 
(i)  Each service connection from the City water system for supplying water to premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the public water system. 
(ii)  Each service connection from the City water system for supplying water to any premises on which any substance, which has the potential to create contamination, is handled in such fashion as may allow its entry into the water system, shall be protected against backflow of the water from the premises into the public system by a backflow prevention device to be installed at the water user's expense. Backflow prevention devices shall also be installed, at the water user's expense, for service connections handling process waters and waters originating from the City water system which have been subjected to contamination from the premises. 
(iii)  Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on all service connections to any premises having any of the following: 
A.  Internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled to the satisfaction of the State or local health agency and the City; or 
B.  Intricate plumbing and piping arrangements; or 
C.  Where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist; or 
D.  Any premises that has pumps to increase water pressure from the supplier. 
(iv)  Any system or premises designated to serve multiple residential, commercial or industrial tenants whose water practices are unknown at the time the plumbing or building permit is issued shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises to the public water system by a backflow prevention device of the type required by the City, health agency or local health agency. The determination of the type of backflow prevention device required shall be based on a determination of the potential hazard that may reasonably be expected to be encountered in buildings of similar type or nature. 
(v)  All portable pressure spray or cleaning units (including water trucks, street sweepers, etc.) that have the capability of connecting to any water supplier's system shall be provided with an air-gap separation. 
(3)  Type of protection required. 
(i)  The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the approved water supply shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the consumer's premises. The type of protective device that may be required (listed in an increasing level of protection) includes: double check-valve assembly (DC), reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RP) and an air-gap separation (AG). The water user may choose a higher level of protection than required by the City, health agency or local health agency. The minimum type of backflow protection required to protect the approved water supply at the user's water connection to premises with varying degrees of hazard are given in Table 1. Situations which are not covered in Table 1 shall be evaluated on a case by case basis and the appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the City or health agency, consistent with the highest practicable protection of potable water supplies. 
TYPE OF BACKFLOW PROTECTION REQUIRED 
TABLE 1 
Degree of Hazard 	Minimum Type of Backflow Prevention 
Sewage and Hazardous Substances 	See below 
 (1) Premises where the public water system is used to supplement the reclaimed water supply. 	AG 
 (2) Premises where there are wastewater pumping and/or treatment plants and there is not interconnection with the potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. A RP may be pro-vided in lieu of an AG if approved by both the health agency and the City. 	AG 
 (3) Premises where reclaimed water is used and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. A RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by both the health agency and the City. 	AG 
 (4) Premises where hazardous substances are handled in any manner in which the substances may enter a potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. A RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by both the health agency and the City. 	AG 
 (5) Premises where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers, herbicides or pesticides are, or can be, injected or assimilated. 	RP 
Auxiliary Water Supplies 	See below 
 (1) Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply which is interconnected with the public water system. A RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by both the health agency and the City. 	AG 
 (2) Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply and there are no interconnections with the public water system. A DC may be provided in lieu of a RP if approved by both the health agency and City. 	RP 
Fire Protection Systems 	See below 
 (1) Premises where fire system is directly supplied from the public water system and there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply on or to the premises (not interconnected). 	RP 
 (2) Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water supply. A RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by both the health agency and City. 	AG 
 (3) Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take suction from the private reservoirs or tanks are used. 	RP 
 (4) Dockside watering points and marine facilities. 	RP 
 (5) Premises where there are marine facilities. 	RP 
 (6) Premises where entry is so restricted that the City determines that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross-connections do not exist. 	RP 
 (7) Premises where cross-connections have been established or reestablished two or more times or any other water service that the health agency or the City determines that a cross-connection hazard may exist. 	RP 
 
(d)  Backflow prevention devices. 
(1)  Approved backflow prevention devices. 
(i)  Only backflow prevention devices which have been approved by the City shall be acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the City's potable water system. 
(ii)  The City will provide, upon request, to any affected customer a list of approved backflow prevention devices. 
(2)  Backflow prevention device installation. 
(i)  Backflow prevention devices shall be installed in a manner prescribed in Section 7603, Title 17/22, of the California Administrative Code of Regulations. Location of the devices shall be as close as practical to the user's connection to the public water supply. The City shall have the final discretionary authority in determining the required location of a backflow prevention device. 
A.  Air-gap separation (AG). The air-gap separation shall be located on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above grade and be entirely visible. No water use shall be provided from any point between the service connection and the air-gap separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate a distance of at least two pipe diameters of the supply inlet, but in no case less than one in. above the overflow rim of the receiving tank. 
B.  Reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device (RP). The approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device shall be installed on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. The device shall be installed a minimum of 12 in. above grade and not more than 36 in. above grade measured from the bottom of the device and with a minimum of 12 in. side clearance. The device shall be installed so that it is readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water supplied from any point between the service connection and the RP device shall be protected in a manner approved by the City. 
C.  Double check-valve assembly (DC). The approved double check-valve assembly shall be located as close as practical to the user's service connection and shall be installed above grade, if possible, and in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing and maintenance. If a double check-valve assembly is put below grade it must be installed in a vault such that there is a minimum of six in. between the bottom of the vault and the bottom of the device, so that the top of the device is no more than eight in. below grade, so there is a minimum of six in. of clearance between the side of the device with the test cocks and the side of the vault, and so there is a minimum of three in. clearance between the other side of the device and the side of the vault. Double check-valve assemblies of the "Y" type must be installed on their "side" with the test cocks in a vertical position so that the check-valve may be removed for service without removing the device. Vaults which do not have an integrated bottom must be placed on a three-inch layer of gravel. 
(3)  Backflow prevention device testing and maintenance. 
(i)  California Department of Public Health requires that the City administer a cross-connection program to ensure that annual testing is completed. The owners of any premises on which, or on account of which, backflow prevention devices are installed, shall have the devices tested by a person certified by the American Water Works Association and approved by the City. Backflow prevention devices must be tested at least annually and immediately after installation, relocation or repair. The City may require a more frequent test schedule if it is determined to be necessary. No device shall be placed back in service unless it is functioning as required. A report in a form acceptable to the City shall be filed with the City each time a device is tested, relocated or repaired. These devices shall be serviced, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of testing, repair and maintenance shall be borne by the water user. 
(ii)  The City will supply affected water users with a list of persons acceptable to the City to test backflow prevention devices. The City will notify affected customers by mail when annual testing of a device is needed and also supply users with the necessary forms which must be filled out each time a device is tested or repaired. 
(4)  Backflow prevention device removal. 
(i)  Approval must be obtained from the City before a backflow prevention device is removed, relocated or replaced. 
A.  Removal. The use of a device may be discontinued and the device removed from service upon determination by the City that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the future. All well(s) must be abandoned by permit through Sutter County Environmental Health. 
B.  Relocation. A device may be relocated following confirmation by the City of Yuba City that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. The City shall require a retest following the relocation of the device to verify the required level of protection. 
C.  Repair. A device may be removed for repair, provided the water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the device is returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the City. The City shall require a retest following the repair of the device to verify the required level of protection. 
D.  Replacement. A device may be removed and replaced provided the water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed. All replacement devices must be approved by the City and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved or updated to current standards. 
(e)  User supervisor. At each premise where it is necessary, in the opinion of the City, a user supervisor shall be designated by and at the expense of the water user. This user supervisor shall be responsible for the monitoring of the backflow prevention devices and for avoidance of cross-connections. In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the City shall be promptly notified by the user supervisor so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination. The water user shall inform the City of the user supervisor's identity annually, and whenever a change occurs. Any cost incurred by the City due to contamination by the failure/tampering or removal of the backflow device caused by user negligence shall be the responsibility of the water user or the property owner. 
(f)  Administrative procedures. 
(1)  Water system survey. 
(i)  The City shall review all requests for new services to determine if backflow protection is needed. Plans and specifications must be submitted to the City upon request for review of possible cross-connection hazards as a condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a backflow prevention device is necessary to protect the public water system, the required device must be installed before service will be granted. 
(ii)  The City may require an on-premises inspection to evaluate cross-connection hazards. The City will transmit a written 48-hour notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any customer which cannot or will not allow on-premises inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the City considers necessary. 
A.  Right of entry for inspections. Upon presentation of official identification, any authorized employee of the City on official business shall be allowed access at reasonable hours to any premises supplied by City water supply. 
B.  Any person who, as owner or occupant of any premises, refuses admittance to or hinders or prevents inspection by an authorized employee of the City may have all water service to the premises terminated. Water will not be restored until an inspection is performed and any corrective action has been addressed. A reconnection fee will be charged in accordance with the fees established in Section 6-6.18 of this chapter. 
C.  The City may, at its discretion, require a re-inspection for cross-connection hazards of any premises to which it serves water. The City will transmit a written 48-hour notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any customer which cannot or will not allow on-premises inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the City considers necessary. 
(2)  Customer notification—Device installation. 
(i)  The City will notify any affected water user of the survey findings, listing corrective action to be taken if required. A period of 30 days will be given to complete all corrective action required including installation of backflow prevention devices. 
(ii)  A second notice will be sent to each water user which does not take the required corrective action prescribed in the first notice within the 30-day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a 15-day period to take the required corrective action. If no action is taken within the two-week period the City may terminate water service to the affected water user until the required corrective actions are taken. A reconnection fee will be charged per the City's fee schedule. 
(3)  Customer notification—Testing and maintenance. 
(i)  The City will notify each affected water user 15 days prior to the time for the backflow prevention device installed on their service connection to be tested. This written notice shall give the water user 60 days to have the device tested and supply the City with a completed test report. All test reports are due annually on the first day of the month in which the device was installed, repaired or replaced. 
(ii)  A second notice shall be sent 30 days after the first notice to each City water user which does not have his/her backflow prevention device tested as prescribed in the first notice within the 60-day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a 30-day period within the original 60-day period to have his/her backflow prevention device tested. 
(iii)  A third and notice shall be sent to have his/her backflow prevention device tested. If no action is taken within the remaining 14 day period a 48-hour notice will be hand delivered prior to the shut off time and date stated in the third notice. The City may terminate water service to the affected water user at that time to the premises until the subject device is tested. A reconnection fee will be charged in accordance with the City's fee schedule before the water service will be restored. 
(g)  Tester requirements. 
(1)  [ Business license required. ] All testers must possess a current business license issued by the City. 
(2)  Application for testers. All parties that wish to test backflow prevention devices within the City surface or groundwater systems shall complete an application for approval to the City cross-connection control program and pay all applicable fees as set forth in Section 6-6.18 of this chapter. All fees for applications are non- refundable regardless of approval. If approved, this will permit testing for a period of three years from the approval date. Before the expiration of the initial three year period, a notification letter of upcoming expiration will be sent. For renewal, a new application and all applicable fees must be paid. Notification by phone or mail will occur regardless of approval. All test equipment must be calibrated within the last 12 months and calibration reports must be submitted with each application. The responsibility for maintaining current approval status is solely the applicant's responsibility. Tester fees and backflow tag fees shall be waived for City employees for the testing of municipal devices only. 
(3)  Backflow tags. Every individual backflow device must have a backflow test tag. Serial numbers from tags must be printed on all test report forms submitted. A new tag must be placed on each device at the number one test cock each time the device is tested /repaired or relocated. All backflow tags must be purchased at the City Finance Department, 1201 Civic Center Boulevard, Yuba City, California, 95993 in accordance with the fees established in Section 6-6.18 of this chapter. Tags are valid from January 1 through December 31 of each year. Tags will expire on December 31 of every calendar year and each year's tags will be of differing color. Tag fees are nonrefundable and unused tags may not be returned for a refund. 
(4)  Application forms. All application forms can be picked up and returned with fees paid at the time of application to the City of Yuba City Finance Department, 1201 Civic Center Boulevard, Yuba City, California, 95993 (Attention Cross-Connection Control Program). 
(5)  Test forms. All test forms must be approved by The City of Yuba City Cross-Connection Program. 
(h)  Water service termination. 
(1)  General. When the City encounters water uses that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be immediately abated, the City shall institute the procedure for discontinuing the City water service. 
(2)  Basis for termination. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service termination shall include, but are not limited to, the following items: 
(i)  Refusal to install a required backflow prevention device; 
(ii)  Refusal to test a backflow prevention device; 
(iii)  Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention device; 
(iv)  Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention device; 
(v)  Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line; 
(vi)  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants; 
(vii)  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system; 
(viii)  A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system. 
(3)  Water service termination procedures. 
(i)  For conditions (i), (ii), (iii) or (iv) of subsection (h)(2) of this section, the City will terminate service to a customer's premises after two written notices have been sent specifying the corrective action needed and the time period in which it must be done. If no action is taken within the allowed time period, water service may be terminated. 
(ii)  For conditions (v), (vi), (vii) or (viii) of subsection (h)(2) of this section, the City will take the following steps: 
A.  Make reasonable effort to advise the water user of intent to terminate water service; 
B.  Immediately terminate water supply and lock service valve. The water service will remain inactive until correction of violations has been approved by the City. A reconnection fee will be charged in accordance with the City's shutoff policy. 
(i)  Fire hydrant use. 
(1)  [ Hydrant meter required. ] It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to draw, cause to be drawn, or allow to be drawn, for any purpose whatsoever, any water from any fire backflow device or fire hydrant within the City's public water supply (surface or groundwater) without a hydrant meter issued from the Finance Department with exception to any authorized fire personnel. All unauthorized water use will be considered theft of a public utility and subject to the fees/fines established in Section 6.20 of this chapter. All conditions of subsection B of this section shall apply and the City may require additional backflow prevention devices in companion with the hydrant meter. The additional backflow device will be at the user's expense. 
(2)  Air gap inspection and stickers. All water trucks, tanks, and other equipment drawing water from within the City's public water supply (surface or groundwater) shall be inspected annually and approved by the Public Works Department for proper air gap prior to drawing water. Upon approval by the Public Works Department a color coded verification sticker that contains a specific serial number shall be applied to the vehicle's windshield or rear bumper. The sticker will be valid for one year from the date of issuance. All inspections are to be paid for in advance at the City of Yuba City Finance Department, 1201 Civic Center Boulevard, Yuba City, California, 95993 in accordance with the fees established in Section 6.18 of this chapter. All unauthorized water use will be considered theft of a public utility and subject to the fees/fines established in Section 6.20 of this chapter. 
(3)  Pools and tanks. When an abnormally large quantity of water is desired for filling a swimming pool or for other purposes, arrangements shall be made with the City prior to taking such water. 
(§ 2, Ord. 012-09, eff. December 17, 2009; § 2, Ord. 003-11, eff. August 18, 2011)  
CHAPTER 7. - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES 
 
Sec. 6-7.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Commission" shall mean the Public Utilities Commission of the State. 
(b)  "Underground utility district" or "district" shall mean that area in the City within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 6-7.03 of this chapter. 
(c)  "Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures" shall mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located aboveground within a District and used or useful in supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. 
(d)  "Utility" shall include all persons or entities supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(§ 1, Ord. 557, eff. October 3, 1968)  
Sec. 6-7.02. - Public hearings by Council. 
The Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive. 
(§ 1, Ord. 557, eff. October 3, 1968)  
Sec. 6-7.03. - Council may designate underground utility districts by resolution. 
If, after any such public hearing, the Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an Underground Utility District and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(§ 1, Ord. 557, eff. October 3, 1968)  
Sec. 6-7.04. - Unlawful acts. 
Whenever the Council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 6-7.03 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ, or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures in the District after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed, except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 6-7.09 of this chapter, and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities after such work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 557, eff. October 3, 1968)  
Sec. 6-7.05. - Exceptions—Emergencies or unusual circumstances. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the Director of Public Works in order to provide emergency service. The Director of Public Works may grant special permission, on such terms as he or she may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use, or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures. 
(§ 1, Ord. 557, eff. October 3, 1968)  
Sec. 6-7.06. - Other exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 6-7.03 of this chapter shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities: 
(a)  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer; 
(b)  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
(c)  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a District within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, where such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
(d)  Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts; 
(e)  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
(f)  Antennae, associated equipment, and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
(g)  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; and 
(h)  Temporary poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(§ 1, Ord. 557, eff. October 3, 1968)  
Sec. 6-7.07. - Notices to property owners and utility companies. 
Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 6-7.03 of this chapter, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by such resolution of the adoption thereof. The City Clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. 
Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 6-7.03 of this chapter, together with a copy of the provision of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(§ 1, Ord. 557, eff. October 3, 1968)  
Sec. 6-7.08. - Responsibility of utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 6-7.03 of this chapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs on file with the Commission. 
(§ 1, Ord. 557, eff. October 3, 1968)  
Sec. 6-7.09. - Responsibility of property owners. 
(a)  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 6-7.08 of this chapter and the termination facility on or within such building or structure being served, subject to the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 6-7.03 of this chapter, the Director of Public Works shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice. 
(b)  The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either the person in possession of such premises or the owner thereof, the notice shall be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice shall be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and shall be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears, on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Yuba City. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the Director of Public Works shall, within 48 hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight in. by ten in. in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on such premises. 
(c)  The notice given by the Director of Public Works to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done and shall state that if such work is not completed within 30 days after receipt of such notice, the Director of Public Works will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property. 
(d)  If, upon the expiration of the 30-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the Director of Public Works shall proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the Director of Public Works, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures supplying utility service to such property. Upon completion of the work by the Director of Public Works, he or she shall file a written report with the Council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter. 
(e)  The Director of Public Works, when the time for hearing such protests has been fixed, shall give a notice thereof in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in this section for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
(f)  Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify, or reject the assessment. 
(g)  If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the Director of Public Works, and the Director of Public Works is directed to turn over to the County Auditor a notice of lien on each of such properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the County Auditor shall add the amount of such assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which such assessment was not paid. Such assessment shall be due and payable at the same time a such property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate provided by law for the settlement of real property taxes. 
(§ 1, Ord. 557, eff. October 3, 1968)  
Sec. 6-7.10. - Responsibility of City. 
The City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 6-7.03 of this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 557, eff. October 3, 1968)  
Sec. 6-7.11. - Extension of time. 
In the event any act required by the provisions of this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 6-7.03 of this chapter cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act shall be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(§ 1, Ord. 557, eff. October 3, 1968)  
CHAPTER 9. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION  
Article 1. - Authorization; Findings; Purpose and Objectives 
 
Sec. 6-9.101. - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the State of California has delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.102. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Yuba City are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.103. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
(a)  To protect human life and health; 
(b)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(c)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(d)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(e)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(f)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blight areas; 
(g)  To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
(h)  To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.104. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
(a)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(b)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(c)  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
(d)  Controlling, filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(e)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Article 2. - Definitions 
 
Sec. 6-9.201. - Interpretation. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.202. - Accessory use. 
"Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.203. - Appeal. 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.204. - Area of shallow flooding. 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AC or AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three ft.; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.205. - Area of special flood hazard. 
"Area of special flood hazard." See "Special flood hazard area." 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.206. - Base flood. 
"Base flood" means a flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.207. - Basement. 
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.208. - Breakaway walls. 
"Breakaway walls" are any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and where constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by flood waters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than ten and no more than 20 pounds per square ft. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions: 
(a)  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
(b)  The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.209. - Building. 
"Building." See "Structure." 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.210. - Council. 
"Council" means the City Council of the City of Yuba City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.211. - Development. 
"Development" means any manmade change to improve or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.212. - Encroachment. 
"Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.213. - Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. 
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the Council. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.214. - Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. 
"Expansion to an existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.215. - Flood, flooding, or flood water. 
"Flood, flooding, or flood water" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters; and the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.216. - Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM). 
"Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.217. - Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). 
"Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.218. - Flood hazard zone. 
"Flood hazard zone" means an area subject to flooding that is delineated as either a special hazard area or an area of moderate hazard on an official flood insurance rate map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The identification of flood hazard zones does not imply that areas outside the flood hazard zones, or uses permitted within flood hazard zones, will be free from flooding or flood damage. 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.219. - Flood Insurance Rate Map (FLRM). 
"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" shall mean the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the City of Yuba City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.220. - Flood Insurance Study. 
"Flood Insurance Study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.221. - Floodplain or flood-prone area. 
"Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "Flooding." 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.222. - Floodplain Administrator. 
"Floodplain Administrator" means the individual appointed by the Council to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.223. - Floodplain management. 
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplains, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.224. - Floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control), and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, State or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.225. - Floodproofing. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to nonresidential structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.226. - Floodway. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one ft. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.227. - Floodway encroachment lines. 
"Floodway encroachment lines" means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, State, and local floodplain maps. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.228. - Floodway fringe. 
"Floodway fringe" is that area of the floodplain on either side of the "regulatory floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.229. - Fraud and victimization. 
"Fraud and victimization," as related to Article 6, Variance Procedures, of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City of Yuba City will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.230. - Hardship. 
"Hardship," as related to Article 6, Variance Procedures, of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The Council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.231. - Highest adjacent grade. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.232. - Historic structure. 
"Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.233. - Levee. 
"Levee" means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.234. - Levee system. 
"Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.235. - Lowest floor. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area (see "Basement") is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter. (Note: This definition allows attached garages to be built at grade provided it conforms with the requirements of FEMA technical bulletin 7-93 entitled "Wet Floodproofing Requirements." Below grade garages are not allowed as they are considered to be basements.) 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.236. - Manufactured home. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.237. - Manufactured home park or subdivision. 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.238. - Mean sea level. 
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.239. - Moderate hazard area. 
"Moderate hazard area" means an area in the floodplain subject to a half-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or Federal Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as zone B or X (shaded). 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.240. - New construction. 
"New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the Council and which includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.241. - New manufactured home park or subdivision. 
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the Council. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.242. - Non-urban or not urbanizing area. 
A non-urban or not urbanizing area is a developed area or an area outside a developed area in which there are fewer than 10,000 residents. Yuba City is an urban area and does not constitute any non-urban or [not] urbanizing area. 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.243. - Obstruction. 
"Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across, or projecting into any watercourse which may: (a) alter, impede, retard, or change direction and/or velocity of the flow of water; (b) snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water due to its location; or (c) be carried downstream. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.244. - One hundred-year flood. 
"One hundred-year flood" or "100-year flood." See "Base flood." 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.245. - Public safety and nuisance. 
"Public safety and nuisance" as related to Article 6, Variance Procedures, of this chapter means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstruct the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.246. - Recreational vehicle. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  400 square ft. or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.247. - Regulatory floodway. 
"Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one ft. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.248. - Riverine. 
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.249. - Sheet flow area. 
"Sheet flow area." See "Area of shallow flooding." 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.250. - Special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
"Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on a FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.251. - Start of construction. 
"Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date that a permit is issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.252. - Structure. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.253. - Substantial damage. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.254. - Substantial improvement. 
"Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(a)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(b)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9-255. - Urban area. 
An urban area is a developed area in which there are 10,000 residents or more. All lands within the City limits of Yuba City are considered an urban area. 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9-256. - Urban level of flood protection. 
"Urban level of flood protection" means the level of protection that is necessary to withstand flooding that has a one in 200 chance of occurring in any given year using criteria consistent with, or developed by, the California Department of Water Resources. "Urban level of flood protection" shall not mean shallow flooding or flooding from local drainage that meets the criteria of the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection. 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9-257. - Urbanizing area. 
An urbanizing area is a developed area or an area outside a developed area that is planned or anticipated to have 10,000 residents or more within the next ten years. Yuba City is an urban area and does not consist of any non-urban or urbanizing areas. 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.258. - Variance. 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.259. - Violation. 
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.260. - Water surface elevation. 
"Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.261. - Watercourse. 
"Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel, or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 1), 9-20-2016)  
Article 3. - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 6-9.301. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all area of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Yuba City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.302. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration, through the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Yuba City" and the Flood Insurance Rate Map dated March 23, 1984, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at the Public Works Department, 1201 Civic Center Boulevard, Yuba City, California 95993. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.303. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.304. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and any other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.305. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(a)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(b)  Liberally construed in favor of the government body; and 
(c)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.306. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Yuba City, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result reliant on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.307. - Severability clause. 
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Article 4. - Administration 
 
Sec. 6-9.401. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 6-9.302. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Public Works Director and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(a)  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all structures; in zone AO elevation of existing grade and proposed elevation of lowest habitable floor of all structures; 
(b)  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed; 
(c)  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in Section 6-9.501(c)(3); 
(d)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.402. - Designation of the Administrator. 
The Public Works Director or his/her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.403. - Duties and responsibilities of the Public Works Director. 
The duties and responsibilities of the Public Works Director shall include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  Permit review. 
(1)  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  All other required State and Federal permits have been obtained. 
(3)  The site is reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of the floodway. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" shall mean that the cumulative effects of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one ft. at any point. 
(b)  Review and use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 6-9.302, the Public Works Director shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer Article 5. Any such information shall be submitted to the City Council for adoption. 
(c)  Notification of other agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
(1)  Notify adjacent communities, the California Department of Water Resources, and flood control districts (including, but not limited to, reclamation districts, levee districts and drainage districts) prior to alteration or relocation; 
(2)  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration and Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
(3)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
(d)  Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed: 
(1)  The certifications required in Section 6-9.501(c). 
(2)  The certified elevation required in Section 6-9.503. 
(3)  The certification required in Section 6-9.506. 
(e)  Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations. 
(1)  Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). 
(2)  All LOMRs for flood control projects must be approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits shall not be issued based on Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
(f)  Map determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards, areas of flood-related erosion hazards or areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article 6. 
(g)  Remedial action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 6-9.303 herein. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Article 5. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 
 
Sec. 6-9.501. - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required: 
(a)  Anchoring. 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 6-9.504. 
(b)  Construction materials and methods. 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall use methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(3)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(4)  All new construction within Zone AO or AH shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(c)  Elevation and floodproofing. 
(1)  Residential new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
(i)  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height exceeding the depth number specified in ft. on the FIRM, by at least one ft., or elevated at least three ft. above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified; 
(ii)  In an A zone where no base flood elevations have been determined, elevated at least one ft. above the base flood elevation, as determined by the floodplain administrator through acceptable methods as listed in FEMA book "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas; A Guide for Developing Base (100 year) Flood Elevations"; and 
(iii)  In all other zones, elevated at least one ft. above the base flood elevation. 
At first form inspection, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(2)  Nonresidential new construction or substantial improvements shall either be elevated to conform with Section 6-9.501(c)(1) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
(i)  Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under Section 6-9.501(c)(1) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
(ii)  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
(iii)  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this Section 6-9.501(c)(2) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(3)  All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or 
(ii)  Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square in. for every square ft. of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one ft. above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
(4)  Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in Section 6-9.504. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.502. - Standards for utilities. 
(a)  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from systems into flood waters. 
(b)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.503. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
(b)  All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s), pads, and adjacent grade. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Public Works Director. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.504. - Standards for manufactured homes. 
(a)  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on Sutter County's Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located: 
(1)  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(2)  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(3)  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
(4)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least one ft. above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement. 
(b)  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH, and AE, on Sutter County's Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 6-9.504(a) will be elevated so that either the: 
(1)  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one ft. above the base flood elevation; or 
(2)  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 in. in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.505. - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on Sutter County's Flood Insurance Rate Map will either: 
(a)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
(b)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has not permanently attached additions; or 
(c)  Meet the permit requirements of Article 4 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 6-9.504(a). 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Sec. 6-9.506. - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 6-9.302 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
(a)  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other developments unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(b)  If the above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage as set forth in Section 6-9.403(a)(1). Certification of compliance shall be required of the developer. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007)  
Article 6. - Floodplain Management Findings 
 
Sec. 6-9.601. - Development agreements. 
The City Council shall not approve the execution of a development agreement for property that is located within a flood hazard zone unless the City Council finds, based on substantial evidence in the record, one of the following: 
(a)  The facilities of the State plan of flood control or other flood management facilities protect the property to the urban level of flood protection in urban and urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas; 
(b)  The city has imposed conditions on the development agreement that will protect the property to the urban level of flood protection in urban and urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas; 
(c)  The local flood management agency has made adequate progress (as defined in Government Code § 65007) on the construction of a flood protection system that will result in flood protection equal to or greater than the urban level of flood protection by 2025 in urban or urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas for property located within a flood hazard zone, intended to be protected by the system; 
(d)  The property in an undetermined risk area has met the urban level of flood protection; 
(e)  The property is located in an area of potential flooding of three feet or less from sources other than local drainage or potential flooding from local drainage that meets the criteria of the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection; or 
(f)  The property is located within a watershed with a contributing area of ten or fewer square miles, as determined by the City. 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 2), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.602. - Permits and entitlements. 
The decision-maker, as designated in Title 8, shall not approve a discretionary permit or other discretionary entitlement that would result in the construction of a new building or construction that would result in an increase in allowed occupancy for an existing building, or a ministerial permit that would result in the construction of a new residence, for a project that is located within a flood hazard zone unless the decision-maker finds, based on substantial evidence in the record, one of the following: 
(a)  The facilities of the State plan of flood control or other flood management facilities protect the property to the urban level of flood protection in urban and urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas; 
(b)  The City has imposed conditions on the permit or discretionary entitlement that will protect the project to the urban level of flood protection in urban and urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas; 
(c)  The local flood management agency has made adequate progress (as defined in California Government Code § 65007) on the construction of a flood protection by 2025 system that will result in flood protection equal to or greater than the urban level of flood protection in urban or urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas for property located within a flood hazard zone, intended to be protected by the system; 
(d)  The property in an undetermined risk area has met the urban level of flood protection based on substantial evidence in the record; 
(e)  The property is located in an area of potential flooding of three feet or less from sources other than local drainage or potential flooding from local drainage that meets the criteria of the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection; or 
(f)  The property is located within a watershed with a contributing area of ten or fewer square miles, as determined by the City. 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 2), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.603. - Maps. 
The decision-maker, as designated in the Title 8, shall not approve a tentative map, or a parcel map for which a tentative map is not required, for a subdivision that is located within a flood hazard zone unless the decision-maker finds, based on substantial evidence in the record, one of the following: 
(a)  The facilities of the State plan of flood control or other flood management facilities protect the subdivision to the urban level of flood protection in urban and urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas; 
(b)  The City has imposed conditions on the subdivision that will protect the project to the urban level of flood protection in urban and urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas; 
(c)  The local flood management agency has made adequate progress (as defined in California Government Code § 65007) on the construction of a flood protection system which will result in flood protection equal to or greater than the urban level of flood protection by 2025 in urban or urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas for property located within a flood hazard zone, intended to be protected by the system; 
(d)  The property in an undetermined risk area has met the urban level of flood protection based on substantial evidence in the record; 
(e)  The property is located in an area of potential flooding of three feet or less from sources other than local drainage or potential flooding from local drainage that meets the criteria of the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection; or 
(f)  The property is located within a watershed with a contributing area of ten or fewer square miles, as determined by the City. 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 2), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.604. - Construction or development in a flood hazard zone. 
The decision-maker specified in Title 8 must make one of the findings in Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6 prior to approving any of the following for construction or development within a flood hazard zone: 
(1)  A development agreement; 
(2)  A discretionary permit or other discretionary entitlement that would result in the construction of a new building or construction that would result in an increase in allowed occupancy for an existing building; 
(3)  A ministerial permit that would result in the construction of a new residence; or 
(4)  A tentative map, or a parcel map for which a tentative map is not required, for a subdivision. 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 2), 9-20-2016)  
Article 7. - Variance Procedures[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 3), adopted Sept. 20, 2016, renumbered and amended former Art. 6, Variance Procedures, §§ 6-9.601—6-9.603, as Art. 7, §§ 6-9.701—6-9.703 as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 6-9.701. - Nature of variances. 
The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance. 
The variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 3), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.702. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Articles 4 and 5 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(b)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Article 2 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation of an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(c)  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(d)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary," considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the City Council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation with the City Council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
(e)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
(1)  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and 
(2)  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the Sutter County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 3), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 6-9.703. - Appeal Board. 
(a)  The City Council shall review and decide requests for variances and, in reviewing such variance applications, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the: 
(1)  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
(4)  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(7)  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and 
(11)  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
(b)  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
(1)  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
(3)  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see "public safety and nuisance" as defined in Section 6-9.242, cause fraud and victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(c)  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Section 6-9.703(a) through (d) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
(d)  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 6-9.702(a) and the purposes of this chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 002-07, eff. March 28, 2007) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 3), 9-20-2016)  
CHAPTER 10. - RECYCLING AT SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
Sec. 6-10.01. - Recycling program required. 
Any applicant seeking permission for the temporary or periodic use or occupancy of a publicly owned street, park, site, or other such public facility within the City of Yuba City for a civic, commercial, recreational, or social event which will have an attendance of 500 persons or more shall, at least ten business days before the event, provide a recycling program to the Parks and Recreation Director for the source separated collection of recyclable and nonrecyclable materials. 
(§ 1, Ord. 005-05, eff. July 21, 2005)  
Sec. 6-10.02. - Recycling program contents. 
Said recycling program shall include the provision of sufficient collection containers and staffing resources to transfer all collected materials to the appropriate recycling and solid waste collection bin(s) during and immediately following the event. At a minimum, the recycling program shall include the source separated collection and recycling of California Redemption Value beverage containers sold or otherwise distributed at the event and the collection and recycling of corrugated cardboard discarded by event vendors and other participants. The applicant shall also provide for adequate solid waste collection containers for the collection of solid waste from full containers to the solid waste collection bin(s) during and immediately following the event. 
(§ 1, Ord. 005-05, eff. July 21, 2005)  
Sec. 6-10.03. - Exemptions. 
The Parks and Recreation Director may exempt certain events from the recycling program requirements of this chapter if it is demonstrated that significant amounts of recyclable materials will not be generated at a particular event. 
(§ 1, Ord. 005-05, eff. July 21, 2005)  
Sec. 6-10.04. - Deposit. 
The applicant shall ensure the implementation of the recycling program and adequate solid waste collection by the deposit of $50, which shall be refunded upon presentation within ten business days after the event of a weight or cubic yardage receipt for the recyclables from the receiving waste hauler, service charity, recycling center, or other such entity verifying that the materials will not be disposed in a landfill. 
(§ 1, Ord. 005-05, eff. July 21, 2005)  
TITLE 7. - BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 001-17 , § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, repealed the former Title 7, Chs. 1—15, §§ 7-1.01—7-15.06, and § 2(Exh. A) of said ordinance enacted a new Title 7 as set out herein. Ch. 16, Grading, has been saved from repeal per the city's direction. The former Title 7 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from § 2, Ord. 005-13, eff. Jan. 1, 2014; Ord. No. 002-16, § 1, adopted Feb. 16, 2016; Ord. No. 005-15, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 2016. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 7-1.01. - Adoption of the California Building Code. 
Adoption of the California Building Code, 2016 edition, based on the 2015 International Building Code, including, among the appendices, Appendix Chapter H (Signs), Appendix Chapter I (Patio Covers), and Appendix Chapters J (Grading), as published by the International Code Council (ICC) as adopted and amended by the California Building Standards Commission in the California Building Standards Code, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations and as amended by the City of Yuba City. One copy is and shall, at all times, be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-1.02. - Amendment of Section 101.4.5 of Division II Scope and Administration. 
Section 101.4.5 of Division II Scope and Administration, of the California Building Code, 2016 edition, is hereby amended to read: 
Fire Prevention. The provisions of the California Fire Code and Chapter 5 of title 4 of the Yuba City Municipal Code shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems or fire hazards in structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-1.03. - Amendment of Section 103.3 of Division II Scope and Administration. 
Section 103.3 of Division II Scope and Administration, of the California Building Code, 2016 edition, is hereby amended to read: 
Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plans examiners and other employees which may include the City Fire Chief and County Health Officer. Such employees shall have the powers as delegated by the building official. For the maintenance of existing properties, see the California Building Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-1.04. - Amendment of Section 105.2 of Division II Scope and Administration. 
Section 105.2 of Division II Scope and Administration, of the California Building Code, 2016 edition, is hereby amended to read: 
Work exempt from permit. In addition to the requirement to obtain permits for the types of construction listed in Section 105.2 of the California Building Code, permits are required for parking lot construction and any resurfacing or re-striping of a parking lot. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-1.05. - Amendment of Section 105.5 of Division II Scope and Administration. 
Section 105.5 of Division II Scope and Administration, of the California Building Code, 2016 edition, is hereby amended to read: 
Expiration. Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the issue date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee thereof shall be one-half (½) the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one (1) year. 
Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which he may commence work under that permit, when he or she is unable to commence work within the time required by this section and for good and satisfactory reasons. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than twice. In order to renew action of the permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee and the work shall comply with all the provisions for a completely new building. 
When a permit expires by limitations and has become null and void, and the Building Inspection Division has not been notified in writing by the permittee that no work was done under the permit, the Building Official may file a "Notice of Non-compliance" with the Sutter County Recorder's Office for failure of obtaining the required inspections. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-1.06. - Amendment of Section 109.2 of Division II Scope and Administration. 
Section 109.2 of Division II Scope and Administration, of the California Building Code, 2016 edition, is hereby amended to read: 
Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with Chapter 8 of Title 3 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-1.07. - Amendment of Section 113 of Division II Scope and Administration. 
Section 113 of Division II Scope and Administration, of the California Building Code, 2016 edition, is hereby amended to read: 
Board of Appeals. Whenever the term "Board of Appeals" is used in this code, such reference shall mean the "Building Board of Appeals" created by Chapter 12 of Title 7 of the Yuba City Municipal Code or the "Accessibility Board of Appeals" created by Chapter 13 of Title 7 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-1.08. - Violations. 
Violations to this chapter will be penalized under the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 2. - CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 7-2.01. - Adoption of the California Electrical Code. 
Adoption of the California Electrical Code, 2016 edition, based on the 2014 National Electrical Code, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations and as amended by the City of Yuba City. One copy is and shall, at all times, be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-2.02. - Administrative requirements. 
The administrative provisions of the California Electrical Code shall be as provided for in the California Building Code Division II Scope and Administration as adopted pursuant to Section 7-1.01 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-2.03. - Violations. 
Violations to this chapter will be penalized under the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 3. - CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 7-3.01. - Adoption of the California Mechanical Code. 
Adoption of the California Mechanical Code, 2016 edition, based on the 2015 Uniform Mechanical Code, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations and as amended by the City of Yuba City. One copy is and shall, at all times, be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-3.02. - Administrative requirements. 
The administrative provisions of the California Mechanical Code shall be as provided for in the California Building Code Division II Scope and Administration as adopted pursuant to Section 7-1.01 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-3.03. - Violations. 
Violations to this chapter will be penalized under the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 4. - CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 
 
Sec. 7-4.01. - Adoption of the California Plumbing Code. 
Adoption of the California Plumbing Code, 2016 edition, based on the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations and as amended by the City of Yuba City. One copy is and shall, at all times, be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-4.02. - Administrative requirements. 
The administrative provisions of the California Plumbing Code shall be as provided for in the California Building Code Division II Scope and Administration as adopted pursuant to Section 7-1.01 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-4.03. - Violations. 
Violations to this chapter will be penalized under the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 5. - CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE 
 
Sec. 7-5.01. - Adoption of the California Energy Code. 
Adoption of the California Energy Code, 2016 edition, as published by the International Code Council (ICC) as adopted and amended by the California Building Standards Commission in the California Building Standards Code, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. One copy is and shall, at all times, be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-5.02. - Administrative requirements. 
The administrative provisions of the California Energy Code shall be as provided for in the California Building Code Division II Scope and Administration as adopted pursuant to Section 7-1.01 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-5.03. - Violations. 
Violations to this chapter will be penalized under the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 6. - CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 7-6.01. - Adoption of the California Historical Code. 
Adoption of the California Historical Code, 2016 edition, as published by the International Code Council (ICC) as adopted and amended by the California Building Standards Commission in the California Building Standards Code, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. One copy is and shall, at all times, be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-6.02. - Administrative requirements. 
The administrative provisions of the California Historical Code shall be as provided for in the California Building Code Division II Scope and Administration as adopted pursuant to Section 7-1.01 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-6.03. - Violations. 
Violations to this chapter will be penalized under the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 7. - CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 7-7.01. - Adoption of the California Existing Building Code. 
Adoption of the California Existing Building Code, 2016 edition, as published by the International Code Council (ICC) and as adopted and amended by the California Building Standards Commission in the California Building Standards Code, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. One copy is and shall, at all times, be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-7.02. - Administrative requirements. 
The administrative provisions of the California Existing Building Code shall be as provided for in the California Building Code Division II Scope and Administration as adopted pursuant to Section 7-1.01 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-7.03. - Violations. 
Violations to this chapter will be penalized under the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 8. - CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE 
 
Sec. 7-8.01. - Adoption of the California Referenced Standards Code. 
Adoption of the California Referenced Standards Code, 2016 edition, as published by the International Code Council (ICC) as adopted and amended by the California Building Standards Commission in the California Building Standards Code, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. One copy is and shall, at all times, be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-8.02. - Administrative requirements. 
The administrative provisions of the California Referenced Standards Code shall be as provided for in the California Building Code Division II Scope and Administration as adopted pursuant to Section 7-1.01 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-8.03. - Violations. 
Violations to this chapter will be penalized under the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 9. - CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 7-9.01. - Adoption of the California Residential Building Code. 
Adoption of the California Residential Building Code, 2016 edition, based on the 2015 International Residential Code including, Chapter 1, Division II Administration as published by the International Code Council (ICC) as amended by the City of Yuba City. One copy is and shall, at all times, be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-9.02. - Amendment of Section R103.3 of Chapter 1, Division II Administration. 
Section R103.3 of Chapter 1, Division II Administration, of the California Residential Code, 2016 edition, is hereby amended to read: 
Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plans examiners and other employees which may include the City Fire Chief and County Health Officer. Such employees shall have the powers as delegated by the building official. For the maintenance of existing properties, see the California Building Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-9.03. - Amendment of Section R105.5 of Chapter 1, Division II Administration. 
Section 105.5 of Chapter 1, Division II Administration, of the California Residential Code, 2016 edition, is hereby amended to read: 
Expiration. Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the issue date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee thereof shall be one-half (½) the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one (1) year. 
Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which he may commence work under that permit, when he or she is unable to commence work within the time required by this section and for good and satisfactory reasons. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than twice. In order to renew action of the permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee and the work shall comply with all the provisions for a completely new building. 
When a permit expires by limitations and has become null and void, and the Building Inspection Division has not been notified in writing by the permittee that no work was done under the permit, the Building Official may file a "Notice of Non-compliance" with the Sutter County Recorder's Office for failure of obtaining the required inspections. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-9.04. - Amendment of Section R108.2 of Chapter 1, Division II Administration. 
Section R108.2 of Chapter 1, Division II Administration, of the California Residential Code, 2016 edition, is hereby amended to read: 
Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with Chapter 8 of Title 3 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-9.05. - Amendment of Section R112 of Chapter 1, Division II Administration. 
Section R112 of Chapter 1, Division II Administration, of the California Residential Code, 2016 edition, is hereby amended to read: 
Board of Appeals. Whenever the term "Board of Appeals" is used in this code, such reference shall mean the "Building Board of Appeals" created by Chapter 12 of Title 7 of the Yuba City Municipal Code or the "Accessibility Board of Appeals" created by Chapter 13 of Title 7 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-9.06. - Amendment of Section R313.2.1.1 of Chapter 3, Building Planning. 
Section R313.2.1 of Chapter 3, Building Planning, of the California Residential Code, 2016 edition, is hereby amended to read: 
Design and Installation. Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section R313.3 or NFPA 13D. A listed and approved exterior combination horn/strobe device attached to the fire sprinkler system flow switch shall be provided on the front of the dwelling, or on the side within 4 feet of the front. The device shall be mounted between 96 inches and 120 inches from adjacent finished grade. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-9.07. - Add Section R313.3.1.2 of Chapter 3, Building Planning. 
Section R313.3.1.2 of Chapter 3, Building Planning, of the California Residential Code, 2016 edition, is hereby added to read: 
Attic Spaces. An Intermediate Temperature sprinkler head shall be provided at the high-point of each attic space 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-9.08. - Add Section R313.3.1.3 of Chapter 3, Building Planning. 
Section R313.3.1.3 of Chapter 3, Building Planning, of the California Residential Code, 2016 edition, is hereby added to read: 
Attached Garages. Attached garages are to be provided with fire sprinkler protection at the same design density as the dwelling. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-9.09. - Amendment of Section R313.3.5.3 of Chapter 3, Building Planning. 
Section R313.3.5.3 of Chapter 3, Building Planning, of the California Residential Code, 2016 edition, is hereby amended to read: 
Connections to automatic fire sprinkler systems. The potable water supply to automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be protected against backflow by using the "passive purge method." The fire sprinkler contractor shall provide a "T" fitting in the fire sprinkler piping at the most hydraulically remote water closet (toilet). The plumber shall connect the water supply for the water closet to the "T." 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-9.10. - Amendment of Section R313.3.8.2 of Chapter 3, Building Planning. 
Section R313.3.8.2 of Chapter 3, Building Planning, of the California Residential Code, 2016 edition, is hereby amended to read: 
Final inspection. The following items shall be verified upon completion of the system: 
1.  Sprinkler are not painted, damaged or otherwise hindered from operation. 
2.  Where a pump is required to provide water to the system, the pump starts automatically upon system water demand. 
3.  Pressure-reducing valves, water softeners, water, filters or other impairments to water flow that were not part of the original design have not been installed. 
4.  The sign or valve tag required by Section R313.3.7 is installed and the owner's manual for the system is present. 
5.  The exterior combination horn/strobe device shall be tested for proper operation by opening the inspector test valve on the fire sprinkler system. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-9.11. - Findings. 
The City Council finds that the following regulations as contained in this Chapter are necessary to mitigate unique local climatic conditions and impose substantially the same requirements as are contained in the international model industry codes. The unique local conditions as found and determined are as follows: 
Yuba City is located in the northern portion of the Central Valley. The area is bounded to the north by the Siskiyou Mountains, the west by the Coastal Mountains, the east by the Sierra Nevada Mountains, and the south by the Delta region. These geographical factors, and the area's proximity to the Pacific Ocean, combine to determine weather and wind conditions that influence the area and can create a particularly hazardous fire situation. 
Four weather conditions routinely present themselves which can result in extremely dangerous fire situations that could result in widespread conflagration. The four conditions are temperature, relative humidity, wind and fog. 
Temperatures in the Yuba City area during the summer months are in the 90 degree Fahrenheit range with high temperatures of 100 degrees being very common. 
Low relative humidity is a very important weather condition, that can intensity fire behavior. When relative humidities fall below 30%, the potential for fire spread is significantly increased. A recent review of 38-month period revealed that the Yuba City area experienced 403 days when the relative humidity was recorded at or below 30%. 
Wind velocity directly contributes to flame spread and the potential for conflagration. Winds, in combination with relative humidities below 30%, contribute to "drying out" fuels. The Yuba City area is subject to strong north winds which are usually very drying in nature. A review was made of the days with relative humidity at or below 30% and winds of ten miles per hour or more using the same 38-month period as was previously mentioned. Of the 403 days of 30% or below relative humidity, 197 days also had winds that equaled or exceeded ten miles per hour. 
The weather conditions described above have a direct influence on fire behavior. High temperatures, low humidities and wind, singularly and in combination, produce a potentially explosive fire situation. 
In addition to the weather conditions described above, the Yuba City area also experiences very dense fog conditions in the wintertime. The presence of dense fog poses significant response problems to emergency response vehicles. Obviously, if dense fog is present, response speeds must be reduced. This reduction in response speed results in longer response times. The longer it takes the fire department to arrive, the larger the fire grows. Research, using the same 38-month period mentioned above, was done to determine how many days of heavy fog the Yuba City area experienced. Heavy fog was defined as one-fourth of a mile visibility or less. The data revealed that during the 38 months reviewed, heavy fog occurred on 103 days. It is important to note that the fog prone months of November and December were missing for two of the three years reviewed. 
As a result of these findings of fact on local climatic conditions within the Yuba City area, the City Council finds that the residential building code provisions and the automatic sprinkler requirements herein established by this Chapter are considered "reasonable and necessary modifications" as provided for in California Health and Safety Code sections 18941.5(b) and 17958 et seq. Because of these serious concerns as reflected in the foregoing findings of fact, it is important that for the effective protection of the citizenry and property within the City limits of the City of Yuba City from the ravages of fire and the reduction of the potential for community-wide conflagration that this ordinance be enacted. Only with the enactment of these regulations can the reduction of the potential for community-wide conflagration and the protection of the citizenry and property within this jurisdiction be realized. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-9.12. - Violations. 
Violations to this chapter will be penalized under the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 10. - CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS, (CALGREEN) CODE 
 
Sec. 7-10.01. - Adoption of the California Green Building Standards (CALGreen) Code. 
Adoption of the California Green Building Standards, (CALGreen) Code, 2016 edition, as published by the California Building Standards Commission as amended by the City of Yuba City. One copy is and shall, at all times, be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-10.02. - Violations. 
Violations to this chapter will be penalized under the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 11. - UNIFORM SWIMMING POOLS, SPA, AND HOT TUB CODE 
 
Sec. 7-11.01. - Adoption of the Uniform Swimming Pool Spa and Hot Tub Code. 
Adoption of the Uniform Swimming Pool Spa and Hot Tub Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, and as amended by the City of Yuba City. One copy is and shall, at all times, be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-11.02. - Administrative requirements. 
The administrative provisions of the Uniform Swimming Pool Spa and Hot Tube Code shall be as provided for in the California Building Code Appendix Chapter 1 as adopted pursuant to Section 7-1.01 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-11.03. - Swimming pool enclosures and safety devices. 
Every person who owns or is in possession of any lot or premises on which there is situated a swimming pool, hot tub, spa, fish pond, wading pool, or any other outside body of water created by artificial means, designed or used for such purpose including any portable or temporary structure irrespective of the nature of materials used in the construction of and for the design thereof and further irrespective of the length of time of the use of such portable or temporary structure, any portion of which is one foot or more in depth, shall keep and maintain on the lot or premises upon which the swimming pool, hot tub, spa, fish pond, wading pool, or any other artificial body of water is located, and completely surrounding the body of water, lot or premises a enclosure sufficient to make the body of water inaccessible to small children. The enclosure shall be as provided for in Chapter 1 of Title 7, Section 7-1.01, California Building Code Section 3109.4.4.3 of the Yuba City Municipal Code for private swimming pools and Chapter 1 of Title 7, Section 7-1.01, California Building Code Section 3118B.1 of the Yuba City Municipal Code for public swimming pools. The enclosure shall not be constructed in such a manner that would make it easily climbable by small children. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-11.04. - Violations. 
Violations to this chapter will be penalized under the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 12. - BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS 
 
Sec. 7-12.01. - Board created. 
There is hereby created a Building Board of Appeals. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-12.02. - Purpose. 
The Building Board of Appeals is created in order to consider and determine the suitability of alternate materials, type and method of construction and to provide for a reasonable interpretation of the provisions of all construction codes, which shall include but not necessarily be limited to, the California Building Code, the California Electrical Code, the California Mechanical Code, the California Plumbing Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, the Uniform Housing Code, and the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-12.03. - Members. 
The Building Board of Appeals shall contain five members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to all forms of building construction and related materials and equipment. In addition to the five members, the Chief Building Official shall be an ex-officio member and shall act as secretary to the Board but shall have no vote in any decision of the Board. Membership on the Board shall consist of at least one qualified person from each of the building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical industries, and an engineer or architect. Members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be approved by and serve at the pleasure of the City Council upon adoption of the provisions of this chapter for a period of two years following the effective day of appointment. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-12.04. - Chairman. 
Annually, the Building Board of Appeals shall select one of the members to serve as Chairman for a one-year period. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-12.05. - Meetings and quorum. 
Meetings of the Building Board of Appeals shall be called at the discretion of the Chairman or upon the request of at least three members of the Board being made to the secretary. Business of the Board shall only be conducted with a quorum present. A quorum shall consist of at least three members. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-12.06. - Rules and regulations. 
The Building Board of Appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations of conducting its investigations and render all decisions and findings in writing to the Chief Building Official with a duplicate copy to the appellant, and recommend to the Council such legislation as is consistent therewith. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-12.07. - Relief from strict application of construction codes. 
When, because of the strict application of any of the provisions of any construction code, the final plans and specifications for any building or structure proposed to be erected or constructed in the City, or for the enlargement, alteration, repair, improvement, removal, or conversion of any structure in the City, are not approved by the Chief Building Official, or a building or other required permit is refused by him, or the Chief Building Official is requiring changes to previously approved plans and specifications or change to a structure under construction which is in compliance with approved plans and specifications, or refuses to issue a certificate of occupancy, or revokes a certificate of occupancy, the Building Board of Appeals may extend relief as provided in this section. Upon the written portion of the applicant, and after a full investigation and hearing on the matter, and when substantial evidence before the Board establishes that each of the following conditions exist in the particular case: (1) that there is a special circumstance or condition applicable to the land or building existing or proposed, or both, referred to in the application; and (2) that granting the appeal is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights; and (3) that granting the appeal will not be detrimental to the safeguard of life or limb, health, property and public welfare; and (4) the proposal substantially complies with the intent of the Code, the Board may relieve the applicant from the strict application of any provisions of any construction code and prescribe such conditions and requirements for the applicant and require from the applicant such guarantee or guarantees for the faithful observance thereof as will, in the opinion of the Board, secure substantially the objective of the Code with due regard for the safeguarding of life, or limb, health, property and public welfare. Each such decision to so relieve the applicant shall be by a three-fifths vote of the members of the Board, and by such decision may authorize the approval of such final plans and specifications, issuance of required permits or approval of completed work by the Chief Building Official. All such approvals or disapprovals shall be final and conclusive in the absence of fraud or prejudicial abuse of discretion. ( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 13. - ACCESSIBILITY BOARD OF APPEALS 
 
Sec. 7-13.01. - Created. 
There is hereby created the Accessibility Board of Appeals. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-13.02. - Purpose. 
The Accessibility Board of Appeals is created in order to consider and determine alternate methods of providing accessibility and to provide for a reasonable interpretation of the accessibility provisions of Title 24, California Code of Regulations. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-13.03. - Members. 
The Accessibility Board of Appeals shall contain five members, two of which shall be persons with disabilities, two shall be qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to all forms of building construction and related building materials and equipment, and one shall be from the general public. In addition to the five members, the Chief Building Official shall be an ex-officio member and shall act as Secretary to the Board. Members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be approved by and serve at the pleasure of the City Council upon the adoption of the provisions of this chapter for a period of two years following the effective day of appointment. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-13.04. - Chairman. 
Annually, the Accessibility Board of Appeals shall select one of the members to serve as Chairman for a one-year term. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-13.05. - Meetings and quorum. 
Meetings of the Accessibility Board of Appeals shall be called at the discretion of the Chairman or upon the request of at least three members of the Board being made to the Secretary. Business of the Board shall only be conducted with a quorum present. A quorum shall consist of at least three members with one from each group present. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-13.06. - Rules and regulations. 
The Accessibility Board of Appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the Chief Building Official. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-13.07. - Relief from strict application of accessibility regulations. 
When, because of the strict application of any provisions of the State accessibility regulations, the final plans and specifications for any building or structure proposed to be erected or constructed in the City, or for the enlargement, alteration, repair, improvement, or conversion of any structure in the City are not approved by the Chief Building Official, or a building or other required permit is refused by him, or the Chief Building Official is requiring changes to previously approved plans and specifications, or change to a structure under construction which is in compliance with approved plans and specifications, or refuses to issue a certificate of occupancy or revokes a certificate of occupancy, the Accessibility Board of Appeals may extend relief as provided in this section. Upon the written petition of the applicant, and after a full investigation and hearing of the matter, and when substantial evidence before the Board establishes that each of the following conditions exists in the particular case: (1) that there is a special circumstance or condition applicable to the land or building existing or proposed, or both, referred to in the application; and (2) that granting the appeal is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial properly rights; and (3) that granting the appeal will not be detrimental to the safeguard of life or limb, health, property and public welfare; and (4) equivalent facilitation will be provided as defined in Title 24 of the California Administrative Code, or other facilitation as deemed by the Board as equivalent is being provided, or when there exists legal or physical constraints which would not allow compliance with Title 24 regulations or equivalent facilitation, the Board may relieve the application from the strict application of any provisions of accessibility regulations and prescribe such conditions and requirements for the applicant and require from the applicant such guarantee or guarantees for the faithful observance thereof as will, in the opinion of the Board, secure substantially the objectives of the Code with due regard for the safeguarding of life or limb, health, property and public welfare. Each such decision to so relieve the applicant shall be by a three-fifths vote of the members of the Board, and by such decision authorize the approval of such final plans and specifications, issuance of required permits or approval of completed work by the Chief Building Official. All such approval or disapprovals shall be final and conclusive in the absence of fraud or prejudicial abuse of discretion. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 14. - TEMPORARY STRUCTURES ON CONSTRUCTION SITES 
 
Sec. 7-14.01. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
(a)  Construction shack shall mean a trailer coach or temporary structure used for the job office during the course of a building construction project. 
(b)  Watchman's quarters shall mean a trailer coach, camper, or other temporary structure used for the purpose of having a person reside on the construction project to maintain security. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-14.02. - Approval required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install a construction shack or watchman's quarters without first obtaining approval from the Building Inspection Division. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-14.03. - Temporary utilities. 
All temporary utility connections for a construction shack or watchman's quarters shall be made in accordance with all federal, State, and local codes. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-14.04. - Violations. 
Violations to this chapter will be penalized under the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 15. - EXPEDITED PERMIT PROCESS FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 7-15.01. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of the chapter is to provide an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014, California Government Code Section 65850.5) in order to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the City to achieve these goals while protecting public health and safety. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-15.02. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(a)  Solar energy system means either of the following: 
(1)  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
(2)  Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. 
(b)  Small residential rooftop solar energy system means all of the following: 
(1)  A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal. 
(2)  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City, and all state and City health and safety standards. 
(3)  A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or two-family dwelling. 
(4)  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the City. 
(c)  Electronic submittal means the utilization of electronic e-mail or submittal via the internet. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-15.03. - Applicability. 
(a)  This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the City. 
(b)  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-15.04. - Solar energy system requirements. 
(a)  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the City. 
(b)  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
(c)  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-15.05. - Applications and documents. 
(a)  All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application will be made available on the City website. 
(b)  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email, or the Internet will be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. 
(c)  The City's Development Services Department will adopt a standard plan and checklist for all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
(d)  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 7-15.06. - Permit review and inspection requirements. 
(a)  The Development Services Director or his or her designee shall implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. The Building Department shall issue a building permit, the issuance of which is nondiscretionary, within a timely manner, upon receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan. 
(b)  Review of the application shall be limited to the City's review of whether the application meets local, State, and federal health and safety requirements. 
(c)  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
(d)  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
(e)  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Building Department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. 
(f)  The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. 
(g)  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized. 
( Ord. No. 001-17 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 16. - GRADING  
Article 1. - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 7-16.01. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the grading, erosion, and sediment control ordinance of the City of Yuba City (City), and shall be referred to herein as the "grading ordinance." 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.02. - Purpose. 
The grading ordinance is enacted for the purpose of regulating grading on property within the City to safeguard life, limb, health, property, and the public welfare; to avoid pollution of watercourses with nutrients, sediments, or other materials generated or caused by surface water runoff; to comply with the City's National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit No. 5S51M2000094, issued by the California State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB); and to ensure that the intended use of a graded site within the City limits is consistent with the General Plan, any operative specific, community, neighborhood, or master plans and applicable City ordinances and regulations. The grading ordinance is intended to control all aspects of grading operations within the City. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.03. - Scope. 
The grading ordinance sets forth the rules and regulations to control land disturbances, landfill, soil storage, pollution, and erosion and sedimentation resulting from construction activities. The grading ordinance establishes procedures for issuance, administration, and enforcement of permits for such activities. Any grading within the City limits of the City shall conform to provisions of the grading ordinance and other applicable provisions of the City Code, including, but not limited to, the latest edition of the City's standard specifications for public works construction and the California Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.04. - Responsibility for administration. 
The grading ordinance shall be administered for the City by the Development Services Department through the building permit process, or improvement plan process, as applicable. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.05. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, word, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application hereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.06. - Conflicts. 
In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any Federal or State law, regulation, order, or permit, the requirement which establishes the higher standard for public health or safety shall govern. To the extent permitted by law, nothing in this chapter shall preclude enforcement of any other applicable law, regulation, order or permit. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.07. - Disclaimer of liability. 
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City or any agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from any reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. Neither issuance of grading approval under the provisions of the grading ordinance nor compliance with the provisions hereof or with any conditions imposed in a permit issued hereunder shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to any person or property or impose any liability upon the City for damage to any person or property. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.08. - Grading approval required. 
Except for the specific exemptions listed hereinafter, no person shall do or permit to be done any grading on any site in the City without first obtaining approval of such grading from the Director in accordance with the provisions of the grading ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.09. - Exemptions. 
The following grading may be done without obtaining grading approval unless grading approval is required in mitigation monitoring agreements or other conditions of project approval. Exemption from the grading approval requirement shall not be deemed as permission to violate any other provision of this chapter. 
(a)  Minor construction projects which meet all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The volume of material graded is less than 50 cubic yards; 
(2)  The depth of cuts and fills is less than two feet; 
(3)  Any drainage way is not blocked or obstructed and its stormwater carrying capacities are not modified; 
(4)  Slopes are less than 10% and are not left in an unstable or erodible condition. 
(b)  Single-family residential lots less than one-half acre (12,780 square feet) which also meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Excavations in connection with a swimming pool authorized by a valid building permit. 
(d)  Grading necessary for agricultural operations unless the failure of any cut or fill created by such grading could endanger any structure intended for human or animal occupancy or any public road, or could obstruct any watercourse or drainage way. 
(e)  Exploratory excavations of less than 350 cubic yards under the supervision of a geotechnical engineer. 
(f)  Routine cemetery excavations and fills. 
(g)  Performance of emergency work necessary to protect life or property when an urgent necessity therefor arises. The person performing such emergency work shall notify the Director promptly of the problem and the work required. 
(h)  An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building authorized by a valid building permit. 
(i)  Refuse disposal sites controlled by Title 23, Chapter 15, of the California Code of Regulations. 
(j)  The repair and maintenance of levees for river and local drainage control performed by a governmental agency. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.10. - Grading approval. 
Grading approval may be issued by the Director in connection with the issuance of a building permit or the approval of improvement plans, or where grading is commenced prior to such issuance or approval, through the issuance of a separate grading permit. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.11. - Conditions of grading approval. 
The conditions of grading approval are as follows: 
(a)  No grading shall be approved unless the project conforms with the City's General Plan, any operative specific, neighborhood, or master plans, and applicable City ordinances. 
(b)  Where the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) requires the preparation and approval of environmental documents concerning a project which will result in grading for which a grading permit is required under this chapter, no grading shall be approved until all CEQA requirements have been met, including, but not limited to, mitigation measures relating to protection of threatened and endangered species under applicable federal and state endangered species laws. 
(c)  Where a proposed grading project requires the filing of a tentative map or the intended use requires approval of a discretionary zoning permit or variance, grading may also require approval from the Development Services Department. 
(d)  Work shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the grading ordinance. 
(e)  Grading approval shall be limited to work shown on the grading plans as approved by the Director. The Director may impose any condition deemed necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, to prevent the creation of a hazard to public or private property, and/or to assure proper completion of the grading, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Mitigation of adverse environmental impacts as disclosed by any environmental document findings, including, but not limited to, those matters specified in subsection b of this section; 
(2)  Improvement of any existing grading to comply with the standards of the grading ordinance; 
(3)  Requirements for fencing or other protection of grading which would otherwise be hazardous; 
(4)  Requirements for dust, erosion, sediment and noise control, hours of operation and season of work, access roads and haul routes; 
(5)  Requirements for safeguarding watercourses, whether natural or manmade, from excessive deposition of sediment or debris. In no case shall deposition of sediment or debris cause an exceedance of applicable water quality standards; 
(6)  Assurance that the land area in which grading is proposed and for which habitable structures are proposed is not subject to hazards of land slippage or significant settlement or erosion and that the hazards of flooding can be eliminated or adequately reduced; 
(7)  Requirements for safeguarding existing water wells. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.12. - Scope of approval. 
The issuance of grading approval shall not be construed as an approval of any action or condition constituting a violation of the provisions of the grading ordinance or of any other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.13. - Water obstruction. 
No person shall do or permit to be done any grading which may obstruct, impede, or interfere with the natural flow of stormwater, whether such waters are unconfined upon the surface of the land or confined within land depressions, natural drainage ways, unimproved channels, watercourses, improved ditches, channels or conduits, in such manner as to cause flooding where it would not otherwise occur, aggravate any existing flooding condition or cause accelerated erosion except where said grading is in accordance with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the provisions of the grading ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.14. - Levee work. 
No person shall excavate or remove any material from or otherwise alter any levee adjacent to any river, creek, bay, or local drainage control channel, without prior approval of the governmental agency or agencies responsible for the operation and/or maintenance of the levee. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.15. - Construction in the public right-of-way. 
No person shall perform any grading work within the right-of-way of a public road or street, or within a public easement, without prior written approval of the Director, and without obtaining a City encroachment permit. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.16. - Hazards. 
Whenever the Director determines that any grading on private property constitutes a condition which could endanger persons or property, or could adversely affect the safety, use or stability of adjacent property, or an overhead or underground utility, or any public way, watercourse or drainage channel, or could adversely affect the water quality of any water bodies or watercourses, the owner of the property upon which the condition is located, or other person or agent in possession or control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the Director, shall, within the period specified therein, stop all work. The Director may require the submission of plans, soil or geological reports, detailed construction recommendations, drainage study or other engineering data prior to and in connection with any work or activity proposed or required to correct such condition. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Article 2. - Application for Grading Permit 
 
Sec. 7-16.17. - Filing of application for grading permit. 
Applications for permits shall be obtained from and filed with the Development Services Department. Each application shall include a plan checking fee, grading plans and a statement of the intended use of the site. Only one application and permit is allowed for grading work to be done on a site. The Director shall determine whether the application is complete in accordance with provisions of Article 5, Permit Requirements, of this chapter herein and may require additional information from the applicant before accepting the application as complete. A grading permit is not considered a building permit. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.18. - Improvement plans in lieu of application for permit. 
Where a subdivision improvement plan is being processed in conjunction with either an approved tentative, parcel, or final map; or a development plan is being processed in accordance with the provisions of this Code, such plan shall also be considered as an application for grading approval. Such plans shall be reviewed and approved, conditionally approved or denied in accordance with the standards and requirements set forth in the grading ordinance and other applicable City specifications. If an improvement plan or site plan is approved, then a separate grading permit shall not be required. Approval of the improvement plans constitutes approval of the grading work intended. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.19. - Grading prior to issuance of building permit or approval of improvement plans. 
Applications for a permit to allow grading prior to issuance of a building permit or approval of improvement plans shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Preliminary grading plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the Director. This plan shall conform to the requirements of the grading ordinance and any applicable conditions placed on the project as a result of any formal discretionary permit process. The applicant shall acknowledge that any additional grading or revisions to work necessitated by conflicts discovered during the improvement plan check or subsequent construction will be corrected at the applicant's expense. 
(b)  Both erosion and sediment control plans in accordance with provisions of Article 3 of this chapter, plans and specifications, of the grading ordinance shall be submitted for review and approval by the Director. 
(c)  Plan check and inspection fee deposit shall be required in the amount of the full plan check fee applicable at the time of submittal in accordance with Section 7-16.70 of this chapter. 
(d)  No grading permit shall be issued until all applicable CEQA requirements have been met. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.20. - Referral to other public agencies. 
The Director may refer the application to other interested public agencies for their recommendations. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.21. - Approval from other agencies or owners. 
No application for grading approval shall relieve the applicant of responsibility for securing other permits or approvals, including, but not limited to, those specified in Section 7-16.11, subsection (b), required for work which is regulated by any other department or other public agency, or for obtaining any easements or authorization for grading on property not owned by the applicant. Proof of applicable public agency permits may be required prior to issuance of grading approval. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Article 3. - Required Plans and Approval Process 
 
Sec. 7-16.22. - Required plans. 
(a)  Grading plans shall be submitted to the Development Service Department. Plans shall include, but shall not limited to: 
(1)  Profiles, cross-sections. 
(2)  Topographic maps. 
(3)  Erosion and sediment control plans. 
(4)  Accompanying specifications. 
(5)  Runoff control plan. 
(b)  The work shall be done in strict compliance with the approved plans and specifications which shall not be changed or altered except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.23. - Grading plans. 
Final grading plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer, except as otherwise provided herein. The Director may waive the requirement that all plans and specifications be prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer if the grading would not endanger the public health, safety, or welfare as determined by the Director and would not involve or require any of the following: 
(a)  Cuts and fills with a combined total of 350 cubic yards or more; 
(b)  An access road serving five or more existing or proposed residences; 
(c)  A cut or fill that is located so as to cause unduly increased pressure or reduce support upon adjacent structure of property; 
(d)  The construction of any drainage or sediment control structures, culverts, or facilities or alteration of any existing drainage course; 
(e)  The creation or aggravation of an unstable slope condition. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.24. - Erosion and sediment control (ESC) plans. 
An erosion and sediment control (ESC) plan shall be prepared for all projects to control surface runoff and erosion and to retain sediment on a particular site and prevent pollution of site runoff during the period beginning when any preconstruction- or construction-related grading or soil storage first occurs, until all final improvements and permanent structures are complete. The ESC plan shall be prepared and submitted concurrently with the final grading plan. The ESC plan may be incorporated on the same plan sheet as the final grading plan unless it makes the sheet cluttered, or it may be submitted on a clean separate sheet. The separate sheet shall be drawn clearly and legibly and entitled "erosion and sediment control plan" and shall contain a statement of the purpose of the proposed best management practices to be used. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.25. - Runoff control [plan] (RCP). 
A runoff control plan (RCP) shall be prepared for all projects to control surface runoff and erosion and retain sediment on a particular site after all planned final improvements and/or structures have been installed or erected. The RCP shall be prepared and submitted concurrently with the final grading plan. The RCP shall be titled "runoff control plan." The RCP shall contain a statement of the purpose of the proposed best management practices to be used to secure the project after completion. See Section 4-21.66 of the Stormwater Management and Discharge Control ordinance for RCP guidelines. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.26. - Modification of approved plans. 
Any modifications of an approved final plan shall be submitted in writing to the Director, who shall approve or deny such modification in his or her sole discretion. All necessary soils and geological information and design details shall accompany any proposed modification. Any modification shall be compatible with all subdivision map or land use requirements. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.27. - General design standards. 
Any activities performed under the authority of the grading ordinance, including, but not limited to, grading, excavation, soil storage, soil transportation, erosion and sediment control measures, shall conform to relevant Federal, State, and local standards. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Article 4. - Permit Requirements 
 
Sec. 7-16.28. - General requirements. 
The Director shall issue grading approval if final grading plans satisfy the provisions of the grading ordinance. The Director shall identify the provision, requirement, or condition which has not yet been met or performed by the applicant in the event the issuance of grading approval is denied. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.29. - Fees. 
(a)  The applicant shall pay a fee based on the City's Public Improvement Plan Check/Inspection fee per the City's fee schedule as determined by Title 3, Chapter 8 of the Municipal Code to cover the City's costs of reviewing plans, specifications, reports and other materials related to grading approval and performing all engineering services, field investigations, inspections, or other work or services in connection with the issuance of grading approval or to determine or enforce compliance with any requirement or provision set forth in this chapter, or the penalty provisions as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 2 of the Municipal Code. Administrative fees, based on the existing building permit fee structure, may be charged to cover the City's costs as appropriate. 
(b)  The fee or fees required by subsection (a) shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council and shall be paid to the Director either before grading approval is issued or before the issuance of a building permit, or both in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council. The Director may charge additional fees in any case where the City incurs costs that are not covered by the initial fee payment(s). 
(c)  If grading work is done in violation of the grading ordinance or does not comply with the terms and conditions of a grading approval issued for such grading, the violator is required to pay the City for all costs actually incurred by the City to inspect or investigate such violation and to perform inspection and plan checking of work required to correct the violation. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.30. - Submit record construction drawings. 
The applicant shall submit to the Director record construction drawings of the final grading plan and erosion and sediment control plans following completion of grading operations. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.31. - Performance of work—Inspection. 
The Director or authorized designees may inspect any work done pursuant to the grading ordinance at any time during the course of construction. No person shall be deemed to have complied with the grading ordinance until a final inspection of the work has been made by the Director. As a condition of any grading approval, the applicant shall provide the City a right-of-entry and reasonable access, in accordance with Section 7-16.86 of this chapter, to the site during the performance of all work and for a minimum period of one year after acceptance by the Director of all improvements pursuant to the grading ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.32. - Location of property lines. 
Prior to any grading work or related activities, the owner must flag all property corners of the parcel of land to be graded. If the property corners are unknown, or whenever the location of a property line or easement or the title thereto is disputed during the application process or during a grading operation, a survey by a licensed land surveyor or civil engineer or other resolution of the title dispute, all at the expense of the applicant, may be required by the Director. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.33. - Other responsibilities of applicant. 
Other responsibilities of applicant include: 
(a)  Protection of utilities. The applicant shall be responsible for the prevention of damage to any public utilities or services. 
(b)  Protection of adjacent property. The applicant shall be responsible for the prevention of damage to adjacent property. No person(s) shall excavate on land that is so close to the property line as to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley, structure or other public or private property or easement without supporting and protecting such property from any damage which might otherwise result. 
(c)  Advance notice. The applicant shall notify the Director at least 24 hours prior to the start of work. 
(d)  Erosion and sediment control. It shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant to prevent discharge of sediment from the site, in quantities greater than before the grading occurred, to any watercourse, drainage system, or adjacent property. 
(e)  Compliance with Stormwater Management and Discharge Control Code. At all times during the preconstruction and construction of any project for which grading approval is issued until all final improvements and permanent structures are complete, the applicant shall fully comply with all applicable requirements of the City's Stormwater Management and Discharge Control Code, set forth in Title 4, Chapter 21 of the Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.34. - Time limits. 
(a)  An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the Director is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(b)  Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The Director is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.35. - Transfer of grading approval. 
No approval or permit issued under the grading ordinance may be transferred or assigned in any manner whatsoever, without the express written consent of the Director. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.36. - Improvement security required. 
(a)  As a condition for the issuance of grading approval, the Director may require the deposit of an improvement security in an amount deemed sufficient by him or her to assure faithful performance of the grading work in the event of default on the part of the applicant. Said security shall be in a form acceptable to the City. 
(b)  In the case of subdivisions, the improvement security shall remain in effect until final inspections have been made and all grading work and subdivision improvements have been accepted by the City. 
(c)  For projects other than subdivisions, the improvement security shall remain in effect until final inspections have been made and all grading work has been accepted by the Director. 
(d)  In addition to the improvement security, the Director may also require the deposit of maintenance security in an amount deemed sufficient by him or her to guarantee and maintain the grading work performed, to assure the proper functioning of drainage systems and adequate erosion and sedimentation control. Said maintenance security shall be in a form acceptable to the City and shall remain in effect for a period of one year after the date of acceptance of the improvements or grading work, as designated in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, or such other periods of time as required by the Director. 
(e)  Any deposit required by the Director pursuant to this chapter shall be payable to the City. 
(f)  Upon failure to complete the work, failure to comply with all of the terms of the grading ordinance, or failure of the completed site to function properly to provide proper drainage or erosion and sedimentation control, the City may do the required work, or cause it to be done and collect from the applicant or surety all costs incurred thereto, including administrative and inspection costs. Any unused portion of a deposit shall be refunded to the applicant after deduction by the City of the cost of the work. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.37. - Appeals. 
Any person may appeal a violation of this chapter in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Article 5. - Enforcement 
 
Sec. 7-16.38. - Enforcement official. 
The Director or authorized designee shall enforce the provisions of the grading ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.39. - Suspension and revocation of grading approval. 
The Director may suspend or revoke grading approval for good cause. In the event that a suspension or revocation is appealed, no work shall be performed pending appeal except as expressly authorized, in writing, by the Director. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.40. - Stop work order. 
(a)  Whenever any work is being done in violation of the provisions of the grading ordinance or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation, the Director may order the work stopped by serving written notice of such violation on any persons engaged in, doing, or causing such work to be done. Any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Director to proceed with the work. If there are no persons present on the premises, the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place. The notice shall state the nature of the violation. Any person violating a stop work order shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(b)  Upon receipt of or knowledge of the existence of such stop work notice, the person performing the work shall: 
(1)  Stop work immediately; and 
(2)  Within 24 hours, provide the Director with a list of remedies which can be immediately undertaken to bring the work into compliance with this title; and 
(3)  Within 24 hours after acceptance of such remedies by the Director, undertake, at the violator's expense, such action as is necessary to bring the work into compliance with this title. 
(4)  If engineering work is required to identify and define the proper course of action, as determined by the Director, such work shall be provided by the violator at no cost to the City. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.41. - Abatement of unlawfully created conditions. 
(a)  Any condition in violation of the grading ordinance is declared to be a public nuisance and is subject to abatement. In the event that the Director determines that a violation has created a condition which is of such a nature to be imminently dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare, such condition may be abated in accordance with the procedures of this Code. Violations that affect environmentally sensitive locations may be required to return the site of the violation to its natural state. 
(b)  Any of the following conditions are declared to constitute an imminently dangerous condition: 
(1)  When a violation has altered natural drainage patterns and has caused flooding to any downstream or upstream property; or 
(2)  When a violation results in a condition which creates a drainage alteration such that upstream or downstream property may be flooded when weather conditions change and the owner, lessee, or licensee of the property on which the violation exists cannot be found; or 
(3)  When a violation results in a hazard, requiring immediate correction for the preservation of the public health, safety, or welfare; or 
(4)  When a violation results in a discharge or release of significant amounts of sediment which causes or threatens to cause flooding, property damage, or unsafe conditions; or 
(5)  When a violation results in a significant environmental impact. 
(c)  The costs incurred by City to abate any nuisance caused by a violation of the grading ordinance shall be assessed against the subject property as a lien or made a personal obligation to the owner of the property as provided in the Nuisance Abatement Code in Title 4, Chapter 8 of the Municipal Code. Such costs may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Engineering and design costs; 
(2)  Contractor service bills or public employee wages at cost; 
(3)  Administrative overhead and supervision based on 20% of all other costs incurred; 
(4)  Interest which shall accrue and be billed at the rate of 10% of all unpaid amounts from the date of billing; 
(5)  Attorney fees and costs. 
(d)  The abatement procedures set forth in this section are cumulative and in addition to any other rights or remedies which are or may be available to City to correct or cause to be corrected any violation of the grading ordinance, or to abate a condition which is otherwise a public nuisance. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.42. - Infraction. 
Any person violating any provision of the grading ordinance shall be guilty of an infraction. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.43. - Nonexclusive remedies. 
The remedies provided herein are not exclusive, and are in addition to any other remedy or penalty provided by law for violation of the grading ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.44. - Right of entry. 
Whenever necessary to enforce the provisions of the grading ordinance, the Director may enter the premises at all reasonable times to the extent authorized by law to perform any duty imposed by the grading ordinance. If such entry is refused, the Director shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Article 6. - Definitions 
 
Sec. 7-16.45. - Definition of words and phrases. 
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this article. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.46. - Applicant. 
Applicant means any person seeking or receiving grading approval, in accordance with the terms of the grading ordinance, to perform grading after the issuance of a building permit or the approval of improvement plans, or to commence grading prior to such issuance or approval. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.47. - Best management practices. 
Best management practices (BMP) means any program, technology, technique, process, siting criteria, operating method, measure or device which controls, prevents, removes or reduces pollution, erosion, and sediment transport, including, but not limited to, any BMP required or implemented under the City's Stormwater Management and Discharge Control ordinance, set forth in Section 4-21 of the City's Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.48. - City. 
City means the City of Yuba City. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.49. - City Council. 
City Council means the City Council of the City of Yuba City. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.50. - Civil engineer. 
Civil engineer means a professional engineer registered as a civil engineer by the State of California. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.51. - Compaction. 
Compaction means the increase of density of a soil or rock fill by mechanical means. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.52. - Cut. 
Cut (excavation) means the removal of naturally occurring earth materials by manual or mechanical means, and the conditions resulting therefrom. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.53. - Director. 
Director means the Director of the Department of Development Services of the City of Yuba City, or his or her designees. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.54. - Drainage waters. 
Drainage waters means surface waters which collect, or are accumulated, on the ground and which, by means of drainage ways or water courses, flow off the surface to larger rivers, streams, or lakes. Such waters shall include, but are not limited to, natural precipitation and irrigation waters. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.55. - Drainage way. 
Drainage way means a depression in the earth's surface such as a swale, ravine, gully, slough, draw, hollow, or ditch in which surface water collects for drainage. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.56. - Earth material. 
Earth material means any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.57. - Embankment. 
Embankment (fill) means the deposit of soil, rock or other material placed by artificial means and the conditions resulting therefrom. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.58. - Encroachment permit. 
Encroachment permit means a written permit issued by the City of Yuba City Department of Public Works authorizing certain work within a publicly maintained right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.59. - Engineering geologist. 
Engineering geologist means a registered geologist certified as an engineering geologist by the State of California. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.60. - Erosion. 
Erosion means the washing or wearing away and transportation of earth material as a result of the movement of wind, water, or ice. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.61. - Erosion and sediment control plan. 
Erosion and sediment control plan (ESCP) consists of a set of BMPs or equivalent measures designed to control surface runoff and erosion, retain sediment on a particular site and prevent pollution of site runoff during the period beginning when any preconstruction or construction related grading or soil storage first occurs, until all final improvements and permanent structures are completed. ESCP requirements are set forth in Title 4, Public Safety, Chapter 21, Stormwater Management and Discharge Control, Section 4-21.65(c). 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.62. - Excavation. 
Excavation (cut) means the removal of naturally occurring earth materials by manual or mechanical means, and the conditions resulting therefrom. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.63. - Existing grade. 
Existing grade means the elevation of the ground surface at a given point prior to excavating or filling. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.64. - Fill. 
Fill (embankment) means the deposit of soil, rock or other materials placed by artificial means and the conditions resulting therefrom. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.65. - Finish grade. 
Finish grade means the final grade of the site after excavating or filling which conforms to the approved final grading plan. The finish grade is also the grade at the top of a paved surface. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.66. - Geologic hazard. 
Geologic hazard means any condition in naturally occurring earth materials which may endanger life, health or property. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.67. - Geotechnical engineer. 
Geotechnical engineer means a civil engineer registered by the State of California who is qualified in the field of soil mechanics and soil engineering and has the authority to use the title "soil engineer." 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.68. - Grade. 
Grade means the vertical location of the ground surface. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.69. - Grading. 
Grading means any land excavation or filling or combination thereof, or the removal, plowing under or burial of vegetative groundcover. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.70. - Grading plan. 
Grading plan means a plan prepared in accordance with this chapter showing grading and related work. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.71. - Municipal Code. 
Municipal Code means the City of Yuba City Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.72. - Owner. 
Owner means the legal owner of the property where the grading work is to be done, as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll in the office of the county assessor. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.73. - Parcel. 
Parcel (lot) means the land described as a lot or parcel in a recorded deed or shown as a lot or parcel on a subdivision map or parcel map on file in the Sutter County Recorder's Office. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.74. - Permit. 
Permit means either a building permit, encroachment permit, or a separate grading permit. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.75. - Person. 
Person means any person, firm, corporation, or public agency whether principal, agent, employee, or otherwise. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.76. - Post construction plans. 
Post construction plans consists of a set of best management practices or equivalent measures designed to control surface runoff and erosion and to retain sediment on a particular site after all final structures and permanent improvements have been erected or installed. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.77. - Preliminary grading plan. 
Preliminary grading plan means a plan that shows the proposed grading work in relation to the existing site prepared and submitted with the application for a grading permit. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.78. - Rainy season. 
Rainy season means the period of the year during which there is a substantial risk of rainfall. For the purpose of this chapter, the rainy season is defined as from October 1 to April 30, inclusive. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.79. - Rough grade. 
Rough grade means the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.80. - Sediment. 
Sediment means any material transported or deposited by water, including soil debris or other foreign matter. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.81. - Site. 
Site means any lot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land, whether held separately or joined together in common ownership or occupancy, where grading is to be performed or has been performed. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.82. - Slope. 
Slope means an inclined ground surface the inclination of which may be expressed as the ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.83. - Soil. 
Soil means all earth material of any origin that overlies bedrock and may include the decomposed zone of bedrock which can be excavated readily by mechanical equipment. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.84. - Vegetation. 
Vegetation means plant life or total plant cover of an area. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 7-16.85. - Watercourse. 
Watercourse means any natural or manmade channel in which water flows continuously or intermittently in a definite direction and course, or which is used for the holding, delay or storage of waters, or which functions at any time to convey or store stormwater runoff. 
( Ord. No. 002-16 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
CHAPTER 17. - EXPEDITED PERMIT PROCESSING FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 7-17.01. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and encourage the use of electric vehicles by creating an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations while promoting public health and safety and preventing specific adverse impacts in the installation and use of such charging stations. This chapter is also purposed to comply with California Government Code Section 65850.7. 
(Ord. No. 001-18 , § 2, 3-6-2018)  
Sec. 7-17.02. - Definitions. 
(a)  "Electric vehicle charging station" or "charging station" means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle. 
(b)  "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(c)  "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
(1)  Electronic mail or email. 
(2)  The internet. 
(3)  Facsimile. 
(Ord. No. 001-18 , § 2, 3-6-2018)  
Sec. 7-17.03. - Expedited permitting process. 
Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall implement an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply with in order to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited, streamlined permitting process and checklist may refer to the recommendations contained in the most current version of the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist" of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook" as published by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. The City's adopted checklist shall be published on the City's website. 
(Ord. No. 001-18 , § 2, 3-6-2018)  
Sec. 7-17.04. - Permit application processing. 
(a)  Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building occupants. Verification by the applicant includes but is not limited to: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking. 
(b)  A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the City's adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the permit application and supporting documents meets the requirements of the City of Yuba City's adopted checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the Building Official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging station until approval is granted by the City. If the Building Official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance. 
(c)  Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered by this ordinance and associated supporting documentations. In accepting such permit applications, the Building Official shall also accept electronic signatures on all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by any applicant. 
(Ord. No. 001-18 , § 2, 3-6-2018)  
Sec. 7-17.05. - Technical review. 
(a)  It is the intent of this ordinance to encourage the installation of electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to permitting for charging stations so long as the action does not supersede the Building Official's authority to address higher priority life-safety situations. If the Building Official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, as defined in this chapter, the City may require the applicant to apply for a use permit. 
(b)  In the technical review of a charging station, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall not condition the approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080. 
(Ord. No. 001-18 , § 2, 3-6-2018)  
Sec. 7-17.06. - Electric vehicle charging station installation requirements. 
(a)  Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public Utilities Commission or a Municipal Electric Utility Company regarding safety and reliability. 
(b)  Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the California Electrical Code. 
(c)  Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load. 
(d)  Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer's installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall not adversely affect building elements. 
(Ord. No. 001-18 , § 2, 3-6-2018)  
TITLE 8. - PLANNING AND ZONING  
CHAPTER 1. - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 8-1.01. - Created; membership. 
The Planning Commission established and created by Ordinance No. 192 entitled "An Ordinance Establishing and Creating a City Planning Commission," is hereby re-established and recreated without loss of continuity under and by authority of the State Planning Law. The Commission shall be composed of seven members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. Six members of the Commission shall reside within the corporate limits of the City. One member shall be from the Sutter County Planning Commission. The Planning Director shall be an ex officio member and shall serve as the secretary to the Commission. All members of the Commission, except ex officio members, shall have the right to vote. One member of the Commission may be appointed to simultaneously serve upon the Sutter County Planning Commission pursuant to appropriate County ordinance providing for such appointment, and when so appointed, shall continue to serve and hold office of City Planning Commissioner and County Planning Commissioner until their successor is duly appointed and qualified. 
(§ 1, Ord. 194, as amended by § 1, Ord. 739, eff. March 9, 1977; § 1, Ord. 943, eff. March 22, 1984; § 1, Ord. 28-92, eff. December 17, 1992)  
Sec. 8-1.02. - Terms of office. 
The terms of members of the Planning Commission shall be four years, with the exception of the representative from the Sutter County Commissioner which shall be one calendar year. 
The anniversary date for all appointments shall be February 28 th of any year. The three current commissioners whose terms expire on December 31, 2018 will be extended to February 28, 2019. The three commissioners whose terms expire on December 31, 2020 will be extended to February 28, 2021. 
The terms of office set forth in this section shall not be deemed arbitrary. Members of the Planning Commission serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed without cause. Council may so order and appoint a successor for the unexpired term of office of the removed member. Any Commissioner appointed to succeed a vacated seat on the Commission shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term of their predecessor. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as appointments for the unexpired term of office. 
Council may establish by resolution appropriate service requirements, criteria and attendance standards governing service on the Planning Commission. Selection shall reflect as nearly as possible the diverse demographic characteristics of the population of Yuba City. Commissioners are expected to attend all Commission meetings. 
(§ 2, Ord. 194, as amended by § 1, Ord. 454, and § 2, Ord. 739, eff. March 9, 1977; § 1, Ord. 1092, eff. March 7, 1990; § 1, Ord. 28-92, eff. December 27, 1992; Ord. No. 004-18 , § 1, 9-18-2018)  
Sec. 8-1.03. - Powers, functions, and duties. 
The Planning Commission shall have all the powers, functions, and duties provided for by the State Planning Law, by the laws of the City, and as delegated in accordance with applicable laws. 
§ 3, Ord. 194, as amended by Ord. 547, eff. March 20, 1968, and § 3, Ord. 739, eff. March 9, 1977)  
CHAPTER 2. - SUBDIVISIONS  
Article 1. - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 8-2.101. - Title. 
The chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Regulations of the City of Yuba City." 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.102. - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Government Code tit. 7, div. 2, entitled the "Subdivision Map Act." 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.103. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is the regulation and control of the design and improvement of subdivisions within the City of Yuba City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.104. - Fees. 
The City Council shall establish by resolution, and may amend and revise from time to time, fees for processing the various applications authorized or required by this title. All fees shall be paid at the time an application is filed, and no processing shall commence until the fee is paid in full. 
(§ 1, Ord. 17-92, eff. September 3, 1992)  
Article 2. - Application of Regulations 
 
Sec. 8-2.201. - Certificate of compliance. 
Any person owning real property or a buyer carrying out a contract of sale for such real property may request the Planning Director to determine whether such real property complies with the provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act and with this chapter. A certificate of compliance may be requested to certify that the parcel was created pursuant to law or to establish conditions which may make the parcel compatible with the law. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.202. - Lot line adjustment. 
A lot line common to abutting parcels may be adjusted solely for the purpose of correcting, confirming or relocating such lot line where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.406. - Effect of recorded map. 
A recorded parcel map of final map shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Article 5. - Lot Line Adjustment 
 
Sec. 8-2.501. - Requirements. 
Any lot line adjustment must be reviewed by the Public Works Director and the Planning Director, and shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Resulting lots shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and the City Zoning Regulations as to area and dimension. An exception may be granted in the case of a substandard lot, if the lot line adjustment does not result in a lot being substandard in any additional area or dimension; 
(b)  A greater number of lots than originally existed is not created; 
(c)  The proposal is consistent with the provision of the City General Plan. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.502. - Filing. 
(a)  An application for a lot line adjustment shall be made on a form supplied by the Planning Director, shall be signed by all property owners involved, and shall include all applicable fees. 
(b)  The application shall include two copies of a legibly drawn to scale map showing locations of existing and proposed lot lines and any structures, wells, septic tanks, leach lines and other improvements on the properties involved. 
(c)  The application shall include the actual legal descriptions for conveyances that would be accomplished as the result of the adjustment. The legal descriptions shall be drawn by a qualified engineer or surveyor. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.503. - Fees. 
At the time of acceptance of a filing for a lot line adjustment, the applicant shall pay an application fee of $100. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990; § 1, Ord. 17-92, eff. September 3, 1992)  
Sec. 8-2.504. - Conditions of approval. 
The Public Works Director and Planning Director shall review the application for the lot line adjustment. Any approval of a lot line adjustment shall be subject to, but not limited to, the following conditions: 
(a)  No new parcels or building sites shall be created as a result of this lot line adjustment. 
(b)  Any deeds of trust shall be adjusted to reflect the new property descriptions. 
(c)  The adjustment is not final until the descriptions accumulating and reducing the parcels affected are recorded together with an acknowledgement that prior parcel lines are eliminated by this action and that any deeds of trust have been adjusted to match the new property lines. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.505. - Denial. 
When the Planning Director determines that the proposed lot line adjustment is not consistent with the provisions of this article, such application may be denied and the preparation of a parcel or final map may be required. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.506. - Recordation. 
The person(s) requesting the lot line adjustment shall be responsible for recording said adjustment with the County Recorder and providing a copy of the recording data to the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Article 6. - Tentative and Vesting Tentative Maps 
 
Sec. 8-2.601. - Preliminary conference. 
Prior to the submittal of a tentative or vesting tentative map, the subdivider is encouraged to consult with the staff of the Planning Department for technical advice and procedural instructions. Preliminary sketches of the subdivision may be submitted and discussed. Any preliminary sketch should be to scale and in detail sufficient to indicate the essential characteristics of the subdivision, including the number, size, and design of the lots; the location and width of streets; the location of any important reservations or easements; the relation of the subdivision to all surrounding lands; and any other details necessary to enable a preliminary review. The Planning Director shall schedule a conference with the subdivider and the Development Review Committee to discuss the preliminary map and make recommendations concerning the submittal of a tentative or vesting tentative map. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.602. - Submittal. 
For subdivisions creating four or less parcels, 11 copies of the tentative or vesting tentative map shall be submitted to the Planning Department. For subdivisions creating five or more parcels, 14 copies of the tentative or vesting tentative map shall be submitted. Also required is a statement of the proposed division of any land and the information required by the Planning Director pertaining to the environmental impact of the proposed project. Vesting tentative maps shall be visibly designated with the title, "Vesting Tentative Map." 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.603. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-2.604. - Form and content. 
(a)  Size and scale. Tentative and vesting tentative maps shall be 18 by 26 in. in size and to a scale of one in. equals 100 ft. for large areas, and to a scale one in. equals 50 ft. for small areas, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Director. 
(b)  Information required. Every tentative and vesting tentative map shall be clearly and legibly reproduced and shall contain the following information. 
(1)  A key or location map on which shall be shown the general area, including adjacent property, subdivisions and roads: 
(2)  The tract name or number, date, north point, scale, and sufficient description to define the location and boundaries of the proposed tract; 
(3)  The name and address of the recorded owner or owners; 
(4)  The name and address of the subdivider; 
(5)  The name and business address of the person who prepared the map; 
(6)  The acreage of the proposed tract to the nearest tenth of an acre; 
(7)  Sufficient elevations or contours or notations indicating the direction and percent of slope to determine the general slope of the land and the high and low point thereof; 
(8)  The locations, names, widths, and grades of all roads, streets, highways, and ways in the proposed subdivision which are to be offered for dedication; 
(9)  The locations, names, and existing widths of all adjoining and contiguous highways, streets, and ways; 
(10)  The locations and size of all pipelines and structures used in connection therewith; 
(11)  The location and character of all existing public utilities; 
(12)  The widths, location, and purposes of all existing and proposed easements; 
(13)  The lot layout, the dimensions of each lot, and the lot numbers; 
(14)  The City limit lines occurring within the general vicinity of the subdivision; 
(15)  The bearings and distances to quarter-section bounds within the general vicinity of the subdivision; 
(16)  The boundaries of any units within the subdivision if the subdivision is to be recorded in stages; 
(17)  The names of the owners of the lands immediately adjacent to the subdivision; 
(18)  The outline of any existing buildings to remain in place and their locations in relation to the existing or proposed streets and lot lines, along with the location of any existing wells and/or septic systems and leaching fields; 
(19)  The location of any trees proposed to remain in place standing within the boundaries of the proposed public rights-of-way; 
(20)  The location of all areas subject to inundation or stormwater overflow and the location, width, and direction of flow of all watercourses; and 
(21)  Typical sections of the proposed street improvements. 
(c)  Statement required. A statement shall be prepared by the subdivider in written form accompanying the map and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The improvements and public utilities proposed to be made or installed and the time at which such improvements are proposed to be completed; 
(2)  The proposed plan for drainage; 
(3)  The provisions for sewerage and sewage disposal; 
(4)  The provisions for the proposed water supply; 
(5)  The public areas proposed; 
(6)  The type and location of street lighting proposed; 
(7)  The proposed building setback lines and the width of side yards; 
(8)  The justification and reasons for any exceptions to the provisions of this chapter or for any amendments to the zoning laws which may be requested in conjunction with the subdivision proposed; 
(9)  A copy of any restrictive covenants, bylaws, or articles of incorporation proposed shall be attached to the owner's statement as required. 
(10)  The existing use or uses of the property; 
(11)  The proposed use of uses of the property; 
(12)  The tree plantings proposed; 
(13)  A statement from the owner of record, if different than the subdivider, consenting to the division of land by subdivision; and 
(14)  A statement giving the name and address of the individual designated to receive all official communications regarding the subdivision. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.605. - Acceptance. 
The Planning Director shall examine the tentative or vesting tentative map and environmental documents upon presentation. Such map or documents shall not be accepted for distribution unless they are in full conformance with this chapter as to form, data, information, and other matters required to be shown or furnished. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.606. - Distribution. 
The Planning Director shall send copies of the tentative or vesting tentative map, together with the accompanying data, to such public agencies, utility companies and departments as may be concerned. Each of the public agencies, utilities and departments shall within ten days from receipt of the copy of a tentative or vesting tentative map, or within 30 days if a draft environmental impact report is required, forward to the Planning Director a written report of their findings and recommendations. If a reply is not received within the time allowed by this section, it will be assumed that the map conforms to the requirements of the public agency or utility company concerned. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.607. - Filing. 
A tentative or vesting tentative map shall not be considered filed until the environmental assessment is complete and the written reports specified in Section 8-2.606 of this article have been received by the Planning Department. The date of filing shall be indicated on the file copy of the tentative or vesting tentative map and accompanying data by the Planning Department. The Planning Director shall present the tentative or vesting tentative map to the Development Review Committee for its recommendations to the Planning Commission. The Committee shall cause a report to be made to the Planning Commission on the tentative or vesting tentative map for further proceedings in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Committee's report shall represent the recommendation of the various departments and agencies involved in the Committee's proceedings. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.608. - Planning Director's report. 
The Planning Director shall prepare a written report on the conformity of the tentative and vesting tentative map in relation to the provisions of the General Plan, the zoning laws, the report of the Development Review Committee, and all other applicable requirements of this chapter and other regulations of the City. The subdivider shall be provided with a report and recommendations on the tentative or vesting tentative map at least three days prior to any hearing or action on the map by the Planning Commission or the Council. The report and recommendations shall be made in writing and mailed directly to the subdivider at the address designated in the subdivider's statement. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.609. - Planning Commission action. 
The Planning Commission shall take action to approve, conditionally approve or deny a tentative or vesting tentative map within 50 days after the map is filed, unless such time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. 
(a)  Findings. If the Planning Commission finds that the proposed map complies with the requirements of this chapter, the State Subdivision Map Act, and the zoning laws of the City, it shall approve or conditionally approve the map. The Planning Commission shall deny a tentative or vesting tentative map if it makes any of the following findings: 
(1)  That the map proposed is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
(2)  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable General and specific plans or adopted City standards; 
(3)  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
(4)  That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development; 
(5)  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements is likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
(6)  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems; 
(7)  None of the findings in Section 6-9.601 of the Municipal Code is satisfied; or 
(8)  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements acquired by the public at large for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. The Planning Commission may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements, for access or use, will be provided and will be substantially equivalent to those previously acquired by the public. The provisions of this subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Reports to subdividers. Planning Commission actions shall be reported to the subdivider or designated representative by notice placed in the mail within three days of such action. 
(c)  Reports to Council. Following action by the Planning Commission, a copy of the tentative or vesting tentative map, together with a copy of the Planning Commission action, shall be referred to the Council for its information. 
(d)  Appeals of Planning Commission. Any aggrieved person may appeal any determination or requirement of the Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of Article 11 of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 8-2.610. - Expiration of tentative maps. 
(a)  The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall be valid for two years within which time a parcel or final map substantially conforming to the approved tentative map and complying with conditions imposed may be submitted to the City Engineer for acceptance and recordation. Two extensions of time not to exceed 18 months each may be granted by the Planning Commission. Extensions must be requested in writing and filed with the Planning Director by the subdivider not less than 30 days in advance of the expiration of the tentative map. 
(b)  The expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no parcel or final map of all or any portion of the real property included within the tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative map. 
(c)  The period of time specified in subsection (a) of this section shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium is in effect according to the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(d)  The period of time specified in subsection (a) of this section, including any extension thereof, shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit involving the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map is or was pending in court according to the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990; § 1, Ord. 17-92, eff. September 3, 1992)  
Sec. 8-2.611. - Expiration of vesting tentative maps. 
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall be valid for the same period of time as a tentative map as stated in Section 8-2.610 of this article, in addition to the following time periods: 
(a)  After the recording of the parcel or final map, the rights given by a vesting tentative map as provided in the State Subdivision Map Act and this chapter shall be valid for an initial time period of one year with a maximum extension of one additional year. Extensions must be requested in writing and filed with the Planning Director by the subdivider not less than 30 days in advance of the expiration of the vesting tentative map. 
(b)  The initial time period shall be automatically extended by any time used by the City for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design review of the time used by the City to process the application exceeds 30 days from the date that a complete application is filed. Any time prior to the expiration of the initial time period the subdivider may apply for a one-year extension. Extensions must be requested in writing and filed with the Planning Director by the subdivider not less than 30 days in advance of the expiration of the vesting tentative map. If the extension is denied by the Planning Commission, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the City Council within 15 days of the action in accordance with the provisions of Article II of this chapter. 
(c)  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsection (a) of this section, the rights conferred by the State Subdivision Map Act and this chapter shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit granted by the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990; § 1, Ord. 17-92, eff. September 3, 1992)  
Sec. 8-2.612. - Amendments to approved tentative or vesting tentative maps. 
(a)  Minor changes to an approved tentative or vesting tentative map may be approved by the Planning Director provided: 
(1)  No lots, units or buildings sites are added. 
(2)  Such changes are consistent with the intent of the original approved tentative map. 
(3)  There are no resulting violations of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(b)  Amendments to the approved tentative or vesting tentative map other than minor, shall be made by filing an application in map form and in writing with the Planning Director. Such application shall be processed in the same manner as an original application for a tentative or vesting tentative map. 
(c)  Any approved minor amendments shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative or vesting tentative map.  
Article 7. - Parcel Map 
 
Sec. 8-2.701. - Filing. 
Within the time stated in Section 8-2.610 of this chapter a subdivider may have a parcel map prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor in conformance with the tentative or vesting tentative map as approved or conditionally approved by the Planning Commission. The parcel map shall be filed with the City Engineer along with a statement signed by the recorded property owner authorizing the recordation of the parcel map. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.702. - Accompanying data. 
At the time of filing a parcel map with the City Engineer, the subdivider shall also submit the appropriate documents specified in Section 8-2.802 of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.703. - Fees. 
At the time of filing a parcel map, the subdivider shall pay a copy fee and a recording fee as required for recordation of the map in the Sutter County Recorder's Office. 
(§ 2, Ord. I 095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.704. - Form and content. 
The parcel map shall be prepared in conformance with the provisions of subsections (a) through (j) of Section 8-2.804 of this chapter and shall include the following: 
(a)  The Engineer's certificate; 
(b)  The City Engineer's certificate; 
(c)  The County Recorder's certificate; 
(d)  The dedication certificate; 
(e)  The Planning Director's certificate; 
(f)  The Tax Collector's Certificate; and 
(g)  Certificate by parties holding title. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.705. - Public improvement agreements. 
If, at the time of the filing of the parcel map by the subdivider, any public improvements required by the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter have not been completed and accepted in accordance with the City standards applicable at the time of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative or vesting tentative map, the subdivider, as a condition precedent to the recordation of the parcel map, shall enter into an agreement with the City, upon mutually agreeable terms, to thereafter complete such improvements at the subdivider's expense. Such agreement shall be secured by improvement security in the amount and form as set forth in Article 10 of this chapter. 
(a)  Agreements for deferment of public improvement may be approved by the City Council if any of the public improvements required by the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and/ or required as a condition of the tentative or vesting tentative map are not practical, in the opinion of the City Engineer, to construct at the time of the filing of the parcel map. In such event, the subdivider, is required to enter into an agreement approved by the City Council which guarantees that the required improvements shall be constructed within 90 days of the date within which such improvements are determined by the City to be practical and necessary to be constructed. The form of said guarantees and assurances of the agreement shall be as determined appropriate by the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.706. - Action by City Engineer. 
Upon receipt of the parcel map, together with the required fees and data, the City Engineer shall determine whether the map is technically correct and substantially conforms with the approved tentative map and with all the changes and requirements imposed as conditions of approval by the Planning Commission. If the City Engineer determines that the parcel map fully conforms with all the requirements set forth in this chapter, he or she shall so certify on the map. The City Engineer shall also refer the parcel map to the Planning Director for review. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.707. - Action by Planning Director. 
The Planning Director shall examine the parcel map and determine if the map is in substantial conformance with the tentative or vesting tentative map approved by the Planning Commission and, upon such finding, shall execute appropriate certificate on the map. The Planning Director shall, upon certification, refer the parcel map back to the City Engineer. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.708. - Recordation. 
After the approval of a parcel map and acceptance of any dedications by the City, the City Clerk shall transmit the map to the County Recorder unless any part of the subdivision is subject to a lien for taxes or special assessments not yet payable. In the case where such a lien exists, the map shall be sent by the City Clerk to the Clerk of the County Board of Supervisors for ultimate transmittal to the County Recorder. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Article 8. - Final Map 
 
Sec. 8-2.801. - Filing. 
Within the time period established in Section 8-2.610 of this chapter, a subdivider may have a final map prepared of the proposed subdivision, or any part thereof, in conformance with the tentative or vesting tentative map as approved or conditionally approved by the Planning Commission. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.802. - Accompanying data. 
Prior to or at the time of submitting the final map of a subdivision to the City Engineer, the subdivider shall also permit the following documents: 
(a)  Traverse sheets. Calculation and traverse sheets, in a form approved by the City Engineer, giving the bearings and distances and coordinates of the boundaries of the subdivision and the blocks and lots therein shown on the final map; 
(b)  Public improvement plans. The original tracings of detailed plans, cross-sections, and profiles as set forth in this chapter, and of all other improvements proposed to be installed as required by the provisions of this chapter, and of all other improvements proposed to be installed by the subdivider in, on, over, or under any street, right-of-way, easement, or parcel of land dedicated by the map or previously dedicated, including the estimated cost thereof, shall be filed with the City Engineer for his or her approval and signature. All such plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer. Plan sheets shall be 24 by 36 in., with a one-in. left margin. The original tracings, as corrected, shall be filed in the Office of the City Engineer; 
(c)  No-access rights. All no-access rights certificates shall be shown on the final map where required by the City Engineer; 
(d)  Design data. Design data assumptions and computations for property analysis in accordance with sound engineering practices shall be provided as required by the City Engineer; 
(e)  Reports and guarantees of clear title. The final map shall be accompanied by a current report prepared by a duly authorized title company naming the persons whose consent is necessary for the preparation and recordation of such map and for the dedication of the streets, alleys and other public places shown on the maps. As of the date of the preparation of the report it shall certify that the persons named in the report are all of the persons necessary to give clear title to such subdivision. At the time of recording such map, following approval, a guarantee shall be executed by a duly authorized title company and shall be filed with the County Recorder. This guarantee shall show that the persons consenting to the preparation and recordation of such map and offering for dedication the streets, alleys, and other public places shown thereon, are all of the persons necessary to pass clear title to such subdivision and the dedications shown thereon. This agreement shall also include the names of such persons; 
(f)  Agreement and bonds. The agreement and improvement security specified in Sections 8-2.809 of this article and Article 10 of this chapter; and 
(g)  Deed restrictions, bylaws and/or articles of incorporation. Two copies of all deed restrictions, bylaws and/ or articles of incorporation. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.803. - Fees. 
At the time of filing a final map, the subdivider shall pay a copy fee and a recording fee as required for recordation of the map by the County Recorder. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.804. - Form and content. 
The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, shall be based upon a survey and shall conform to all of the following provisions: 
(a)  Materials. The map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film. Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on a polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility; 
(b)  Size and scale. The size of each sheet shall be 18 by 26 in. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one in. The scale of the map shall be sufficient to show all details clearly and in no case shall be greater than one in. equals 100 ft. nor less than one in. equals 50 ft. Sufficient sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The number of each sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and the relation of each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown by the date of the survey, north point, written graphic scale and other information as necessary. The map shall be so made and shall be in such condition when filed that good legible prints and negatives can be made therefrom; 
(c)  Title. The title of each sheet of such final map shall consist of the approved name and unit number of the tract, if any, at the lower right-land corner of the sheet, followed by the words "City of Yuba City." Maps filed for the purpose of showing acreage land previously subdivided shall be conspicuously marked with the words "Reversion to Acreage"; 
(d)  Coordinate system. Wherever the City Engineer has established a system of coordinates, then the survey shall be tied into such system. The adjoining corners of all adjoining lots shall be identified by lot and block numbers, subdivision name, and place of record or other proper designation; 
(e)  Subdivision boundaries. An accurate and complete boundary survey to second order accuracy shall be made of the land to be subdivided. A traverse of the exterior boundaries of the tract, and of each block when computed from field measurements on the ground, shall close within a limit of one ft. to 10,000 ft. The boundary of the subdivision shall be indicated on the final map by a red-orange border applied to the reverse side of the tracing; 
(f)  Dimensions, bearings and curve data. The final map shall show all of the survey and mathematical information and data necessary to locate all monuments thereon, including bearings and distances of straight lines and central angles, radii, arc lengths of curves and such information as may be necessary to determine the location of the centers of the curves; 
(g)  Lots and blocks. All lots and blocks and all parcels offered for dedication for any purpose shall be particularly delineated and designated with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in every case. Parcels offered for dedication or for special purposes other than for streets and easements shall be designated by letter. Sufficient linear, angular and curve data shall be shown to provide block, lot, and parcel which is a part thereof. Sheets shall be so arranged that no lot is split between two or more sheets, and, wherever practicable, blocks in their entirety shall be shown on one sheet. No ditto marks shall be used for dimensions. Lot numbers shall begin with the numeral "1" and continue consecutively throughout the tract, with no omissions or duplications; 
(h)  Streets. The map shall show the right-of-way lines of each street, the width of any portion being dedicated and widths of any existing dedications. The widths and locations of adjacent streets and other public properties within 50 ft. of the subdivision shall be shown. If any street in the subdivision is a continuation or approximately a continuation of any existing street, the conformity or the amount of nonconformity of such street to such existing streets shall be accurately shown. Whenever the center line of a street has been established or recorded, the data shall be shown on the final map; 
(i)  Easements. The side lines of all easements, including utility and new access easements, shall be shown by fine dashed lines. If any easement already of record cannot be definitely located, a statement of the existence, the nature thereof, and its recorder reference shall appear on the title sheet. Distances and bearings on the side lines of lots which are cut by an easement shall be narrowed or be so shown that the map will indicate clearly the actual lengths of the lot line. The widths of all easements, and sufficient ties thereto to definitely locate the same with respect to the subdivision, shall be shown. All easements shall be clearly labeled and identified. If an easement shown on the map is already of record, its recorded reference shall be given. If an easement is being dedicated by the map, it shall be set out in the owner's certificate of dedication; 
(j)  Monuments. The map shall fully and clearly show those stakes, monuments or other evidence used to determine the boundaries of the subdivision that were found on the ground and each adjacent corner of each adjoining subdivision, or portion thereof, by lot and block number, tract name or number, and place of record, by section, municipality, and range or by other proper designation. Any monument or benchmark, as required by this chapter, that is disturbed or destroyed before the acceptance of all improvements shall be shown on the final map: 
(1)  The location of all monuments placed in making the survey. If any points were reset by ties, that fact shall be stated; 
(2)  Concrete monuments depressed below the street grade with a cast iron ring and cover of a type approved by the City Engineer shall be set at intersections of street center line tangents or offsets therefrom, or as required by the City Engineer. The exact location of all such monuments shall be shown on the final map; 
(3)  All lot corners shall be permanently monumented; and 
(4)  All monuments shall be set prior to the acceptance of the public improvements by the City Council; 
(k)  Certificates, acknowledgments and descriptions. The title sheet of the map, below the title, shall show the name of the engineer or surveyor, together with the date of the survey, the scale of the map and the number of sheets. The following certificates, acknowledgments and descriptions shall appear on the title sheet of the final map, and such certificates may be combined where appropriate: 
(1)  Certificates by parties holding title. A certificate in accordance with the provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act; 
(2)  Dedication certificates. A certificate in accordance with the provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act; 
(3)  Engineer's certificates. A certificate in accordance with the provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act; 
(4)  Certificates to be executed. Certificates for execution by each of the following: 
(i)  The City Engineer; 
(ii)  The City Clerk; 
(iii)  The Planning Director; and 
(l)  Description of property. A description of all property being subdivided by reference to maps or deeds of the property shown thereon as shall have been previously recorded or filed shall be filed with the final map. Each reference in such description to any tract or subdivision shall show a complete reference to the book and page of records of the County Recorder. The description shall also include a reference to any vacated area with the number of the ordinance vacating the area. 
(m)  Certificates regarding tax liens. Prior to the filing of the final map with the Council, the subdivider shall file the certificate and documents set forth in the State Subdivision Map Act, or any amendments thereto, relating to taxes and assessments, including the division of assessments. 
(n)  Other affidavits, certificates and the like. Such other affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments, endorsements and notarial seals as are required by law and by this article shall be filed. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.805. - Certificates of insurance. 
The public improvement agreement shall provide for a certificate of insurance in the terms and amount as approved by the City Attorney naming the City as additionally insured. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.806. - Action by City Engineer. 
Upon the receipt of the final map and other data submitted therewith, the City Engineer shall examine the same to determine that the subdivision as shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the tentative map and any approved alterations thereof, that all the provisions of this chapter and the State Subdivision Map Act applicable at the time of the approval of the tentative map have been complied with, and that he or she is satisfied that the map is technically correct. If the City Engineer shall determine that the final map is not in full conformity with the tentative map, he or she shall advise the subdivider of the changes or additions that shall be made to provide conformity and shall afford the subdivider an opportunity to make such changes or additions. If the City Engineer shall determine that full conformity therewith has been made, he or she shall so certify on the map and shall transmit the map to the City Clerk, together with any documents which may have been filed therewith, for presentation to the Council. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.807. - Action by Planning Director. 
The Planning Director shall examine the final map and determine if the map is in substantial conformance with the tentative map approved by the Planning Commission and, upon such finding, shall execute the appropriate certificate on the map. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.808. - Approval by City Council. 
At its first regular meeting following the filing of the final map with the City Clerk, as set forth in Section 8-2.806 of this article, the Council shall consider the map, the plan of subdivision and the offers of dedication. If the Council determines that the map is in conformity with the requirements of this chapter and that it is satisfied with the plan of subdivision, it shall approve the map. At the time the Council approves a final map, it shall also accept, subject to improvement or reject any offer of dedication. The City Clerk shall certify on the map the action by the Council. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.809. - Public improvement agreements. 
If, at the time of the approval of the final map by the Council, any public improvements required by the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter have not been completed and accepted in accordance with the City standards applicable at the time of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, the Council, as a condition precedent to the approval of the final map, shall require the subdivider to enter into an agreement with the City upon mutually agreeable terms, to thereafter complete such improvements at the subdivider's expense. Such agreement shall be secured by improvement security in the amount and form set forth in Article 10 of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.810. - Disapproval by City Council. 
If the Council shall determine either that the final map is not in conformity with the requirements of this chapter or that it is not satisfied with the plan of subdivision, it shall disapprove the map, specifying its reason therefor, and the City Clerk shall, in writing, advise the subdivider of such disapproval and of the reason or reasons for such disapproval. No final map shall have any force or effect until it has been approved by the Council, and no offer of dedication shall be accepted until the City Clerk has recorded the map with the County Recorder. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.811. - Recordation. 
After Council approval of the final map, as set forth in Section 8-2.808 of this article, the City Clerk shall transmit the map to the County Recorder unless any part of the subdivision is subject to a lien for taxes or special assessments not yet payable. In the case where such a lien exists, the map shall be set by the City Clerk to the Clerk of the County Board of Supervisors for ultimate transmittal to the County Recorder. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Article 9. - Reversion to Acreage 
 
Sec. 8-2.901. - Initiation of proceedings by owner. 
Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by petition of all of the owners of record of property. The petition shall be on a form prescribed by the Planning Director. The petition shall contain the information required by Section 8-2.904 of this article and such other information as required by the Planning Director. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.902. - Initiation of proceedings by City Council. 
The City Council, at the request of any person or on its own motion, may by resolution initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage. The City Council shall direct the Planning Director to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.903. - Fees. 
Petitions to revert property to acreage shall be accomplished by a fee as required for recordation of the map by the County Recorder. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.904. - Content of petition. 
The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the Planning Director and shall contain but not be limited to the following: 
(a)  Evidence of title to the real property; and 
(b)  Evidence of the consent of all of the owners having an interest in the property; and 
(c)  Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the parcel or final map was filed for record or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or 
(d)  Evidence that no lots shown on the parcel or final map have been sold within five years from the date such parcel or final map was filed for record. 
In lieu of a petition for reversion to acreage a property owner(s) may file a tentative map in the form prescribed by Article 6 followed by a parcel or final map in the form prescribed by Article 7 or Article 8 of this chapter which map delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications which are condition to reversion. Parcel or final maps shall be visibly designated with the title, "The Purpose of this Map is a Reversion to Acreage." 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.905. - Planning Director's report. 
The Planning Director shall prepare a written report on the conformity of the requested reversion to acreage in relation to the provisions of the General Plan, the zoning laws, the report of the Development Review Committee, and all other applicable requirements of this chapter and other regulations of the City. The petitioner shall be provided with a report and recommendations on the requested reversion of acreage at least three days prior to any hearing or action on the petition by the Council. The report and recommendation shall be made in writing and mailed directly to the petitioner at the address designated in the petition. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.906. - Approval by City Council. 
A public hearing shall be held by the City Council on all petitions for reversion to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 8-2.305 of this chapter. The Planning Director may give such other notice as is deemed necessary or advisable. 
The City Council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records by resolution that: 
(a)  Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and 
(b)  Either: 
(l)  All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion; or 
(2)  None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or 
(3)  No lots shown on the final or parcel map were sold within five years of original recordation. 
The City Council may require as conditions of the reversion: 
(i)  The owners dedication or offer to dedicate streets, public rights-of-ways or easements; and 
(ii)  The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvement securities if the same as necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.907. - Filing for recordation. 
Upon Council approval of the reversion to acreage, the City Clerk shall transmit the maps, together with the City Council's resolution approving the reversion, to the County Recorder for recordation. 
A reversion to acreage shall be effective upon the map being filed for record by the County Recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedications not shown on the final or parcel map for reversion shall be of no further force and effect. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.908. - Exclusion. 
Exclusion may be affected when in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 6, Article 2 of the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Article 10. - Improvement Security 
 
Sec. 8-2.1001. - Improvement security required. 
Whenever this chapter authorizes or requires the furnishings of security in connection with the performance of any act or agreement, such security shall be one of the following at the option of and subject to the approval of the City: 
(a)  A bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties; or 
(b)  A deposit, either with the City or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the City, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for security deposits of public moneys; or 
(c)  An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulations by the State or Federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment, or a letter of credit issued by such a financial institution; or 
(d)  A lien upon the property to be divided, created by contract between the owner and the City, if the City finds that it would not be in the public interest to require the installation of the required improvement sooner than two years after the recordation of the map. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1002. - Form of security. 
(a)  Bonds. A bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties shall be obtained to secure the faithful performance or security of laborers and material men and shall be in substantially the form prescribed by the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(b)  Amount of security. The amount of improvement security shall be based upon the total estimated cost of the improvements as determined by the City Engineer. Improvement security securing the faithful performance of the subdivision agreement shall be an amount equal to 100% of such estimated cost of the improvements. At least 5% of such faithful performance security shall be retained for the guarantee and warranty of the work for a period of one year following the completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done or defective materials furnished. Improvement security securing payment to the contractor, his or her subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment to them for the improvement of the performance of the required act shall be an amount equal to 100% of the total estimated cost of the improvement, except if such securities is in the form of a cash deposit or deposit or instrument of credit, the amount shall be equal to 50% of the total estimated cost of the improvements. 
(c)  Liability on security. Any liability upon the security given for the faithful performance of any act or agreement shall be limited to the condition prescribed by the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(d)  Release of security. Improvement security may be released in whole or in part in the manner prescribed by the State Subdivision Map Act and in accordance with any such rules prescribed by the City Council. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Article 11. - Appeals 
 
Sec. 8-2.1101. - Notices of appeal. 
Appeals may be made from any decision or determination or requirement of the Planning Director, the Planning Commission or the City Engineer by any person aggrieved. Appeals shall be made by filing a notice thereof in writing with the City Clerk within ten days after such decision or determination or requirement is rendered. However, if the Planning Commission denies an extension of time for a tentative or vesting tentative map, the appeal period is within 15 days of the Planning Commission's decision. All such appeals shall set forth in detail the action and grounds upon which such person bases a grievance. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990; § 1, Ord. 17-92, eff. September 3, 1992)  
Sec. 8-2.1102. - Report of the City Clerk to the Planning Commission and City Engineer. 
The City Clerk shall report the filing of such notice to the Planning Director, Planning Commission and the City Engineer. A written report shall be submitted to the Council by the agent or agency whose decision, determination or requirement is being appealed not later than the date set for hearing such appeal. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990  
Sec. 8-2.1103. - Action on appeals. 
Upon the filing of an appeal, the Council shall set the matter for hearing. Such hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date of filing the appeal. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Council shall, within ten days, declare its findings based upon the testimony and documents before it. The Council may overrule or modify the decision, determination or requirement appealed from and enter any such orders as are in harmony with the spirit and purposes of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990  
Article 12. - Correction and Amendments to Filed Maps 
 
Sec. 8-2.1201. - Requirements. 
After a final or parcel map is filed in the office of the County Recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map: 
(a)  To correct an error in any course or distance shown; 
(b)  To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom; 
(c)  To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map; 
(d)  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments; 
(e)  To show the proper location of any monument which has been changed in location, or character or originally was shown the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character; or 
(f)  To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the City Engineer, which does not affect any property right. Errors and omissions may include, but not be limited to, lots and numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent record maps. Error does not include changes in courses or distances from which an error cannot be determined from the data shown on the final or parcel map. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1202. - Fees. 
At the time of submittal of an amended map or certificate of correction the subdivider shall pay a recording fee as required for recordation of the map by the County Recorder. 
(§ 2, Ord. I 095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1203. - Form and content. 
The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. An amending map shall conform to Article 7 of this chapter if a parcel map, or Article 8 of this chapter if a final map. The amending map or certificate of correction shall show or explain in detail the corrections made and list the names of the present owners of the property who will be affected by the correction or omission. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1204. - Action by City Engineer. 
The amending map or certificate of correction shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and if the only changes made are those set forth in Section 8-2.1201(a) through (f) of this article, the Engineer shall certify the amending map or certificate of corrections. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1205. - Recordation. 
An amending map or certificate of correction which has been certified by the City Engineer, shall be filed in the office of the County Recorder. Upon such filing, the County Recorder shall index the names of the property owners and the appropriate subdivision designation shown on the amending map or certificate of correction in the general index and map index respectively. The original map shall be considered to have been corrected and shall give notice of all the corrections in the same manner as if it were on the original map. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Article 13. - Definitions 
 
Sec. 8-2.1301. - Terms and words. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, all terms used in this chapter which are defined in the State Subdivision Map Act, and those terms set forth in Section 1-3.13 of Chapter 3 of Title 1 of this Code are used in this chapter as so defined, unless from the context hereof it clearly appears that a different meaning is intended. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1302. - Advisory agency. 
"Advisory agency" shall mean the City Planning Commission who has the authority under this chapter to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove maps of proposed divisions of real property. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1303. - Certificate of compliance. 
"Certificate of compliance" shall mean a certificate prepared by the City and recorded by the property owner or his or her agent which determines that the subdivision of real property complies or conditionally complies with the provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act and City ordinances enacted pursuant thereto. A recorded final map or parcel map shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1304. - Design. 
"Design" shall mean: 
(a)  Street alignments, grades and widths; 
(b)  Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades thereof; 
(c)  Location and size of all required easements and right-of-way; 
(d)  Fire lanes; 
(e)  Lot size and configuration; 
(f)  Traffic access; 
(g)  Grading; 
(h)  Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; and 
(i)  Such other specific requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary or convenient to ensure conformity to or implementation of the General Plan or an adopted specific plan of the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1305. - Development. 
"Development" shall mean the uses to which the land, which is the subject of the map, shall be put, the buildings to be constructed on it, and all other alterations of the land. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1306. - Final map. 
"Final map" shall mean a map prepared by or under the direction of a qualified registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor in accordance with the provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act and this chapter which delineates the division of land into five or more residential lots and show the design, improvements and dedications of the proposed subdivision. This map is designed to be placed on record in the office of the County Recorder. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1307. - Improvement. 
(a)  "Improvement" shall refer to any street work and utilities to be installed or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider, either on-site or off-site, to be used for public or private street, highways, ways and easements as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof; 
(b)  "Improvements" also refers to any other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the local agency or by a combination thereof, is necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the General Plan or any applicable specific plan. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1308. - Lot. 
"Lot" shall mean a parcel or portion of land established for purposes of sale, lease, finance, division of interest or separate use, separated from other lands by description on a final map or parcel map. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1309. - Lot line adjustment. 
"Lot line adjustment" shall mean a minor shift or rotation of an existing lot line or other adjustments where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created, as approved by the Planning Director and Public Works Director. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1310. - Parcel map. 
"Parcel map" shall mean a map prepared by or under the direction of a qualified registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor in accordance with the State Subdivision Map Act and this chapter which delineates the division of land into four or less residential lots or any number of commercial or industrial lots and shows the design, improvements and dedications of the proposed subdivisions. This map is designed to be placed on record in the office of the County Recorder. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1311. - Planning director. 
"Planning Director" shall mean the City Planning Director or authorized representative. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1312. - Reversion to acreage. 
"Reversion to acreage" shall mean the changing of subdivided property, as shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll, to acreage. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1313. - Subdivider. 
"Subdivider" shall mean a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided, real property into a subdivision for himself or herself or for others. 
(§ 2, Ord. I 095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1314. - Subdivision. 
"Subdivision" shall mean the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future except for leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, street, utility easement or railroad rights of way. "Subdivision" shall include a condominium project, as defined in the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in the Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in the Business and Professions Code. As used in this section, "agricultural purposes" shall mean the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1315. - Development review committee. 
"Development Review Committee" shall mean the following officials or their duly authorized representatives: the Planning Director and the Director of Public Works and other department heads as may be affected by the proposed subdivision. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1316. - Tentative map. 
"Tentative map" shall mean a map prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor in accordance with the provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act and this chapter to show the design of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around the land proposed to be divided. Such map need not be based upon an accurate or detailed field survey; however, it shall be graphically accurate to reasonable tolerances. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1317. - Vesting tentative map. 
"Vesting tentative map" refers to a map which meets the requirements of a tentative map and when approved or conditionally approved, gives the subdivider a vested right to develop the property in compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the subdivider filed a complete application with the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Article 14. - Standards and Requirements for Subdivisions 
 
Sec. 8-2.1401. - Requirements. 
Except where modified in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, each subdivision and the map thereof shall be in conformity with the standards set forth or referred to in this article. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1402. - Buildable lots. 
All subdivisions shall result in the creation of lots which are developable and capable of being built upon. No subdivision shall create lots which are impractical of improvement due to size or shape, location of water courses, or problems of sewage or driveway grades or other natural physical conditions. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1403. - Lot standards. 
The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate to the location of the proposed subdivision and to the types of developments contemplated. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
(a)  The minimum area and dimension of all lots shall conform to the requirements of the zoning laws of the City for the district in which the subdivision is located; 
(b)  No residential lot shall have a width less than 50 ft. at the street frontage, except for residential lots on curved or cul-de-sac streets, which shall have a minimum street frontage of 40 ft. and a minimum width at the established front yard building setback line of 50 ft.; 
(c)  The side lines of all lots, so far as possible, shall be at right angles to the street which the lot faces, or approximately radial to the center of curvature, if such street is curved. The side lines of lots shall be approximately radial to the center of the curvature of a cul-de-sac on which the lot faces; 
(d)  No lot shall be divided by a City boundary line nor any boundary between parcels registered under separate ownership. Each such boundary line shall be made a lot line; 
(e)  Lots having double frontage shall not be approved, except where necessitated by unusual conditions. The width of each block shall be sufficient for an ultimate layout of two tiers of lots therein of a size required by the provisions of this chapter, unless the general layout in the vicinity, lines of ownership, topographical conditions, or locations of major streets or freeways justify or make necessary a variation from this requirement; 
(f)  No remnants of property shall be left in the subdivision which do not conform to the lot requirements or are not required for a private utility or public purpose. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1404. - Access to public streets. 
All lots or parcels created by the subdivision of lands shall have access to a public street improved to the standards hereinafter required. Private streets shall not normally be permitted. However, if the Planning Commission finds that the most logical development of the land requires that lots be created which are served by a private street or other means or access, and makes such findings in writing with the reasons therefor, then such access may be approved by the Planning Commission. The subdivider shall submit a development plan showing the alignment, width, grade and material specifications of any proposed private street, the drainage and sewerage of the lots served by such private streets, and a plan satisfactory to the Council for the ownership and maintenance of such street and the liability for taxes thereon. The construction of the private streets or access shall be completed prior to the occupancy of any buildings on lots served by a private street. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1405. - Streets. 
(a)  Conformance. Streets shall conform in principle to the streets shown on the Circulation Element of the General Plan and in width and alignment to the streets shown on any precise plan adopted by the Council relating to streets and shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. Streets not shown on a General or precise plan shall conform to the requirements of the City and of this chapter. 
(b)  Minimum standards. Where higher standards have not been established as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, all major and minor streets shall be platted according to the following minimums, except that higher standards may be required where streets are to serve commercial or industrial property or where probable traffic conditions warrant: 
	Type of Street 	Right-of-Way Width* (feet) 	Curb-to-Curb Width (feet) 
1. 	Major or highway (arterial) 
	 4 lane 	84 	72 
	 2 lane 	72 	60 
2. 	Collector 	60 	48 
3. 	Industrial 	56 	44 
4. 	Standard residential streets 	54 	40 
5. 	Interior residential & cul-de-sac streets 	49** 	40 
6. 	Private streets and alleys 	As determined by the Planning Commission 
(see also Sec. 8-2.1409) 
 
* Plus additional easements for utilities. 
** Minimum cul-de-sac right-of-way radius is 44.5 ft. 
"Interior residential and cul-de-sac streets" as used in this subsection means streets which serve only lots which are wholly within the subdivision. That is, the term is intended to apply to streets other than through streets. It is not intended to apply to that portion of streets adjacent to the exterior boundaries of the subdivision nor to streets within the subdivision that are aligned, generally, with streets lying outside the subdivision. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1406. - Street patterns. 
The street patterns in the subdivision shall be in general conformity with a plan for the most advantageous development of adjoining areas and the entire neighborhood or district. 
The following principles shall be observed: 
(a)  Where appropriate to the design, the proposed streets shall be contiguous to and in alignment with existing, planned, or platted streets which they connect. 
(b)  The proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the land to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, such extension is not necessary for the coordination of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. A no-access rights certificate shall be shown on the final map where required by the City Engineer. 
(c)  Where necessary to give access to or permit a satisfactory subdivision of adjoining land, streets shall extend to the boundaries of the property and the resulting dead-end streets may be approved for a period established by the City Engineer. In all other cases, a turnaround shall have a minimum right-of-way radius of 44.5 ft. and a curb radius of 40 ft. 
(d)  No cul-de-sac shall exceed 600 ft. in length from the center of the turnaround to the center line of the intersecting street. 
(e)  The proposed streets shall intersect one another as nearly at right angles as the conditions and other limiting factors of good design shall permit. 
(f)  Excessively long, straight, standard subdivision streets, conducive to high speed traffic, shall be discouraged. 
(g)  The center lines of all streets, wherever practicable, shall be the continuation of the center lines of existing streets or shall be offset at least 300 ft. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1407. - Design adjacent to arterials. 
The subdivision design adjacent to major streets or highways shall be as determined by the Planning Commission. 
(a)  Design—General. Street design shall have the purpose of making adjacent lots, if for residential use, desirable for such use by cushioning the impact of heavy traffic and minimizing the interference with traffic on such arterials. 
(b)  Intersections. The number of intersection streets along arterials shall be held to a minimum. 
(c)  Lot ingress and egress. When the rear or side lines of any lots border a State highway or major street, the subdivider may be required to execute and deliver to the City an instrument prohibiting the right of ingress and egress to such lots across the side lines of such highways. 
(d)  Service roads. When lots proposed for commercial or industrial uses front on any major or secondary street or highway, the subdivider may be required to dedicate and improve a parallel service road to provide ingress and egress to and from such lots. When lots proposed for residential use front on a highway or a major street, the subdivider may be required to dedicate and improve a service road at the front of such lots or to back lots to the highway or major streets. 
(e)  Service roads—Off-street parking. In addition to the requirements for a service road, the Planning Commission may require adequate off-street parking areas for all lots proposed for commercial, multiple-family, or industrial uses. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1408. - Street names. 
All street names shall be as approved by the Planning Commission, and no duplication of street names shall be permitted within the urban area of the City and the County area contiguous to the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1409. - Alleys. 
When lots are proposed for commercial or industrial uses, alleys at least 26 ft. in width may be required at the rear thereof. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1410. - Grades, curves, and sight distances. 
Grades, curves, and sight distances shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer to ensure proper drainage and safety for vehicles and pedestrians. The following principles and minimum standards shall be observed: 
(a)  Grades of streets shall not be less than 0.24% and not greater than 7%. 
(b)  Street intersections shall be rounded with curves having a minimum radius of 15 ft. at property lines. A greater curve radius may be required if streets intersect at other than right angles or if the streets is either a collector or an arterial street. 
(c)  The center line curve radius on all streets and highways shall conform to accepted engineering standards of design and shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1411. - Curbs, sidewalks, and pedestrian ways. 
(a)  Curbs and gutters as shown on the City's standard detail drawings shall be required. 
(b)  When required for access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation facilities, other community facilities, or for unusually long blocks, the subdivider shall construct pedestrian ways not less than ten ft. in width. 
(c)  Sidewalks shall be located within the street right-of-way as shown on the City's standard detail drawings. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1412. - Utilities and easements. 
(a)  Utility easements, not less than eight ft. in width, may be required for utility purposes. 
(b)  All utility distribution facilities shall be placed underground, except as otherwise provided in Section 8-2.1511 of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1413. - Watercourses. 
The subdivider shall dedicate rights-of-way for storm drainage conforming substantially with the lines of any natural watercourse that traverses the subdivision, or, at the option of the Planning Commission, the subdivider shall provide by dedication further and sufficient easements or construction, or both, to dispose of such surface and stormwater. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1414. - Block standards. 
The major dimensions of a block shall not exceed 1,320 ft. in length nor be less than 440 ft. in length between street center lines, unless modified in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-2.1501 of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1415. - Neighborhood facilities; reservation of sites. 
The subdivider may be required to reserve sites appropriate in area and location for necessary and desirable neighborhood facilities, such as schools, parks, and playgrounds. Such sites shall be dedicated in accordance with the provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1416. - Nonresidential subdivisions. 
(a)  The term "nonresidential subdivisions" applies to all subdivisions that do not include residential lots. 
(b)  The street and lot layout of a nonresidential subdivision shall be appropriate to the land use for which the subdivision is proposed and shall conform to the proposed land use and standards established in the City's General Plan and the zoning laws of the City. 
(c)  In addition to the principles and standards in this chapter which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the subdivider shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
(1)  Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the type of industrial development anticipated. 
(2)  Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereon. 
(3)  Special requirements may be imposed by the City with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction. 
(4)  Special requirements may be imposed by the City with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and storm drainage. 
(5)  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisances caused by nonresidential subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up to existing or potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary. 
(6)  Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas or be connected to streets extended for predominantly residential traffic. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Article 15. - Public Improvements 
 
Sec. 8-2.1501. - Minimum requirements. 
The subdivider shall improve, or agree to improve, all streets, pedestrian ways or easements, and public utilities in the subdivision and adjacent thereto required to serve the subdivision. No permanent improvement work shall be commenced until improvement plans and profiles have been approved by the City Engineer and a subdivision agreement contract has been concluded between the subdivider and the City. Improvements shall be installed to permanent line and grade, and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, and in accordance with the standard specification on file in the office of the City Engineer. The minimum improvement which the subdivider shall make, or agree to make at the cost of the subdivider, prior to the acceptance and approval of the final subdivision map or parcel map by the City shall be as set forth in this article. 
Improvements may be required of the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision which would contain supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, together with a requirement that such improvements shall be dedicated to the public. In the event the subdivider is required under this provision to install improvements containing supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, City shall, pursuant to the provisions of Government Code § 66486, enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements. The term "improvements" as used herein shall mean any street work and utilities to be installed or agreed to be installed by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways and easements as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof. "Improvements" shall also refer to any other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the local agency, or by a combination thereof, is necessary to ensure consistency with or implementation of the General Plan or any applicable specific plan. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1502. - Grading, curbs, gutters, paving, and drainage structures. 
Grading, curbs and gutters, paving, and the drainage structures necessary for the proper use and drainage of the streets, adjacent property, and pedestrian ways and for the public safety shall be provided. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1503. - Streets and pedestrian ways. 
All streets and pedestrian ways shall be improved to the widths and grades shown on the improvement plans and profiles signed by the City Engineer and approved by the Council as established by law. The subdivider shall improve the extensions of all subdivision streets and pedestrian ways to the intercepting paving line of any County road, City street, or State highway. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1504. - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks shall be installed as shown on the improvement plans and profiles approved by the City Engineer. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1505. - Street name signs. 
Street name signs shall be provided and placed as approved by the City Engineer. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1506. - Monuments, barricades and traffic safety devices. 
Permanent monuments, barricades and traffic safety devices shall be placed as approved by the City Engineer. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1507. - Street lighting facilities. 
Street lighting facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer. Lighting shall be adequate to permit proper policing of the subdivision. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1508. - Sewer facilities. 
Sanitary sewer facilities connecting with the existing City sewer system shall be installed to serve the subdivision with a separate private lateral from each lot and to the grades and sizes shown on the plans approved by the City Engineer. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1509. - Stormwater drains. 
Stormwater drains shall be installed as shown on the improvement plans approved by the City Engineer. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1510. - Water mains and fire hydrants. 
Water mains and fire hydrants connecting to the water system of the City shall be installed as shown on the improvement plans approved by the City Engineer. Mains and individual lot services shall be of sufficient size to furnish an adequate water supply for each lot or parcel in the subdivision and to provide adequate fire protection. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1511. - Underground utility facilities. 
All new utility facilities (including, but not limited to, electric, communication, and cable television lines) extended to and installed within any new subdivision shall be placed underground. The installation of the facilities of privately owned utility companies shall be made in accordance with the utilities' rules and regulations on file with the Public Utilities Commission of the State. Exempt from this requirement are equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. 
(a)  The subdivider shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies involved for the installation of such facilities. 
(b)  Public rights-of-way and easements where utilities are to be placed underground shall be graded to within six in. of the final grade prior to the installation of those utilities. 
(c)  The grades of curbs shall be determined and staked before utilities are installed underground. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1512. - Underground utilities; general. 
All underground utilities, water lines, sanitary sewer, and storm drains installed in streets or alleys shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of such streets or alleys. The connections for all water lines, storm drain lines, underground utilities and sanitary sewers shall be laid to such lengths as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the street or alley improvements when service connections thereto are made. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1513. - Underground utility crossings; dry conduit installations. 
Where necessary, dry conduit shall be installed for future underground utility crossings. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1514. - Completion. 
A complete set of improvement plans "as built" shall be filed with the City Engineer upon the completion of the improvements required by the provisions of this article. Such "as built" plans shall be drawn on copies of the original tracings and be certified as to accuracy and completeness by the subdivider's licensed contractor or engineer. 
Upon the receipt and acceptance of such "as built" plans, the City Engineer shall recommend to the Council the formal acceptance of the improvements by the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
Sec. 8-2.1515. - Utility fees. 
The subdivider shall be required to pay all the regular extension fees and connection fees for the extension of and connection to water lines, sewer lines, and storm drain facilities. Such fees shall be made payable prior to the filing of the map, except in such cases where the building density is not determined, in which case the sewer and water connection fees may be deferred by the Council upon the recommendation of the City Engineer until an application for a building permit is filed. 
(§ 2, Ord. 1095, eff. March 22, 1990)  
CHAPTER 3. - AIRPORT ZONING 
 
Sec. 8-3.01. - Title of provisions. 
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "Airport Zoning Regulations of the City of Yuba City." 
(§ 2, Ord. 448)  
Sec. 8-3.02. - Purpose of provisions. 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Conservation and Planning Act of the State of California, and in conformity with regulations and standards of the Federal Aeronautics Administration of the United States Department of Commerce, the Council deems it necessary to create airport zoning regulations for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City by preventing the creation or establishment of airport hazards, thereby protecting the lives and property of the users of the Sutter County Airport, and of the occupants of the land in the vicinity, and preventing destruction or impairment of the utility of the airport and the public investment therein. 
(§ 1, Ord. 448)  
Sec. 8-3.03. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Airport" shall mean the Sutter County Airport. 
(b)  "Airport hazard" shall mean any structure, tree, or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or takeoff at the airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or takeoff of aircraft. 
(c)  "Landing area" shall mean the area of the airport used for the landing, takeoff, or taxiing of aircraft. 
(d)  "Nonconforming use" shall mean any structure, tree, or use of land which does not conform on December 6, 1961, to the regulations prescribed in this chapter or an amendment hereto as of the effective date of such amendment. 
(e)  "Planning Commission" shall mean the Planning Commission of the City. 
(f)  "Structure" shall mean any object constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead transmission lines. 
(g)  "Tree" shall mean any object of natural growth. 
(§ 3, Ord. 448)  
Sec. 8-3.04. - Zones. 
In order to carry out the purpose of this chapter, all land within the boundaries of the Sutter County Airport and within 8,000 ft. of the airport reference point is hereby divided into airport approach zones, airport turning zones, and airport transition zones, the boundaries of which are shown on the Official Airport Zoning Map of Yuba City, approved by the Planning Commission, and conforming to Civil Aeronautics Technical Standard Order TSON18, dated 26 April, 1950. The airport zoning map is hereby approved as the official map for such zoning purposes and shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk, and the same is hereby made a part of this chapter, subject to amendments hereof from time to time as may be necessary. Such amendments shall be entered on the official map, and the same shall be kept up-to-date at all times. 
(§ 4, Ord. 448)  
Sec. 8-3.05. - Height limits. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in any airport approach zone, airport turning zone, or airport transition zone to a height in excess of the height limit established in this section for such zone. For the purposes of this regulation, the following height limits are hereby established for each of such zones: 
(a)  Approach Zone No. One. Approach Zone No. One shall have a maximum height limit of zero ft. at a distance of 200 ft. from the end of the runway, "zero ft.," for the purposes of this chapter, being the elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area. The maximum allowable height shall be increased at the rate of one ft. vertically to each 20 ft. horizontally to a maximum height of 150 ft. 
(b)  Transition Zones No. One and No. Two. Transition Zones No. One and No. Two are inclined planes with a slope of seven ft. horizontally to one ft. vertically measured upward and outward in a vertical plane at right angles to the center line of the runway. These planes extend from the edge of Approach Zone No. One to a maximum height of 150 ft. 
(c)  Turning Zone No. One. Turning Zone No. One comprises all areas other than as specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section within a 5,000 ft. radius of the airport reference point. The maximum height limit within all portions of this zone shall be 150 ft. 
(d)  Turning Zone No. Two. Turning Zone No. Two comprises all those areas outside the 5,000 ft. radius specified in subsection (c) of this section but within a radius of 8,000 ft. of the airport reference point. The maximum height limit in this zone shall be a conical surface extending upward and outward from the periphery of Turning Zone No. One with a slope of 20 ft. horizontally to one ft. vertically measured in a vertical plane passing through the airport reference point. 
(§ 5, Ord. 448)  
Sec. 8-3.06. - Use restrictions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made of land within any airport approach zone, airport turning zone, or airport transition zone in such a manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and other lights, resulting in glare in the eyes of the flyers using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endanger the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft. 
(§ 6, Ord. 448)  
Sec. 8-3.07. - Nonconforming uses. 
The regulations set forth in Sections 8-3.05 and 8-3.06 of this chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations on December 6, 1961, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any changes in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to December 6, 1961, and is diligently prosecuted and completed within one year thereof. 
(§ 7, Ord. 448)  
Sec. 8-3.08. - Variances. 
Any person desiring to erect any structure, or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his or her property not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may apply to the Planning Commission for a variance therefrom in accordance with the procedure prescribed for variances in Article 22 of Chapter 5 of this title. When it has been determined that there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, the Planning Commission shall have the power to vary or modify any of the rules, regulations, or provisions contained in this chapter so that its spirit shall be observed, the public welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
The Planning Commission shall also have the power to make changes in the restrictions and boundaries of the zones established by this chapter in accordance with the procedure prescribed for amendments and reclassification in Article 23 of Chapter 5 of this title. 
(§§ 8 and 9, Ord. 448)  
Sec. 8-3.09. - Hazard marking and lighting. 
Any variance granted pursuant to the provisions of Section 8-3.08 of this chapter may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and is reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question, at his or her own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence any airport hazard. 
(§ 10, Ord. 448)  
Sec. 8-3.10. - Administrative agency. 
The Building Inspector of the City is hereby designated the administrator charged with the duty of administering and enforcing the regulations of this chapter. The duties of the Building Inspector shall include the review of all applications for building permits within the approach zones, turning zones, and transitional zones of the Sutter County Airport. The applicant shall be notified of any possible violations within ten days of the date of application. The Building Inspector shall not have or exercise any of the powers or duties delegated to the Planning Commission. 
(§ 11, Ord. 448)  
Sec. 8-3.11. - Jurisdiction of provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall only apply and be in force on areas within the approach zones, the transitional zones, and the turning zones within the City. 
(§ 14, Ord. 448)  
Sec. 8-3.12. - Conflicting regulations. 
When the provisions of this chapter impose a greater or more stringent restriction upon the use of land than is imposed or required by any other law or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(§ 15, Ord. 448)  
Sec. 8-3.13. - Violation of provisions. 
In the event any person shall erect, construct, move, or alter any structure or allow any tree to grow to a height in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the same is hereby declared a public nuisance, and it shall be the duty of the City Attorney to bring and prosecute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin such person from continuing such erection, construction, moving, alteration, or growth, or if such erection, construction, moving, alteration, or growth is being or has been accomplished, the City Attorney shall enjoin such person from maintaining the same. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be accumulative and shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this Code or by law for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 12, Ord. 448)  
CHAPTER 4. - OFFICIAL STREET MAP, FUTURE WIDTH LINE MAPS, AND OFFICIAL PLAN LINE MAPS 
 
Sec. 8-4.01. - Purposes of provisions. 
(a)  The Council hereby finds that the preparation and adoption of certain Precise Plans, which are provided for by law, are necessary to implement elements of the Master Plan and to promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. 
(b)  The Council further finds that the official mapping of all public streets and alleys, and the precise mapping of existing and proposed future streets and alleys for purposes of giving notice of proposed widening or extension, are in the public interest and necessary to accomplish the purposes of the Streets and Highways element of the Master Plan. 
(§ 1, Ord. 341)  
Sec. 8-4.02. - Preparation of maps. 
The Council hereby authorizes the preparation of the following: 
(a)  An Official Street Map; 
(b)  Future Width Line Maps; and 
(c)  Official Plan Line Maps. 
All such maps shall constitute Precise Plans, shall be based on adopted elements of the Master Plan, and shall be prepared and adopted in accordance with procedures provided by law pertaining to Precise Plans. 
(§ 1, Ord. 341)  
Sec. 8-4.03. - Official street map. 
The Official Street Map shall show all public streets and alleys within the City, together with their names, widths of rights-of-way, actual or established center lines, monuments which have been set to establish such right-of-way or center lines, and other data related to the widths and locations of such streets and alleys. 
(§ 2, Ord. 341)  
Sec. 8-4.04. - Official street map; inclusion of or references to other maps. 
Future Width Line Maps and Official Plan Line Maps may be included upon the Official Street Map or may be individual maps to which reference is made on the Official Street Map by appropriate symbols or other designations. 
(§ 3, Ord. 341)  
Sec. 8-4.05. - Future width line maps. 
(a)  Future Width Line Maps shall show the land areas required for future street widening in accordance with the Master Plan by lines precisely dimensioned from existing right-of-way lines or from actual or established center lines. 
(b)  Future Width Line Maps shall show the land areas required for future streets or for street extensions or realignments in accordance with the Master Plan by precisely dimensioned land boundaries and ties to existing monuments, existing street lines, or existing property lines or corners. 
(§§ 4 and 5, Ord. 341)  
Sec. 8-4.06. - Variances from provisions. 
Variances from the provisions of this chapter may be approved in cases of unusual hardship which would result from the strict application of such regulations. Upon the receipt of a written request for a variance, the Planning Commission shall, within 45 days, consider such request and submit a report thereon to the Council. The Council shall act upon any such request within 30 days of receipt of the report thereon. 
(§ 7, Ord. 341)  
Sec. 8-4.07. - Violations of provisions; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct any building or structure upon any land areas included within any adopted Future Width Lines or Official Plan Lines, with the exception of the following: 
(a)  Street improvements, drainage structures, City or public utility lines or structures, or similar structures or installations which have first been approved by the Council; 
(b)  Temporary fences and farm irrigation and drainage structures; and 
(c)  Temporary buildings or structures having a value of not more than $500 as determined by the Building Inspector. 
(§ 6, Ord. 341)  
Sec. 8-4.08. - Public nuisances; removal. 
Any building or structure erected or constructed in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may be caused to be removed by the Council at the expense of the owner thereof. 
(§ 8, Ord. 341)  
CHAPTER 5. - ZONING  
PART I. - INTRODUCTION  
Article 1. - Basic Provisions 
 
Sec. 8-5.101. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Zoning Regulations of the City of Yuba City. 
(§ 8-5.101, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.102. - Purpose of the zoning regulations. 
To promote and protect the public's health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience and general welfare; 
To provide open space, light, air, privacy, convenience of access, aesthetic values, protection of environmental values, and protection of public and private improvements; 
To facilitate and guide growth in accordance with the Yuba City Urban Area General Plan; 
To protect the social and economic stability of residential, commercial and industrial activities within the City through the orderly and planned use of land. 
(§ 8-5.102, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.103. - Application of zoning regulations. 
(a)  No land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, structurally altered, moved or used in any district shown on the district map except in accordance with the regulations established by this chapter. 
(b)  In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the protection and promotion of the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all ownership of land within the City, to the extent provided by law. 
(§ 8-5.103, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.104. - Issuance of certificates of occupancy. 
No building or structure constructed, erected, altered, or moved on a lot shall be occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy, showing that such use of the lot or building is in conformity with provisions of this chapter, is issued by the Chief Building Inspector. 
(§ 8-5.104, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.105. - Districts established. 
The City is hereby divided into the following districts: 
Map Symbol 	District Classification 
R-1 	One-Family Residence District 
R-2 	Two-Family Residence District 
R-3 	Multiple-Family Residence District 
C-O 	Office Commercial District 
C-1 	Neighborhood Convenience Commercial District 
C-2 	Community Commercial District 
C-3 	General Commercial District 
C-M 	Heavy Commercial/Light Industrial District 
M-1 	Light Industrial District 
M-2 	Industrial District 
AH 	Agricultural Holding District 
F 	Flood District 
PD 	Planned Development District 
PF 	Public Facilities District 
A 	Agricultural Combining District 
AI 	Airport Influence Combining District 
H 	Historic Combining District 
X 	Special Standards Combining District 
SP 	Specific Plan Combining District 
 
(§ 8-5.105, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.106. - District map. 
The boundaries of the districts shall be as shown on the district map of the City. Such map, and all amendments, changes, and extensions thereof, and all legends, symbols, notations, references, and other matters shown thereon, shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the Planning Director. 
(§ 8-5.106, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.107. - District map; adoption. 
The boundaries of the districts shown on the district map, or amendments thereto, are hereby adopted, and all the regulations of this chapter with respect to the several districts delineated thereon, together with all references and information shown thereon, are hereby established and declared to be in effect upon all lands included within the boundaries of the several districts delineated upon the district map. 
The district map, for convenience, may be divided into parts, and each such part may, for purposes of more readily identifying areas within such district map, be subdivided into units, and each such unit may be separately used for purposes of amending the district map or for any official reference to the district map. Such map, and each such part and unit, and the notations, references, and other information shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the matters and information set forth by such map were all fully described in this chapter. 
(§ 8-5.107, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.108. - Application of preannexation zoning. 
The City may apply preannexation zoning to unincorporated property located within the area defined by the Yuba City Urban Area General Plan Land Use Map. The preannexation zoning process shall comply with the provisions of Article 72 of this chapter. 
(§ 8-5.108, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.109. - Annexed territory. 
Territory annexed to the City shall be automatically added to the district map and shall be classed the same as the preannexation zone, effective on the date of annexation. 
(§ 8-5.109, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.110. - Uncertainty of boundaries. 
When uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district as shown on the district map, the following rules apply: 
(a)  Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following highway, street, or alley lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(b)  In the case of a district boundary dividing a lot, the location of such boundaries, unless they are indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the district map. 
(c)  Where a public street or alley or parcel of land is officially vacated, the regulations of abutting properties shall apply to such vacated street, alley, or land. 
(d)  In case of further uncertainty, the Planning Commission shall determine the location of boundaries. 
(e)  Any other land not included in any district shall be classed as being in the One-Family Residence District (R-1). 
(§ 8-5.110, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.111. - Uncertainty of uses. 
The list of uses within each district is representative of the expected uses, and is not intended to be a complete list of every possible use. Where a proposed land use is not specifically listed by a district, the Planning Director may determine that the use is a permitted use, or the use is permitted if a use permit is first secured, if the following findings can be made: 
(a)  The proposed use is similar in character and impact to a listed use; and 
(b)  The proposed use will be treated in the same manner as the listed use, including determining where it is allowed, what permits are required and what standards must be met for its establishment. 
(§ 8-5.111, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.112. - Fees. 
The City Council may establish by resolution, and may amend and revise from time to time, fees for processing the various applications authorized or required by the title. All fees shall be paid at the time an application is filed and no processing shall commence until such fee is paid in full. 
(§ 8-5.112, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.113. - Conflicts with other laws and agreements. 
(a)  When conflicts occur between the regulations of this chapter and the Building Code or other regulations effective in the City, the more restrictive of any such regulations shall apply. 
(b)  It is not intended by the provisions of this chapter to interfere with or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties; provided, however, when the provisions of this chapter impose a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon spaces than are imposed or required by such easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(§ 8-5.113, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
PART II. - ZONE DISTRICTS  
Article 5. - One-Family Residence Districts (R-1) 
 
Sec. 8-5.501. - Purpose. 
To provide areas for the low density residential neighborhoods that have adequate services and amenities which will support a desirable and stable living environment. The R-1 District is consistent with the Low Density Residential General Plan designation. 
(§ 8-5.501, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.502. - Uses. 
Uses 	Permitted (1) 	Zoning Clearance (2) 	Use Permit (3) 	Specific Standards 
Accessory buildings 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5001(c) 
Bed and breakfast inn 			X 	
Churches 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5003(b) 
Day care center 			X 	
Day care home (small and large) 	X 			
Garage/yard sales 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5001(b) 
Garden, orchard, field crops with no retail sales from the site 	X 			
Golf course or country club 			X 	
Home occupation 		X 		Sec. 8-5.5002(b) 
Keeping of animals 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5001(a) 
Mobile home 		X 		Sec. 8-5.5002(a) 
Mobile home parks 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5003(c) 
Model homes 		X 		Sec. 8-5.5002(c) 
One-family residence 	X 			
One-family residence (zero lot line) 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5001(e) 
Parking lot for an off-site use 			X 	Use occupies an abutting property 
Public parks and playgrounds 	X 			
Public and quasi-public 			X 	
Public utilities 	X 		X 	Sec. 8-5.5107 
Recreational facilities (swimming pool, tennis courts and a clubhouse) 	X 			Incidental to a residential development 
Residential parking and/or yard reduction or waiver 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5003(d) 
Residential care home (small) 	X 			
Residential care home (large) 			X 	
Second family residence 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5001(f) 
Rotating church cold weather shelter 		X 		Sec. 8-5.5002(d) 
Swimming pool/spa 	X 			
 
(1)  See Section 8-5.7001 for review process explanation. 
(2)  See Section 8-5.7002 for review process explanation. 
(3)  See Section 8-5.7003 for review process explanation. 
(§ 8-5.502, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996; § 1, Ord. 04-97, eff. December 4, 1997; § 1, Ord. 009-03, eff. July 17, 2003; § 1, Ord. 015-10, eff. December 16, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.503. - Development standards. 
Minimum lot size 	5,000 sq. ft., 6,000 sq. ft. for corner lots. Special criteria and exceptions are provided in Article 55. 
Minimum lot width 	50 ft., except that for cul-de-sac lots it may be 40 ft. if the width is at least 50 ft. at the back of the front yard line. 
Maximum percentage of lot coverage 	40% for two-story residences and 45% for single story residences, includes all main and accessory buildings, except as provided in Section 8-5.5001(c) and (d). 
Maximum building height 	2 stories not to exceed 35 ft., except as provided in Article 56. 
Minimum yards 	Front - 15 ft., except that garage entrances must be 20 ft. 
	Interior Side - 5 ft. For any public building, church, school, library, museum, or other similar use, permitted pursuant to the regulations of this district, a minimum distance of 15 ft. from any adjoining lot containing or potentially containing a one-family residence. 
	Street Side - 10 ft., except that garage entrances must be 20 ft. 
	Rear - 25 ft. or 20% of the total lot depth, whichever is less. 
	Exceptions are provided in Article 57. 
Exterior lighting 	As provided in Article 58. 
Fences, walls, hedges and intersection visibility 	As provided in Article 59. 
Public improvements 	As provided in Article 62. 
Flood standard 	As provided in Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6. 
 
(§ 8-5.503, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 08-99, eff. July 1, 1999) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Article 6. - Two-Family Residence District (R-2) 
 
Sec. 8-5.601. - Purpose. 
To provide housing in a similar atmosphere as in the R-1 District but that also provides for the lowest density of attached residences. This district is consistent with the Low Density Residential and Medium Density Residential General Plan designations. 
(§ 8-5.601, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.602. - Uses. 
Uses 	Permitted (1) 	Zoning Clearance (2) 	Use Permit (3) 	Specific Standards 
Accessory buildings 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5001(c) 
Bed and breakfast inn 			X 	
Churches 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5003(b) 
Day care home (small and large) 	X 			
Garage/yard sales 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5001(b) 
Garden, orchard, field crops with no retail sales from the site 	X 			
Golf course or country club 			X 	
Home occupation 		X 		Sec. 8-5.5002(b) 
Keeping of animals 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5001(a) 
Mobile home 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5002(a) 
Mobile home parks 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5003(c) 
Model homes 		X 		Sec. 8-5.5002(c) 
One-family residence 	X 			
One-family residence (zero lot line) 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5001(e) 
Parking lot for an off-site use 			X 	Use occupies an abutting property 
Public parks and playgrounds 	X 			
Public and quasi-public 			X 	
Public utilities 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5107 
Recreational facilities (swimming pool, tennis courts and a clubhouse) 	X 			Incidental to a residential development 
Residential parking and/or yard reduction or waiver 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5003(d) 
Residential care home (small) 	X 			
Residential care home (large) 			X 	
Rotating church cold weather shelter 		X 		Sec. 8-5.5002(d) 
Swimming pool/spa 	X 			
Two-family residence, or 2 one-family residences 	X 			
 
(1)  See Section 8-5.7001 for review process explanation. 
(2)  See Section 8-5.7002 for review process explanation. 
(3)  See Section 8-5.7003 for review process explanation. 
(§ 8-5.602, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 04-97, eff. December 4, 1997; § 2, Ord. 015-10, eff. December 16, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.603. - Development standards. 
Density 	The residential density must be within the minimum and maximum density range for the General Plan designation within which the project is located. 
Minimum lot size 	Two-family residence - 6,000 sq. ft., 7,000 sq. ft. corner lot. 
	One-family residence - 3,500 sq. ft., 4,500 sq. ft. corner lot. 
	Special criteria and exceptions are provided in Article 55. 
Minimum lot width 	60 ft., except that for cul-de-sac lots it may be 50 ft. if the width is at least 60 ft. at the back of the front yard line. 
Maximum percentage of lot coverage 	Two-family residence - 40% for two-story residences, includes all main and accessory buildings. 
	One-family residence - 45% for single story residences, includes all main and accessory buildings. 
	Except as provided in Section 8-5.5001(c) & (d). 
Maximum building height 	3 stories not to exceed 35 ft., except as provided in Article 56. 
Minimum yards 	Front - 15 ft., except that garage entrances must be 20 ft. 
	Interior Side - 5 ft. For any public building, church, school, library, museum, or other similar use, permitted pursuant to the regulations of this district, a minimum distance of 15 ft. from the lot line of any adjoining residential lot containing or potentially containing a one-family residence. 
	Street Side - 10 ft., except that garage entrances must be 20 ft. 
	Rear - 25 ft. or 20% of the total lot depth whichever is less. 
	Exceptions are provided in Article 57. 
Exterior lighting 	As provided in Article 58. 
Fences, walls, hedges and intersection visibility 	As provided in Article 59. 
Off-street parking and loading 	As provided in Article 61. 
Public improvements 	As provided in Article 62. 
Flood standard 	As provided in Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6. 
 
(§ 8-5.603, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 08-99, eff. July 1, 1999) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Article 7. - Multiple-Family Residence District (R-3) 
 
Sec. 8-5.701. - Purpose. 
To provide for the highest density residential uses in appropriate locations, with a level of standards conducive to establishment of a suitable living environment to those living in multiple-family residences. The R-3 District is consistent with the Medium Density Residential and High Density Residential General Plan designations. 
(§ 8-5.701, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.702. - Uses. 
Uses 	Permitted (1) 	Zoning Clearance (2) 	Use Permit (3) 	Specific Standards 
Bed and breakfast inn 			X 	
Boarding house 			X 	
Churches 			X 	
Condominiums 	X 			
Day care center 			X 	
Day care home (small and large) 	X 			
Emergency shelter 			X 	
Garage/yard sales 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5001(b) 
Garden, orchard, field crops with no retail sales from the site 	X 			
Golf course, country or health club 			X 	
Group residences 	X 			
Home occupation 		X 		Sec. 8-5.5002(b) 
Keeping of animals 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5001(a) 
Mobile home 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5002(a) 
Mobile home parks 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5003(c) 
Model homes 		X 		Sec. 8-5.5002(c) 
Multiple-family residences 	X 			
One-family residences 	X 			
Office (professional and business) 			X 	
Parking lot for an off-site use 			X 	Use occupies an abutting property 
Public parks and playgrounds 	X 			
Public and quasi-public 			X 	
Public utilities 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5107 
Recreational facilities (swimming pool, tennis courts and a clubhouse) 	X 			Incidental to a residential development 
Residential parking and/or yard reduction or waiver 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5003(d) 
Residential care home (small and large) 	X 			
Rotating church cold weather shelter 		X 		Sec. 8-5.5002(d) 
Senior congregate care facility 	X 			Sec. 8-5.7001(a) 
Service and social clubs 			X 	
Skilled nursing and intermediate care facilities 	X 			Sec. 8-5.7001(a) 
Studios for music, dancing and art 			X 	
Swimming pool/spa 	X 			
Two-family residence 	X 			
Townhouses 	X 			
Transitional housing 			X 	
 
(1)  See Section 8-5.7001 for review process explanation. 
(2)  See Section 8-5.7002 for review process explanation. 
(3)  See Section 8-5.7003 for review process explanation. 
(§ 8-5.702, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 04-97, eff. December 4, 1997; § 3, Ord. 015-10, eff. December 16, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.703. - Development standards. 
Maximum density 	General Plan Designation 
	High Density Residential - 1 unit/1,000 sq. ft. lot area. 
	Medium Density Residential - 1 unit/ 1,500 sq. ft. lot area. 
Minimum lot size 	Two-family residence - 10,000 sq. ft. 
	Special criteria and exceptions are provided in Article 55. 
Minimum lot width 	100 ft., except that for cul-de-sac lots it may be 80 ft. if the width is at least 100 ft. at the back of the front yard line. 
Maximum percentage of lot coverage 	60%, includes all main and accessory buildings, except as provided in Sec. 8-5.5001(c) and (d). 
Maximum building height 	4 stories not to exceed 48 ft. - except if within 25 ft. of an R-1 District, then 2 stories not to exceed 30 ft., within 35 ft. of an R-1 District, then 3 stories not to exceed 40 ft. and within 45 ft. of an R-1 District, then 4 stories not to exceed 48 ft. - except as provided in Article 56. 
Maximum building height 	Accessory Buildings - 20 ft. 
Minimum yards 	Front - 15 ft. 
	Interior Side - 5 ft. 
	Street Side - 15 ft. 
	Rear - 10 ft. 
	Exceptions are provided in Article 57. 
Minimum distance between buildings 	Front to Any Side or Rear - 20 ft. 
	All others - 10 ft. 
Open space/recreation areas 	200 sq. ft./unit. (1) 
Walkways 	Walkways shall link the residential units with recreational and other internal facilities as well as other residential units. 
Exterior lighting 	As provided in Article 58. 
Fences, walls, hedges and intersection visibility 	As provided in Article 59. 
Landscaping 	As provided in Article 60. 
Off-street parking and loading 	As provided in Article 61. 
Public improvements 	As provided in Article 62. 
Signs 	As provided in Article 63. 
Trash Enclosures 	As provided in Article 64. 
Flood standard 	As provided in Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6. 
 
(1)  Open space/recreation area criteria: 
a.  To qualify as open space an area must be a minimum of 6 ft. by 10 ft. located between the required front yard, street side yard and rear property line. 
b.  Areas that may be included are private or common balconies, patios or decks; recreation rooms, roof areas designed to accommodate recreation or leisure activities, swimming pool/spa areas, other types of recreation or leisure area, landscaped areas. 
c.  Areas that do not qualify are front and street side yards, driveways and parking areas and associated required landscaping, clothes drying areas, walkways between buildings and entryways. 
d.  At least 20% of the open space/recreation area shall be landscaped, as provided in Section 8-5.6004. 
(§ 8-5.703, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Article 11. - Office Commercial District (C-O) 
 
Sec. 8-5.1101. - Purpose. 
To provide for the establishment and concentration of professional and business and administrative offices and business support services normally associated with offices. This district is consistent with the Institutional and Professional, Community Commercial and Regional Commercial General Plan designations. 
(§ 8-5.1101, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.1102. - Uses. 
Uses 	Permitted (1) 	Use Permit (3) 	Specific Standards 
Art galleries 	X 		
Banks and savings and loans that primarily provide direct service to the public 	X 		
Churches 		X 	
Commercial coach (temporary) 		X 	Sec. 8-5.5101 
Cultural and community centers 	X 		
Day care center 	X 		
Drive-thru facilities 		X 	
Employment agency 	X 		
Health clubs 	X 		
Heliports 		X 	
Hospitals 		X 	
Laboratories (medical, dental and optical) 	X 		
Libraries and museums 	X 		
Mortuary 		X 	
Offices (administrative, business, government, medical and professional) 	X 		
Office (insurance and real estate sales) 	X 		
One-family residence or multiple-family residence (4) 		X 	
Outdoor sales (temporary) 	X 		Sec. 8-5.5103 
Outdoor storage and sales areas 	X 		Sec. 8-5.5905 
Pharmacies, prescription 	X 		
Public utilities 		X 	Sec. 8-5.5107 
Public and quasi-public 		X 	
Rotating church cold weather shelter 		X 	Sec. 8-5.5112 
Security/detective agencies 	X 		
Schools (music, dancing, photography, art and broadcasting) 	X 		
Service and social clubs 	X 		
Skilled nursing/intermediate care facilities 		X 	
Studios (music, dancing, photography, art and broadcasting) 	X 		
Support services (3) 	X 		
Tax consultant 	X 		
Title insurance company 	X 		
Trade schools 	X 		
Travel agency 	X 		
 
(1)  The level of review is determined as provided in Section 8-5.7001. 
(2)  See Section 8-5.7003 for review process explanation. 
(3)  Support services normally associated with offices, including: blue printing and copying, telephone service, pharmacies, cafe and restaurant, day care center, barber and beauty shops. 
(4)  Residences are permitted in the C Districts in conjunction with a bona fide business or on upper floors of the same building. If the building is single story then the square footage of the residence shall not exceed the square footage of the building designated as part of the business. 
(§ 8-5.1102, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996; § 1, Ord. 04-97, eff. December 4, 1997; § 1, Ord. 08-99, eff. July 1, 1999; § 4, Ord. 015-10, eff. December 16, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.1103. - Development standards. 
Minimum lot size 	6,000 sq. ft. Special criteria and exceptions are provided in Article 55. 
Maximum building height 	4 stories not to exceed 52 ft., except as provided in Article 56. 
Minimum yards 	Front - 10 ft. 
	Street Side - 10 ft. 
	Interior Side - None, except when abutting a residential district, then 15 ft. 
	Rear - None, except when abutting a residential district or for a through lot where neighboring uses have front yards, then 15 ft. 
Exterior lighting 	As provided in Article 58. 
Fences, walls, hedges and intersection visibility 	As provided in Article 59. 
Landscaping 	As provided in Article 60. 
Off-street parking and loading 	As provided in Article 61. 
Public improvements 	As provided in Article 62. 
Signs 	As provided in Article 63. 
Trash enclosures 	As provided in Article 64. 
Flood standard 	As provided in Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6. 
 
(§ 8-5.1103, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 06-01, eff. August 16, 2001) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Article 12. - Neighborhood Convenience Commercial District (C-1) 
 
Sec. 8-5.1201. - Purpose. 
Intended to provide small commercial areas that cater to the daily convenience shopping and service needs of the surrounding residential neighborhood. The scale and design of buildings within this district must be compatible with the neighboring residential uses. This district is consistent with the Neighborhood Commercial General Plan designation. 
(§ 8-5.1201, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.1202. - Uses. 
Uses 	Permitted (1) 	Use Permit (3) 	Specific Standards 
Bar/pub 		X 	
Barber shop and beauty parlor 	X 		
Caretaker/night watchman's residence (4) 	X 		
Churches 		X 	
Commercial coach (temporary) 		X 	Sec. 8-5.5101 
Day care center 	X 		
Gasoline sales(3) 		X 	
Indoor sale of new products, unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter 	X 		
Insurance sales office 	X 		
Laundry and laundromat 	X 		
Offices (administrative, business, government, medical and professional) 	X 		
One-family residence or multiple-family residence (5) 		X 	
Outdoor sales (temporary) 	X 		Sec. 8-5.5103 
Outdoor storage and sales areas 	X 		Sec. 8-5.5905 
Permitted uses that exceed 10,000 square ft. of floor area 		X 	
Public and quasi-public 		X 	
Public utilities 		X 	Sec. 8-5.5107 
Real estate office 	X 		
Repair shop (i.e., shoes, radios, and domestic appliances) 	X 		
Restaurant (excluding drive-thru) and cafes, including those serving alcoholic beverages 	X 		
Restaurant (excluding drive-thru) and cafes, including those serving alcoholic beverages that have a gfa. greater than 3,000 sq. ft. 		X 	
Rotating church cold weather shelter 		X 	Sec. 8-5.5112 
Schools 		X 	
Service and social clubs 		X 	
Studios (music, dancing, photography, art and broadcasting) 	X 		
Video rental 	X 		
 
(1)  The level of review is determined as provided in Section 8-5.7001. Provided the use does not exceed 10,000 square ft. of floor area (3,000 sq. ft. of floor area for a restaurant). 
(2)  See Section 8-5.7003 for review process explanation. 
(3)  Gasoline sales only when in conjunction with a bona fide retail business. No on-site auto repair allowed. 
(4)  Provided it is part of a bona fide commercial use and not a separate rental unit. 
(5)  Residences are permitted in the C Districts in conjunction with a bona fide business or on upper floors of the same building. If the building is single story then the square footage of the residence shall not exceed the square footage of the building designated as part of the business. 
(§ 8-5.1202, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996; § 1, Ord. 04-97, eff. December 4, 1997; § 1, Ord. 08-99, eff. July 1, 1999; § 5, Ord. 015-10, eff. December 16, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.1203. - Development standards. 
Maximum district size 	3 acres. 
Minimum lot size 	5,000 sq. ft. Special criteria and exceptions are provided in Article 55. 
Maximum building height 	2 stories not to exceed 30 ft., except as provided in Article 56. 
Minimum yards 	Front - 10 ft. 
	Street Side - 10 ft. 
	Interior Side - None, except when abutting a residential district, then 15 ft. 
	Rear - None, except when abutting a residential district or for a through lot where neighboring uses have front yards, then 15 ft. 
Exterior lighting 	As provided in Article 58. 
Fences, walls, hedges and intersection visibility 	As provided in Article 59. 
Landscaping 	As provided in Article 60. 
Off-street parking and loading 	As provided in Article 61. 
Public improvements 	As provided in Article 62. 
Signs 	As provided in Article 63. 
Trash enclosures 	As provided in Article 64. 
Flood standard 	As provided in Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6. 
 
(§ 8-5.1203, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 06-01, eff. August 16, 2001) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Article 13. - Community Commercial District (C-2) 
 
Sec. 8-5.1301. - Purpose. 
To provide for a wide variety of retail sales and personal services that are primarily conducted within a building. The facilities may range from a single building to a neighborhood center with a supermarket as the primary tenant to a community center that may have several major tenants. This district is consistent with the Community Commercial and Regional Commercial General Plan designations. 
(§ 8-5.1301, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.1302. - Uses. 
The following uses are primarily conducted indoors, except as otherwise provided. Outdoor sales and storage shall be ancillary to the indoor use and shall meet the criteria provided in Section 8-5.5103 of this chapter. 
Uses 	Permitted (1) 	Zoning Clearance (2) 	Use Permit (3) 	Specific Standards 
Auto service station, fuel sales 			X 	
Banks and financial institutions 	X 			
Bar/pub, drinking places 			X 	
Card room 	X 			
Carnivals, fairs and festivals (4) 		X 		Sec. 8-5.5108 
Caretaker/night watchman's residence (6) 	X 			
Car wash (self-serve or full service) (4)(5) 	X 			
Churches 	X 			
Clinic, intermediate care facility 	X 			
Commercial coach (temporary) 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5101 
Day care center 	X 			
Drive-thru facilities 			X 	
Employment agency 	X 			
Health club 	X 			
Heliports 			X 	
Hospital 	X 			
Hotel 	X 			
Indoor entertainment facility (i.e., motion picture theater, live theater, video game center, skating rink, bowling alley, billiard parlor and other such uses) 	X 			
Laboratory (medical, dental and optical) 	X 			
Laundry and laundromat 	X 			
Mortuary 	X 			
Motel 	X 			
Nightclubs (8) 			X 	
Nursery or garden supply (4) 	X 			
Offices (administrative, business, government, medical and professional) 	X 			
Insurance, real estate, tax and travel offices 	X 			
One-family residence or multiple-family residence (7) 		X 		
Outdoor sales (temporary) 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5103 
Outdoor storage and sales area 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5905 
Photocopy and blueprint business 	X 			
Public and quasi-public 			X 	
Recycling collection facility (4) 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5104 
Repair shop (i.e., shoes, bicycles, radios, televisions or other domestic appliances) 	X 			
Restaurant 	X 			
Retail sales, unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter 	X 			
Rotating church cold weather shelter 		X 		Sec. 8-5.5112 
Service and social club 	X 			
Studios (i.e., music, dancing, photography and art) 	X 			
Taxidermist 	X 			
Trade school 	X 			
Veterinarian (no outdoor boarding facilities) 	X 			
 
(1)  The level of review is determined as provided in Section 8-5.7001. 
(2)  See Section 8-5.7002 for review process explanation. 
(3)  See Section 8-5.7003 for review process explanation. 
(4)  Business conducted primarily outdoors is permitted. 
(5)  Provided the operation is located a minimum of 100 ft. from any residential district. 
(6)  Provided it is part of a bona fide commercial use and not a separate rental unit. 
(7)  Residences are permitted in the C Districts in conjunction with a bona fide business or on upper floors of the same building. If the building is single story then the square footage of the residence shall not exceed the square footage of the building designated as part of the business. 
(8)  Nightclub uses shall not be located within 500 ft. of a residential zone district as measured from the residential zone district boundary to the structure where the nightclub use is proposed. 
(§ 8-5.1302, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996; § 1, Ord. 04-97, eff. December 4, 1997; § 1, Ord. 08-99, eff. July 1, 1999; § 2, Ord. 001-03, eff. March 6, 2003; § 2, Ord. 014-04, eff. October 7, 2004; § 1, Ord. 005-08, eff. June 5, 2008; § 4, Ord. 006-08, eff. September 4, 2008; § 4, Ord. 008-09, eff. August 18, 2009; § 2, Ord. 008-10, eff. September 16, 2010; § 6, Ord. 015-10, eff. December 16, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.1303. - Development standards. 
Minimum lot size 	5,000 sq. ft. Special criteria and exceptions are provided in Article 55. 
Maximum building height 	4 stories not to exceed 52 ft., except as provided in Article 56. 
Minimum yards 	Front - 10 ft. 
	Street Side - 10 ft. 
	Interior Side - None, except when abutting a residential district, then 15 ft. 
	Rear - None, except when abutting a residential district or for a through lot where neighboring uses have front yards, then 15 ft. 
Exterior lighting 	As provided in Article 58. 
Fences, walls, hedges and intersection visibility 	As provided in Article 59. 
Landscaping 	As provided in Article 60. 
Off-street parking and loading 	As provided in Article 61. 
Public improvements 	As provided in Article 62. 
Signs 	As provided in Article 63. 
Trash enclosures 	As provided in Article 64. 
Flood standard 	As provided in Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6. 
 
(§ 8-5.1303, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 06-01, eff. August 16, 2001) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Article 14. - General Commercial District (C-3) 
 
Sec. 8-5.1401. - Purpose. 
This district is intended to provide for the entire range of commercial uses. It is consistent with the Community Commercial and Regional Commercial General Plan designations. 
(§ 8-5.1401, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.1402. - Uses. 
Uses 	Permitted (1) 	Zoning Clearance (2) 	Use Permit (3) 	Specific Standards 
All "permitted uses" in the C-2 District 	X 			
Auto repair (general) 	X 			
Auto repair (specialty) (i.e., transmission, brake, smog or electric) (4) 	X 			
Auto service station 	X 			
Auto service station, fuel sales 			X 	
Bars and drinking places 	X 			
Card room 	X 			
Caretaker/night watchman's residence (5) 	X 			
Carnivals, fairs and festivals 		X 		Sec. 8-5.5108 
Drive-thru facilities 			X 	
Heliports 			X 	
Miniature golf course 			X 	
Nightclubs (7) 			X 	
One-family residence or multiple-family residence (6) 		X 		
Outdoor storage and sales area 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5905 
Public and quasi-public 			X 	
Rotating church cold weather shelter 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5112 
Sale and rental of new and used autos, boats, motorcycles, trailers, recreational vehicles, mobile homes and agricultural equipment 	X 			
Sex oriented businesses 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5105 
Theme/amusement park with outdoor facilities 			X 	
 
(1)  The level of review is determined as provided in Section 8-5.7001. 
(2)  See Section 8-5.7002 for review process explanation. 
(3)  See Section 8-5.7003 for review process explanation. 
(4)  Not included in this category are auto body and paint or radiator shops. 
(5)  Provided it is part of a bona fide commercial use and not a separate rental unit. 
(6)  Residences are permitted in the C Districts in conjunction with a bona fide business or on upper floors of the same building. If the building is single story then the square footage of the residence shall not exceed the square footage of the building designated as part of the business. 
(7)  Nightclub uses shall not be located within 500 ft. of a residential zone district as measured from the residential zone district boundary to the structure where the nightclub use is proposed. 
(§ 8-5.1402, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996; § 1, Ord. 04-97, eff. December 4, 1997; § 1, Ord. 08-99, eff. July 1, 1999; § 4, Ord. 006-08, eff. September 4, 2008; § 4; Ord. 008-09, eff. August 18, 2009; § 2; Ord. 008-10, eff. September 16, 2010; § 7, Ord. 015-10, eff. December 16, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.1403. - Development standards. 
Minimum lot size 	5,000 sq. ft. Special criteria and exceptions are provided in Article 55. 
Maximum building height 	4 stories not to exceed 52 ft., except as provided in Article 56. 
Minimum yards 	Front - 10 ft. 
	Street Side - 10 ft. 
	Interior Side - None, except when abutting a residential district, then 15 ft. 
	Rear - None, except when abutting a residential district or for a through lot where neighboring uses have front yards, then 15 ft. 
Exterior lighting 	As provided in Article 58. 
Fences, walls, hedges and intersection visibility 	As provided in Article 59. 
Landscaping 	As provided in Article 60. 
Off-street parking and loading 	As provided in Article 61. 
Public improvements 	As provided in Article 62. 
Signs 	As provided in Article 63. 
Trash enclosures 	As provided in Article 64. 
Flood standard 	As provided in Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6. 
 
(§ 8-5.1403, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 06-01, eff. August 16, 2001) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Article 15. - Heavy Commercial/Light Industrial District (C-M) 
 
Sec. 8-5.1501. - Purpose. 
This district is for a transition between commercial and industrial areas. This is typically a commercial area with low visibility or the more visible industrial areas. The district provides for selected sales and services that are often considered inappropriate in primary retail areas due to size or operating characteristics, as well as various light industrial type uses. This district is not intended to provide typical retail sales normally found in the retail districts. This district is consistent with the Community Commercial, Regional Commercial and Light Industrial General Plan designations. 
(§ 8-5.1501, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.1502. - Uses. 
Uses 	Permitted (1) 	Use Permit (3) 	Specific Standards 
Auto repair (general), auto body, transmission, electrical, radiator, upholstery and similar specialized repair shops 	X 		
Autos, trucks, boats, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, mobile homes (new and used) sales and service 	X 		
Boats, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, mobile homes (new and used) sales and repair 	X 		
Building maintenance services such as janitorial, pest extermination, or grounds maintenance 	X 		
Building, lumber, electrical, plumbing and welding material sales and service 	X 		
Cabinet or woodworking shops 	X 		
Caretaker/night watchman's residence (3) 	X 		
Commercial coach (temporary) 		X 	Sec. 8-5.5101 
Contractors equipment yard 	X 		
Farm and ranch, and related supply sales 	X 		
Food storage lockers, ice making facilities 	X 		
Heavy equipment, sales and service 	X 		
Heliports 		X 	
Indoor assembly, processing, fabricating, treatment, manufacturing, repairing or pack-aging of goods that do not create noise, dust, odor, smoke, bright light, involve the handling of explosives or inflammable materials as a primary use, or otherwise create offensive conditions at the property line 	X 		
Indoor recreational facilities 		X 	
Janitorial and restaurant supplies 	X 		
Laboratory: medical, dental, optical, or biological for testing or classifying 	X 		
Laundries (commercial) such as those providing a linen service, but not including personal laundromats 	X 		
Meat cutting and packing, provided there is no slaughtering 	X 		
Nursery, garden and landscaping supply and services 	X 		
Offices (4) 	X 		
Outdoor sales (temporary) 	X 		Sec. 8-5.5103 
Outdoor storage and sales areas 	X 		Sec. 8-5.5905 
Photographic processing plant 	X 		
Printing, engraving, lithography or publishing 	X 		
Public and quasi-public 		X 	
Radio and television stations, communication services exclusive of transmission towers 	X 		
Recycling collection facilities 	X 		Sec. 8-5.5104 
Service establishments such as glass shop, sign shop and water softening business 	X 		
Support businesses for permit-ted uses, provided the hours of operation are similar to those permitted uses, including a coffee shop, delicatessen, cafeteria or blueprint service (as part of a larger development) 	X 		
Taxidermist 	X 		
Trade school 	X 		
Tree surgeon establishments 	X 		
Veterinarian (no outdoor boarding facilities) 	X 		
Warehouse, mini storage or other storage buildings or wholesale distribution facilities, except those storing flammable or explosive material 	X 		
 
(1)  The level of review is determined as provided in Section 8-5.7001. 
(2)  See Section 8-5.7003 for review process explanation. 
(3)  Provided it is part of a bona fide heavy commercial/light industrial use and not a separate rental unit. 
(4)  Office floor area square footage for an existing building shall be limited to the amount of parking available to the subject property. 
(§ 8-5.1502, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996; § 1, Ord. 04-07, eff. December 4, 1997; § 1, Ord. 03-00, eff. June 15, 2000; § 1, Ord. 001-05, eff. February 17, 2005)  
Sec. 8-5.1503. - Development standards. 
Minimum lot size 	5,000 sq. ft. Special criteria and exceptions are provided in Article 55. 
Maximum building height 	4 stories not to exceed 52 ft., except as provided in Article 56. 
Minimum yards 	Front - 10 ft. 
	Street Side - 10 ft. 
	Interior Side - None, except when abutting a residential district, then 15 ft. 
	Rear - None, except when abutting a residential district or for a through lot where neighboring uses have front yards, then 15 ft. 
Exterior lighting 	As provided in Article 58. 
Fences, walls, hedges and intersection visibility 	As provided in Article 59. 
Landscaping 	As provided in Article 60. 
Off-street parking and loading 	As provided in Article 61. 
Public improvements 	As provided in Article 62. 
Signs 	As provided in Article 63. 
Trash enclosures 	As provided in Article 64. 
Flood standard 	As provided in Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6. 
 
(§ 8-5.1503, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Article 20. - Light Industrial District (M-1) 
 
Sec. 8-5.2001. - Purpose. 
To provide suitable areas for low intensity assembly, processing or manufacturing activities, product distribution, and related activities, all of which do not create nuisance or otherwise unacceptable levels of noise, dust, odor, smoke, bright light or vibration. This district is consistent with the Light Industrial and Industrial General Plan designations. 
(§ 8-5.2001, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.2002. - Uses. 
Uses 	Permitted (1) 	Zoning Clearance (2) 	Use Permit (3) 	Specific Standards 
Auto body and painting shop 	X 			
Building materials and supplies sales that are strictly wholesale or cater to the building contractor 	X 			
Bulk product storage (indoor) 	X 			
Cabinet shop 	X 			
Caretaker/night watchman's residence (4) 	X 			
Commercial coach (<10,000 sf) 		X 		Sec. 8-5.5102(c) 
Commercial coach (>10,000 sf) 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5102(c) 
Commercial coach (temporary) 			X 	
Construction and material yards 	X 			
Contractors yard 	X 			
Distribution center 	X 			
Dry cleaning and dyeing plant 	X 			
Indoor assembly, processing, fabricating, treatment, manufacturing, repairing or packaging of goods that do not create noise, dust, odor, smoke, bright light, involve the handling of explosives or inflammable materials as a primary use, or otherwise creates offensive conditions at the property line 	X 			
Heliports 			X 	
Indoor recreational facilities 			X 	
Laundries (commercial) 	X 			
Liquefied petroleum and pressurized gas products storage and wholesale 			X 	
Machine shop 	X 			
Mini-warehouses 	X 			
Office and other ancillary facilities that are part of and clearly subordinate to the principal use as listed herein and located on the same site 	X 			
Outdoor sales (temporary) 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5103 
Outdoor storage and sales area 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5905 
Printing, engraving, lithography and publishing 	X 			
Public and quasi-public 			X 	
Recycling collection and materials processing facilities 			X 	
Research and development laboratory 	X 			
Retail sales, limited (3) 	X 			
Sales and repair of commercial trucks and trailers and other heavy equipment 	X 			
Sheet metal shop 	X 			
Storage warehouse 	X 			
Support businesses for permitted uses, provided the hours of operation are similar to those permitted uses, including a coffee shop, delicatessen, cafeteria or office supply 	X 			
Tire recapping plant 	X 			
Truck terminals 	X 			
Welding shop 	X 			
Wholesale business 	X 			
 
(1)  The level of review is determined as provided in Section 8-5.7001. 
(2)  See Section 8-5.7003 for review process explanation. 
(3)  Maximum retail sales area is limited to 15% of the building square footage with products limited to those created on site. 
(4)  Provided it is part of a bona fide industrial use and not a separate rental unit. 
(§ 8-5.2002, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996; § 1, Ord. 04-97, eff. December 4, 1997; § 1, Ord. 001-05, eff. February 17, 2005; § 1, Ord. 002-10, eff. April 1, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.2003. - Development standards. 
Minimum lot size 	20,000 sq. ft. Special criteria and exceptions are provided in Article 55. 
Maximum building height 	45 ft., except as provided for in Article 56. 
Minimum yards 	Front - 10 ft. 
	Street Side - 10 ft. 
	Interior Side - None, except when abutting a residential district, then 15 ft. 
	Rear - None, except when abutting a residential district or for a through lot where neighboring uses have front yards, then 15 ft. 
Exterior lighting 	As provided in Article 58. 
Fences, walls, hedges and intersection visibility 	As provided in Article 59. 
Landscaping 	As provided in Article 60. 
Off-street parking and loading 	As provided in Article 61. 
Public improvements 	As provided in Article 62. 
Signs 	As provided in Article 63. 
Trash enclosures 	As provided in Article 64. 
Flood standard 	As provided in Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6. 
 
(§ 8-5.2003, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 08-99, eff. July 1, 1999) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Article 21. - Industrial District (M-2) 
 
Sec. 8-5.2101. - Purpose. 
To provide areas for a full range of industrial uses. This district is consistent with the Industrial General Plan designation. 
(§ 8-5.2101, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.2102. - Uses. 
Uses 	Permitted (1) 	Zoning Clearance (2) 	Use Permit (3) 	Specific Standards 
All "permitted uses" in the M-1 District 	X 			
Bulk petroleum storage and wholesale 		X 		
Bulk product storage (indoor) 	X 			
Caretaker/night watchman's residence (4) 	X 			
Cement and asphalt batch plants 			X 	
Commercial coach (<10,000 sf) 		X 		Sec. 8-5.5102(c) 
Commercial coach (>10,000 sf) 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5102(c) 
Commercial coach (temporary) 			X 	
Dismantling yard (i.e., auto, truck and heavy equipment) 			X 	
Emergency shelters 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5111 
Explosive, inflammable or hazardous material handling as a primary use 			X 	
Flea market 			X 	
Food processing operations 	X 			
Gravel crushing or processing 			X 	
Heliports 			X 	
Indoor recreational facilities 			X 	
Junk yard 			X 	
Lumber processing (i.e., planing mills, plywood, veneer, wood preserving and laminating) 	X 			
Outdoor assembly, processing, fabricating, treatment, manufacturing, repairing or packaging of goods that do not create significant noise, dust, odor, smoke, bright light, or otherwise create offensive conditions at the property line (3) 	X 			
Outdoor assembly, processing, fabricating, treatment, manufacturing, repairing or packaging of goods that create significant noise, dust, odor, smoke, bright light, or otherwise create offensive conditions at the property line 			X 	
Outdoor storage and sales areas 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5905 
Public and quasi-public 			X 	
Recycling collection and materials processing facilities 			X 	
Retail sales, limited(3) 	X 			
Wood pulp processing 			X 	
 
(1)  The level of review is determined as provided in Section 8-5.7001. 
(2)  See Section 8-5.7003 for review process explanation. 
(3)  Maximum retail sales area is limited to 15% of the building square footage with products limited to those created on site. 
(4)  Provided it is part of a bona fide industrial use and not a separate rental unit. 
(§ 8-5.2102, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996; § 1, Ord. 04-97, eff. December 4, 1997; § 1, Ord. 06-01, eff. August 16, 2001; § 1, Ord. 001-05, eff. February 17, 2005; § 1, Ord. 002-10, eff. April 1, 2010; § 1, Ord. 009-10, eff. October 7, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.2103. - Development standards. 
Minimum lot size 	1 acre. Special criteria and exceptions are provided in Article 55. 
Maximum building height 	60 ft., except as provided for in Article 56. 
Minimum yards 	Front - 10 ft. 
	Street Side - 10 ft. 
	Interior Side - None, except when abutting a residential district, then 15 ft. 
	Rear - None, except when abutting a residential district or for a through lot where neighboring uses have front yards, then 15 ft. 
Exterior lighting 	As provided in Article 58. 
Fences, walls, hedges and intersection visibility 	As provided in Article 59. 
Landscaping 	As provided in Article 60. 
Off-street parking and loading 	As provided in Article 61. 
Public improvements 	As provided in Article 62. 
Signs 	As provided in Article 63. 
Trash enclosures 	As provided in Article 64. 
Flood standard 	As provided in Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6. 
 
(§ 8-5.2103, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 08-99, eff. July 1, 1999) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Article 25. - Agricultural Holding Districts (AH) 
 
Sec. 8-5.2501. - Purpose. 
To be applied on an interim basis to rural or undeveloped areas where it is apparent that more intensive suburban or urban development is imminent or will occur when public services become available. This district allows property to be used for agricultural purposes until more intensive development occurs. This district is consistent with all General Plan designations. 
(§ 8-5.2501, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.2502. - Uses. 
Uses 	Permitted (1) 	Zoning Clearance (2) 	Use Permit (3) 	Specific Standards 
Agricultural processing (4) 			X 	
Bed and breakfast inn 			X 	
Day care center 			X 	
Day care home (small or large) 	X 			
Garage/yard sales 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5001(b) 
Horticultural and truck gardening activities with no on-site sales 	X 			
Animal husbandry and livestock farming (5) 	X 			
Heliports 			X 	
Home occupation 		X 		Sec. 8-5.5002(a) 
Mobile home 	X 			Sec. 8-5.5002(a) 
One-family residence 	X 			
Public parks and playgrounds 	X 			
Public and quasi-public 			X 	
Public utilities 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5107 
Residential accessory buildings (including guest houses) 	X 			
Residential care home 	X 			
Seasonal fruit/vegetable stands(6) 			X 	
Second family residence 			X 	Sec. 8-5.5003(a) 
Swimming pool/spa 	X 			
 
(1)  The level of review is determined as provided in Section 8-5.7001. 
(2)  See Section 8-5.7002 for review process explanation. 
(3)  See Section 8-5.7003 for review process explanation. 
(4)  Temporary facilities for the processing of agricultural products grown on the same property. 
(5)  Limited to no more than one large animal per each .5 acre over one acre of lot area, and no more than 12 hen chickens, rabbits and similar small creatures per each .5 acre. 
(6)  Temporary stands for the sale of produce grown on the premises. 
(§ 8-5.2502, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996)  
Sec. 8-5.2503. - Development standards. 
Minimum lot size 	10 acres. 
Minimum lot width 	300 ft. 
Maximum building height 	3 stories not to exceed 35 ft., except as provided in Article 56. 
Minimum yards 	Front - 55 ft. from the centerline for any street or road that does not have an established future plan line. On any street for which the future width is established, the front yard shall be 15 ft., except that garages facing a street shall be 20 ft. from the edge of the plan line. 
	Interior Side - 5 ft. 
	Street Side - 55 ft. from the centerline for any street or road that does not have an established future plan line. On any street on which the future width is established, the yard shall be 15 ft., except that garages facing a street shall be 20 ft. from the edge of the plan line. 
	Rear - 25 ft. or 20% of the total lot depth whichever is less. 
	Exceptions are provided in Section 8-5.5703. 
Exterior lighting 	As provided in Article 58. 
Fences, walls, hedges and intersection visibility 	As provided in Article 59. 
Off-street parking and loading 	As provided in Article 61. 
Public improvements 	As provided in Article 62. 
Flood standard 	As provided in Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6. 
 
(§ 8-5.2503, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Article 26. - Flood District (F) 
 
Sec. 8-5.2601. - Purpose. 
To allow reasonable use of property that is within the flood zone established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a manner consistent with the need to minimize or avoid hazards to life and property. This district is consistent with the Flood Plain designation of the General Plan. 
(§ 8-5.2601, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.2602. - Uses. 
Uses 	Permitted (1) 	Use Permit (2) 	Specific Standards 
Agriculture (3) 	X 		
Any new permanent building associated with a permitted use 		X 	
Dredging and/or gravel pit 		X 	
Public facilities (3) 	X 		
Recreational facilities (3) 	X 		
 
(1)  The level of review is determined as provided in Section 8-5.7001. 
(2)  See Section 8-5.7003 for review process explanation. 
(3)  Flood standard as provided in Title 6, Article 9, Chapter 6. 
(4)  Provided no new building is involved. 
(§ 8-5.2602, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Article 27. - Planned Development District (PD) 
 
Sec. 8-5.2701. - Purpose. 
To provide opportunities for creative and more efficient approaches to the use of land through lot design, use of open space, mixture of land usage and/or densities, adjustment of setbacks, or other means to create a better environment. Planned developments are under unified control and are comprehensively planned, resulting in a development of superior design and quality. The proposal must be found to be consistent with the General Plan designation(s) applied to the property. 
(§ 8-5.2701, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.2702. - Uses. 
Any use or combination of uses which are arranged and designed in such a manner as to result in a development which is internally compatible, compatible with neighboring uses and consistent with the General Plan. 
(§ 8-5.2702, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.2703. - Density and intensity. 
The density and intensity of the development shall be limited to that allowed by the General Plan designation(s) applied to the property. 
(§ 8-5.2703, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.2704. - Establishment of a planned development district. 
Applications for the establishment of a planned development district shall be considered amendments to the Yuba City Zoning Code and shall be processed according to the provisions of Article 72 of this chapter. 
(§ 8-5.2704, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.2705. - Application. 
Applications for a planned development district shall contain a site plan for the project as well as other information needed to properly evaluate and process the application, including building elevations, roads, walkways, parking, landscaping, signs, proposed uses, plans for phasing and other information deemed necessary by the Planning Director. 
(§ 8-5.2705, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.2706. - Findings. 
In order to approve a planned development, the following findings must first be made: 
(a)  The proposal is consistent with the General Plan. 
(b)  The proposal is consistent with the planned surrounding land uses. 
(c)  There are or will be adequate public facilities available to properly serve the development, including streets to adequately handle the anticipated traffic. 
(d)  The quality of the development is as good or better than would be accomplished through traditional zoning and design standards. 
(§ 8-5.2706, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.2707. - Site development. 
Prior to issuance of any building permits, detailed plans shall be submitted to the Planning Director for review and approval for substantial compliance to the approved planned development. 
(§ 8-5.2707, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.2708. - Review. 
If construction has not commenced within three years of the date of approval and every two years thereafter, the Planning Commission shall review the project to determine if a zone change or amendment to the PD is appropriate. If it is determined that a change may be appropriate, the Commission shall authorize the revision to proceed, according to the provisions of Article 72 of this chapter. For purposes of this article, "commencement of construction" means the installation of a foundation. 
(§ 8-5.2708, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Article 28. - Public Facilities District (PF) 
 
Sec. 8-5.2801. - Purpose. 
To recognize land which is used or set aside for civic facilities or other public uses. This district is consistent with all General Plan designations. 
(§ 8-5.2801, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.2802. - Uses. 
Uses 	Permitted (1) 	Use Permit (2) 	Specific Standards 
Administrative office 		X 	
Botanical gardens 	X 		
Cemetery 		X 	
Community parking lot 		X 	
Community center 		X 	
Expansion of an existing public facility (3) 	X 		
Fire station 		X 	
Golf course (public) 		X 	
Heliport and/or airport 		X 	
Library 		X 	
Maintenance/equipment yard 		X 	
Museum 		X 	
Office building (enclosed) (4) 	X 		
Police station 		X 	
Public parks with active and passive recreational facilities 	X 		
Public uses not listed 		X 	
School 		X 	
Storage building (enclosed) (4) 	X 		
Swimming pool 		X 	
Water treatment and reclamation plant 		X 	
 
(1)  The level of review is determined as provided in Section 8-5.7001. 
(2)  See Section 8-5.7003 for review process explanation. 
(3)  Provided the expansion does not exceed 25% of the existing floor area. 
(4)  Provided the building does not exceed a floor area of 2,000 square ft. and a maximum height of 20 ft., otherwise a use permit is required. 
(§ 8-5.2802, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996)  
Sec. 8-5.2803. - Development standards. 
Minimum lot size 	None. 
Minimum lot width 	None. 
Maximum building height 	3 stories not to exceed 39 ft., exceptions are provided in Article 56. 
Minimum yards 	Front - 10 ft. 
	Street Side - 10 ft. 
	Interior Side - None, except when abutting a residential district, then 15 ft. 
	Rear - None, except when abutting a residential district or for a through lot, then 15 ft. 
Exterior lighting 	As provided in Article 58. 
Fences, walls, hedges and intersection visibility 	As provided in Article 59. 
Landscaping 	As provided in Article 60. 
Off-street parking and loading 	As provided in Article 61. 
Public improvements 	As provided in Article 62. 
Signs 	As provided in Article 63. 
Trash enclosures 	As provided in Article 64. 
Flood standard 	As provided in Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6. 
 
(§ 8-5.2803, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Article 35. - Agricultural Combining District (A) 
 
Sec. 8-5.3501. - Purpose. 
To provide for the limited raising of farm animals in areas within the City where the lot size is large enough for such a use without creating a nuisance to neighboring uses. 
(§ 8-5.3501, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.3502. - Uses. 
Uses 	Permitted (1) 	Use Permit (2) 	Specific Standards 
All uses permitted in the respective district with which this district is combined 	X 		
All uses requiring use permits in the respective district with which this district is combined 		X 	
Crop and tree farming 	X 		
Dairy 		X 	
Kennel (dog and/or cat) 		X 	
Livestock farming (3) 	X 		
Poultry, rabbit or similar-sized animal farming (4) 	X 		
Poultry and rabbit slaughter and processing 		X 	
Sale of agricultural products produced on-site (5) 	X 		
Veterinary hospital 		X 	
 
(1)  The level of review is determined as provided in Section 8-5.7001. 
(2)  See Section 8-5.7003 for review process explanation. 
(3)  Provided not more than one horse, one mule, one cow, one steer, two sheep or two goats shall be kept for each .5 acre of lot area. 
(4)  Provided a use permit shall be required for the raising of more than 100 head of either poultry or rabbit at any one time. 
(5)  Provided, however, in residence districts no commercial structure for such purpose, other than a temporary stand shall be permitted. 
(§ 8-5.3502, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.3503. - Yards and open spaces. 
Barns, stables, chicken coops, kennels, and similar buildings shall be a minimum of 35 ft. from any property line and 40 ft. from any dwelling. 
(§ 8-5.3503, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Article 36. - Airport Influence Combining District (AI) 
 
Sec. 8-5.3601. - Purpose. 
Intended to implement the provisions of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan for the Sutter County Airport. This district is intended to be applied to those properties within the overflight zones of the airport. 
(§ 8-5.3601, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.3602. - Uses. 
All of the uses permitted in the base district with which this district is combined, provided the use conforms to the compatibility criteria established by the Comprehensive Land Use Plan for the Sutter County Airport (CLUP). 
(§ 8-5.3602, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.3603. - Project review procedures. 
Prior to City review of any General Plan or specific plan amendment, rezoning, use permit or variance for any property within this district, the project shall first be reviewed by and comments shall be received from the Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) if required by the CLUP. In the case of a negative finding by the ALUC the City shall comply with the ALUC's finding unless the City Council overrules the ALUC decision and finds that a hardship outweighs the public health, safety and welfare objectives of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
(§ 8-5.3603, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Article 37. - Historic Combining District (H) 
 
Sec. 8-5.3701. - Purpose. 
The Historic Combining District is established to implement the historic and archaeological resources policies of the General Plan; to promote the preservation, rehabilitation, restoration, reconstruction, and protection of historic and cultural resources; to encourage and promote public knowledge, understanding, and appreciation of the City's history; to promote appreciation and use of historic resources; to encourage preservation of resources, which may potentially be considered eligible for historic preservation zoning; to promote public awareness of the benefits of preservation; and to encourage public participation in identifying and preserving historic resources, thereby increasing community pride and awareness of the City's cultural and historical heritage. 
(§ 2, Ord. 014-05, eff. January 19, 2006)  
Sec. 8-5.3702. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Historic building or structure" shall mean a building or structure that is located on property that has been recognized by the City Council by being rezoned to the Historic Combining District classification. 
(b)  "Qualified historical property" shall mean: 
(1)  A property listed in the National Register of Historic Places or located in a registered historic district, as defined in 26 CFR 1.191-2(b); or 
(2)  A property listed in any state, city, county, or city and county official register of historical or architecturally significant sites, places, or landmarks. 
(c)  "Qualified professional" shall mean an individual meeting the Secretary of the Interior's Professional Qualifications Standards (36 CFR Part 61 Appendix A) in history, architectural history, and historic architecture or an individual determined by the Development Services Director, or his/her designee, to have the necessary qualifications equivalent to the above standards based on demonstrated experience in history, architectural history, and historic architecture. 
(§ 2, Ord. 014-05, eff. January 19, 2006)  
Sec. 8-5.3703. - Establishment of Historic Combining District designation. 
The Historic Combining District classification may be combined with any other zoning district classification and can be applied to land to satisfy the purposes of this article pursuant to approval of a rezoning application. Requests to establish a Historic Combining District designation on a property shall be accomplished by submitting a rezone application to the Development Services Department together with the following information: 
(a)  Property owner(s) proposing to designate a property Historic Combining District shall submit the following information together with a rezone application to the Development Services Department: 
(1)  A statement of the current and proposed usage of the property or site. 
(2)  A site plan, drawn to scale, showing: 
(i)  The boundaries of the property. 
(ii)  The location of all improvements on the site. 
(3)  A statement explaining why the property should be designated for historic preservation and how it is intended to preserve the building or site. 
(4)  Photographs depicting the historic building or structure. 
(5)  Applications shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution by the City Council. 
(b)  Following the submittal of an application to rezone property to the Historic Combining District, the proposal shall be forwarded to the Historic Preservation Review Committee for review, consistent with Section 8-5.3708(b), to determine if the historic resource is a candidate for the Historic Combining District designation and what character defining features exist on the structure that should be preserved. 
Rezone applications shall be processed as set forth in the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(§ 2, Ord. 014-05, eff. January 19, 2006)  
Sec. 8-5.3704. - Disestablishment of a Historic Combining District. 
(a)  Requests to rezone property from the Historic Combining District classification shall be accomplished by submitting a rezone application to the Development Services Department along with the following items: 
(1)  A statement of the current and proposed usage of the property or site. 
(2)  A site plan, drawn to scale, showing: 
(i)  The boundaries of the property. 
(ii)  The location of all improvements on the site. 
(3)  A report prepared by a qualified professional, detailing why the site, building, or structure is not or is no longer of cultural or historical significance to the history of Yuba City. 
(4)  Photographs depicting the historic building or structure. 
(5)  Applications shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution by the City Council. 
Rezone applications shall be processed as set forth in the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(§ 2, Ord. 014-05, eff. January 19, 2006)  
Sec. 8-5.3705. - Development standards. 
(a)  All uses and development standards which are permitted and applicable in the base district to which the Historic Combining District is applied, including uses which are only allowed by use permit, shall continue to be permitted or allowed by the use permit providing it is demonstrated that those uses do not adversely affect the historic or cultural site or building involved. 
(b)  Towers, spires, chimneys, machinery penthouses, scenery lofts, cupolas, water tanks, and similar architectural structures may be built and used to a height not more than 25 ft. above the height limit established for the district in which the historic building or structure is located, provided, however, photographs or other documentation, acceptable to the Development Services Director, is submitted demonstrating that the architectural feature or structure in question was originally a part of the historic building or structure. The above height limitations shall be subject to laws and regulations of the State and Federal Government. 
(§ 2, Ord. 014-05, eff. January 19, 2006)  
Sec. 8-5.3706. - Historic preservation incentive program. 
The City Council may provide incentives to properties designated Historic Combining District. The incentives shall be identified, and made available through a resolution approved by the City Council and modified from time to time, as the Council deems appropriate. 
(§ 2, Ord. 014-05, eff. January 19, 2006)  
Sec. 8-5.3707. - Removal and relocation permitting requirements. 
Prior to the removal and/or relocation of a historic building or structure on property that is designated Historic Combining District, a use permit shall first be approved together with an appropriate environmental document by the Planning Commission. 
Prior to relocating a historic building located on land designated Historic Combining District; a property owner shall first successfully rezone the property where the historic building will be relocated to the Historic Combining District. In addition, the property owner shall secure all required permits necessary to transport the building on local roads and State highways. 
At the time the City considers rezoning a property to the Historic Combining District for the purposes of relocating a historic building to it, the City Council may consider removing the Historic Combining District classification from the property where the historic building will be relocated from. This action may be accomplished by filing a single rezone application to the Development Services Department that includes both properties that are to be considered. 
(§ 2, Ord. 014-05, eff. January 19, 2006)  
Sec. 8-5.3708. - Historic preservation design review requirements. 
(a)  Applicability. Exterior modifications that require a building permit to a recognized historic building within the Historic Combining District shall be subject to administrative design review to be evaluated by the Community Development Division. Applications for administrative design review shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the City Council and collected with building permit fees. 
(b)  Design review process. Applicants requesting a building permit on property that is designated Historic Combining District shall provide elevation views for all portions of the recognized historic structure that is subject to alteration. The elevation views shall clearly depict all proposed changes to the exterior of the historic building or structure. 
Staff shall review the proposed alterations to a historic building or structure against the report prepared by a qualified professional at the time the historic building was rezoned to the Historic Combining District. In addition, the proposed alterations shall be reviewed against the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings. Implementation of the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings shall not conflict with the permitted uses specified in the underlying zoning of the property. If architectural features identified as historically significant are proposed to be altered, all proposed changes shall maintain the character defining features as discussed or depicted in the report that has been previously prepared for the historic structure. 
If after reviewing a proposal, staff determines that proposed changes to a historic building or structure, located on property that is zoned Historic Combining District, will maintain the character defining features of the historic building or structure, the Development Services Director, or his/her designee, may approve or conditionally approve the proposal. 
If after reviewing a proposal, staff determines that proposed changes to a historic building or structure may not maintain the character defining features of the historic building or structure, the proposal shall be forwarded to the Historic Preservation Review Committee for review and determination. 
(§ 2, Ord. 014-05, eff. January 19, 2006)  
Sec. 8-5.3709. - Historic Preservation Review Committee. 
The Historic Preservation Review Committee shall consist of three persons, appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the City Council. In addition, three alternate Committee members shall be appointed by the City Council and serve in the absence of a regular Committee member. Committee members shall have knowledge of architecture, historic preservation, history, or a combination of knowledge determined by the City Council as acceptable for providing recommendations regarding historic preservation issues. A quorum shall consist of three Committee members being present. 
(a)  Committee action regarding historic structure modifications. If a quorum of Committee or alternate Committee members cannot be convened within a two-week period from the time a meeting is determined to be necessary, the Development Services Director, or his/her designee, may convene the meeting with those available Committee members. After reviewing the information and receiving input from the Committee members present, the Development Services Director, or his/her designee, shall determine proposed actions the applicant can take in order to maintain the character defining features of a historic structure and may approve or conditionally approve the proposal. 
The Committee shall meet as necessary to review and provide determinations to applicants and staff regarding proposed changes to historic structures. 
All pertinent information deemed necessary by the Development Services Director, or his/her designee, shall be supplied by the building permit applicant and forwarded to the Committee members by staff for review prior to Committee meetings. 
The Committee shall review and discuss with the applicant and staff the issues associated with modifying a recognized historic structure. The Committee shall determine proposed actions the applicant can take in order to maintain the character defining features of a historic structure. 
All determinations made by the Committee shall be transmitted to the property owner in writing. Any determination made by the Historic Preservation Review Committee, or the Development Services Director, or his/her designee, shall be subject to appeal to the Planning Commission pursuant to the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(b)  Committee action for application to the Historic Combining District. Prior to the submittal of an application to rezone property to the Historic Combining District, the proposal shall first be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Review Committee and a report shall be prepared by the Community Development Division based upon the Committee's determinations. 
The Committee shall meet as necessary to review and provide determinations detailing why a potential historic building or structure is a candidate for the Historic Combining District designation and what the character defining features are of the historic building or structure that should be preserved. 
A quorum of the Committee shall consist of three members being present and all Committee determinations shall be made by at least two of three Committee members. 
Based upon the Committee's determination regarding why a historic resource is a candidate for the Historic Combining District designation and what the character defining features are of the building that should be preserved, Community Development Division staff shall prepare a report of this information. 
The report shall be transmitted to the property owner(s) in writing within 20 days of the date the Committee makes its determination. Any determination made by the Historic Preservation Review Committee shall be subject to appeal to the Planning Commission pursuant to the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(§ 2, Ord. 014-05, eff. January 19, 2006)  
Sec. 8-5.3710. - Historic identification plaques. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, nonilluminated historic identification plaques as approved by the Planning Commission not exceeding two square ft. in size are permitted to be installed on structures located on property that have been zoned to have the Historic Combining District designation. 
(§ 2, Ord. 014-05, eff. January 19, 2006)  
Sec. 8-5.3711. - Appeals. 
Decisions of the Development Services Director, Planning Commission, and Historic Preservation Review Committee may be appealed by an applicant or any aggrieved person. A person includes, but is not limited to, a City officer, as defined by Government Code § 24000. 
(§ 2, Ord. 014-05, eff. January 19, 2006)  
Article 38. - Special Standards Combining District (X) 
 
Sec. 8-5.3801. - Purpose. 
This district serves two distinct purposes. First, this district may be used by the City to apply specific development criteria that may be important for the proper development of a parcel or group of parcels but is not relevant on a citywide basis. Secondly, for a developer that may propose innovative approaches to site design this district also can be used to modify adopted development standards to accommodate that type of development. Those projects that utilize this district must meet or exceed the quality expected of projects meeting the typical development standards. This district is not intended to be used to reduce development standards. 
(§ 8-5.3801, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.3802. - Uses. 
All uses permitted by the primary district with which this district is combined unless, through criteria applied by this district, there are limitations on uses. 
(§ 8-5.3802, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.3803. - Density and intensity. 
The density and intensity of the development shall be limited to the density and intensity allowed by the General Plan. 
(§ 8-5.3803, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.3804. - Establishment of the special standards combining district. 
Applications for the establishment of a Special Standards Combining District shall be considered amendments to the Yuba City Zoning Code and shall be processed according to the provisions of Article 72 of this chapter. 
(§ 8-5.3804, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.3805. - Application. 
Applications for a Special Standards Combining District shall contain information needed to properly evaluate and process the application as deemed necessary by the Planning Director. 
(§ 8-5.3805, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.3806. - Findings. 
In order to approve a Special Standards Combining District, the following findings must first be made: 
(a)  The proposal is consistent with the General Plan. 
(b)  The revision to the development standards will not cause a project to occur that will be incompatible with existing or planned surrounding land uses. 
(c)  The quality of the development will be as good or better than would be accomplished through traditional zoning. 
(§ 8-5.3806, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Article 39. - Specific Plan Combining District (SP) 
 
Sec. 8-5.3901. - Purpose. 
To ensure that new development and, to the extent required, additions and improvements to existing developments, meet the standards and regulations contained within adopted specific plans previously adopted for an area. This district may be combined with any base district, provided the site is located within the boundaries of an adopted specific plan. 
(§ 8-5.3901, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.3902. - Uses. 
All permitted uses and uses requiring a use permit within the base district with which this district is combined, provided that the uses do not conflict with the policies or intended uses established by the specific plan. Also permitted are uses identified by the specific plan. If a conflict between the base district and the specific plan occurs, the specific plan shall prevail. 
(§ 8-5.3902, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.3903. - Development standards. 
All standards contained within the base district with which this district is combined, as well as all development standards required by the specific plan, shall apply. If a conflict between the base district and the specific plan occurs, the specific plan shall prevail. 
(§ 8-5.3903, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.3904. - Applications. 
The type of permit necessary for site improvements shall be dictated by the base district. 
All applications for site improvements shall include adequate information, as required by the Planning Director, to ensure compliance with all relevant standards and criteria established by the base district and the specific plan. 
Decisions on all projects located within this combining district shall be by the agency established to do so by this Zoning Ordinance, provided that if the specific plan also establishes a review body, such as a design review committee, that body shall serve as an advisory agency to the decision making body established by this chapter. 
(§ 8-5.3904, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
PART III. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
Article 50. - Specific Standards for Residences, Residential Accessory Buildings and Uses, and Related Uses 
 
Sec. 8-5.5001. - Standards for certain permitted uses. 
In any district that permits a residence, the following types of accessory buildings and uses are permitted if the required standards are met. 
(a)  Keeping of animals and other creatures. 
(1)  On lots of one-half acre or less, the keeping of chicken hens (no roosters), rabbits, guinea pigs, or similar small animals, not exceeding a combined total of 12 in number (excluding the offspring thereof, up to the age of six months, may be kept for home enjoyment or consumption, subject to the provisions of other applicable laws. No hoofed animals are permitted, except two potbellied pigs are allowed as pets. 
(2)  On lots exceeding one-half acre, the keeping of animals listed above in numbers exceeding those listed or keeping of other types of livestock shall be permitted with an approved use permit. Such animals housed in pens or buildings shall not be nearer than 35 ft. to any lot line and not nearer than 40 ft. from a residence. 
(3)  Kennels are not permitted in residential districts. 
(4)  Beehives are only permitted within the City limits on a temporary basis when used in conjunction with a bona fide agricultural operation for which bees are needed for pollination of trees within the city. 
(b)  Garage/yard sales. Garage/yard sales are allowed when involving the sale of common household goods, primarily owned by the resident, for a duration not to exceed three days, nor more frequently than two times per year per residence. On-site signs are permitted. Off-site signs are permitted pursuant to Section 8-5.6306(f) of this chapter. If illegal off-site signs are posted in the vicinity of the garage/yard sale, the person or persons operating the garage/yard sale at the location indicated on the sign shall be held responsible for the posting of the prohibited sign(s). 
(c)  Residential accessory buildings (including guest houses). In addition to the standards established by the district in which the building is located, the following standards apply: 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter residential accessory buildings are subject to lot coverage requirements. 
(2)  A residential accessory building cannot be constructed prior to the main building on the lot. 
(3)  No accessory building, except garages or carports, may encroach on the front one-half of any lot or be within 50 ft. of the front property line, whichever is less. 
(4)  Height limits/yard reductions. 
(i) Type of Building 	Building Height (maximum) 	Minimum Rear Yard 	Minimum Side Yard 
Children's playhouse 	8 	0 (1) 	0 (1) 
Storage shed 	8 	0 (1) 	0 (1) 
Accessory building 	10 ft. 	5 ft. (2) 	5 ft. 
	15 ft. 	10 ft. 	5 ft. 
	20 ft. 	Outside Rear Yard 	5 ft. 
 
(1) Within a required interior side or rear yard one building used exclusively as a storage shed and one structure for a children's playhouse is permitted, and not subject to lot coverage limitations, provided: 
i.  Each has a roof of less than 120 square ft. 
ii.  Each does not exceed eight ft. in height. 
(2) For those lots that back onto a General Plan street with a City maintained landscape strip the height of an accessory building shall not exceed eight ft. when located within ten ft. of the rear lot line. 
(d)  Patio covers in yard areas. A patio cover may encroach into the rear yard of a one-family or two-family residential unit, and not be subject to lot coverage limitations, provided: 
(1)  The patio cover remains open from the ground to the roof except screening on all sides not attached to the main building. 
(2)  The patio cover is attached to the main building or meets the minimum six ft. separation required for accessory buildings. 
(3)  The patio cover may encroach a maximum of ten ft. into the required rear yard, provided: 
(i)  The support posts for the patio cover shall be a minimum of ten ft. from the rear property line and the eaves on the patio cover shall not extend more than two ft. beyond that; 
(ii)  The minimum side yard standard shall be maintained; 
(iii)  The width of the patio cover shall not exceed one-half the width of the main building; 
(iv)  Only shed-type of flat roofs shall be allowed for patio covers, with a maximum eave height of nine ft. 
(e)  One-family residence - Zero lot line. 
(1)  Must meet residential density standards of the General Plan. 
(2)  Must be part of a project designed for this type of development. The building footprints of the residences must be approved as part of the subdivision map. 
(3)  The opposite side yard must be a minimum of ten ft. wide (R-1 District only). 
(4)  No more than two units attached to each other. 
(5) 	Minimum lot size 	R-1 	R-2 
	        Interior 	3,500 sq. ft. 	3,000 sq. ft. 
	        Corner 	4,000 sq. ft. 	3,500 sq. ft. 
(6) 	Minimum lot width 	R-1 	R-2 
	        Interior 	35 ft. 	30 ft. 
	        Corner 	40 ft. 	35 ft. 
 
(f)  Second residence in the R-1 District. 
(1)  Second units shall be allowed only in the R-1 Districts. 
(2)  The property owner shall reside in the primary residence. 
(3)  The second unit may be an attached addition to an existing single-family home, a conversion of existing space within a single-family home or a detached unit on the same lot meeting setback requirements. If a mobile home is used as the second unit, it shall comply with the performance standards for mobile homes in a residential district as specified by Section 8-5.5002(a). 
(4)  If the second unit is attached to the primary residence, its size shall not exceed 50% of the living area or floor area of the primary residence and in no case shall the second unit exceed 1,200 square ft. in living area. 
(5)  The second unit shall meet the parking requirements for second units found in Section 8-5.6102(a) of the Zoning Regulations. 
(6)  Parking in the front yard setback shall not be allowed. 
(7)  The design and exterior finish of the second unit shall be reasonably similar to the existing primary residence in architectural style, color, exterior materials, and roofing color, materials and design. 
(8)  The second unit shall have a separate entryway. 
(§ 8-5.5001, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995; § 1, Ord. 08-99, eff. July 1, 1999; § 1, Ord. 03-00, eff. June 15, 2000; § 3, Ord. 009-03, eff. July 17, 2003)  
Sec. 8-5.5002. - Standards for uses requiring a zoning clearance. 
(a)  Use of a mobile home as a one-family residence. A mobile home may be placed upon any lot as a one-family residence within any residential district which allows one- or two-family residences as a permitted use, provided the mobile home meets the following standards: 
(1)  The mobile home shall be certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974; 
(2)  The mobile home shall be placed upon a permanent foundation approved by the Building Department; 
(3)  The mobile home has a minimum width of 20 ft.; 
(4)  The mobile home is covered with an exterior material compatible to residential structures in the surrounding area; 
(5)  The exterior covering material extends to the ground. If a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the exterior covering material need not extend more than three in. below the top of the foundation. Alternative skirting materials, customarily used in conventional residential structures, will be considered compatible; 
(6)  The roofing material is composition shingles or other materials customarily used on conventional residential structures in the surrounding area; 
(7)  The roof has a pitch of not less than 2.5 in. of vertical rise for each 12 in. of horizontal run; 
(8)  The roof has eaves and gable overhangs of not less than one ft. measured from the vertical side of the mobile home or what is customarily found on conventional residential structures in the surrounding area; 
(9)  The mobile home has an enclosed attached garage or a carport, if they are customarily found with conventional residential structures in the surrounding area; 
(10)  The exterior covering material of the garage or carport is the same as the mobile home; 
(11)  The finished floor is a maximum of 25 in. above the exterior finish grade of the lot; 
(12)  The facade which fronts on the street is designed with sufficient detail to make it visually compatible with conventional residential structures in the area. 
(b)  Home occupations. A home occupation may be conducted in any residential district subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The residential use remains the primary activity on the property; 
(2)  The activity is limited to one customer on the premises at a time for which off-street parking shall be provided in addition to that required for the residential use; 
(3)  It involves no sale of merchandise other than that produced on the premises or merchandise directly related to the business and incidental to the services offered; 
(4)  It is carried on by the members of the family occupying the dwelling, with no other persons employed on-site; 
(5)  It produces no exterior evidence of its existence beyond the premises, including but not limited to outdoor storage, noise, smoke, odors and vibrations; 
(6)  No external signage relative to the business shall be allowed; 
(7)  If the residence is not owner-occupied, property owner authorization for the home occupation is provided; 
(8)  There shall be no outdoor storage of building materials, machinery, equipment or other materials related to the home occupation; 
(9)  The repair of autos, trucks, motorcycles, boats, trailers and similar equipment is specifically prohibited as a home occupation. 
Home occupations that allow more than one customer at a time may be approved with a use permit (Section 8-5.7003) provided that the Planning Commission finds that the added traffic will not adversely impact the neighborhood and that adequate off-street parking is provided. 
(c)  Model homes. Model homes with sales offices and temporary information/sales trailers are permitted in new residential subdivisions, provided the following criteria are met: 
(1)  A site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Department showing the location of all model homes and temporary information/sales trailers, signage (Section 8-5.6306(k)), identification flags (Section 8-5.6306(l)) and fencing proposed; 
(2)  A temporary information/sales trailer may be used during the construction of the model homes for a maximum period of six months; 
(3)  Real estate sales shall be limited to properties within the subject subdivision; 
(4)  Prior to the sale of any of the subject models as a single-family residence, any portion used for commercial purposes shall be converted to its intended residential purpose; 
(5)  The zoning clearance (Section 8-5.7002) shall be valid for a term period of three years or until completion of the sale of lots/residences, whichever comes first. One year extensions may be approved by the Planning Director until the sale of all lots/residences is completed. 
(d)  Rotating church cold weather shelters. Existing churches shall be allowed to operate a rotating cold weather shelter program from within their facilities during the months of November 1 through April 30 through the zoning clearance process, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  The maximum number of participants that can stay at a single church facility is 30 people. 
(2)  The maximum length of stay at a participating church facility by an eligible participant is seven days. Once a church facility has hosted a cold weather shelter for seven days, the church shall wait 21 days before serving as a cold weather shelter again. 
(3)  Eligible participants at the shelter(s) shall be oriented to families. 
(4)  Eligible participants shall be brought to the participating church facility not before 6:00 p.m. and shall depart the facility by 7:30 a.m. the next day. 
(5)  As part of the zoning clearance process, participating churches in the rotating cold weather shelter program shall submit an operations plan that provides the following information: 
(i)  Screening process for eligible participants. 
(ii)  Occupancy schedule. 
(iii)  No loitering policy. 
(iv)  Transportation plan. 
(§ 8-5.5002, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995; § 8, Ord. 015-10, eff. December 16, 2011; § 1, Ord. 007-11, eff. December 15, 2011)  
Sec. 8-5.5003. - Standards for uses requiring use permits. 
(a)  Reserved. [Formerly pertained to second residences in the R-1 District.] 
(b)  Locational criteria for churches. In order to ensure compatibility between churches and neighboring one-family residential development, churches located in an R-1 or R-2 District must meet the following criteria, in addition to any conditions imposed as part of the use permit approval: 
(1)  Churches must be located on a lot that is either: 
(i)  Contiguous with a multiple family, commercial, industrial or public district; or 
(ii)  Has primary frontage on a collector or arterial street, as designated by the General Plan. 
(2)  Vehicle access to the church parking lot should be as near as feasible, or directly onto, a collector or arterial street. 
(3)  The minimum yard area between the church and any one-family residential lot shall be that of the district within which the property is located or 20 ft., whichever is greater. At least ten ft. of that yard area shall be landscaped with the intent of screening building and paved areas from the one-family residence. 
(4)  The lot coverage standard for the R-1 or R-2 District shall apply to the church facility. 
(5)  Expansion of churches existing prior to this ordinance shall comply only with the yard area and lot coverage standards described above. 
(c)  Standards for mobile home parks. Mobile home parks, where permitted, shall meet the following requirements in addition to any conditions imposed by the use permit: 
(1)  Mobile home space dimensions. 
(i)  All mobile home lots in the mobile home park shall average at least 3,000 square ft. in area, and in any case no lot shall be less than 2,500 square ft. 
(ii)  Yards for mobile homes in mobile home spaces shall be: 
A.  Front: Ten ft. 
B.  Side: Five ft. (zero and ten ft. if the project is designed for this type of development). 
C.  Rear: Ten ft. 
D.  Awnings and carports may be within three ft. from any mobile home space boundary. 
(2)  Circulation. 
(i)  All mobile home lots shall access internal private streets located within the mobile home park. There shall be no direct access from a mobile home lot to a public street or alley. 
(ii)  All interior streets shall be a minimum of 25 ft. in width, exclusive of required parking areas and shall be designed and improved to City standards. 
(iii)  All necessary rights-of-way adjacent to the site as may be necessary to conform to the standards of the General Plan shall be offered for dedication to the City. 
(3)  On-site utilities. Shall be underground. 
(4)  Walls and screening. All exterior boundaries shall be screened with a solid decorative wall or fence. The wall shall be inside of required landscape areas for front and street side yards of the respective district. 
(5)  Parking. As provided in Article 61 of this chapter. 
(6)  Common open space/recreation areas. A minimum of 400 square ft. of space for each mobile home space shall be devoted to common open space and recreational facilities within the mobile home park. This area does not include street rights-of-way, parking areas, areas between structures less than 15 ft. wide or private yards. 
(7)  Landscaping. All common open space areas, exterior front and street side yards and common parking areas shall be landscaped, as provided in Article 60 of this chapter, unless otherwise used for recreation activities. 
(8)  Walkways. Walkways shall link the mobile homes with recreational and other internal facilities as well as other mobile homes. 
(9)  Mobile home type. All mobile homes shall be certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974. 
(d)  Residential parking and yard reductions or waivers. This section provides a means of relief from the parking and yard requirements of this chapter for those residential property owners who purchased residential property for use as their own place of residence which have parking and yard violations which existed prior to their purchase of the property. 
A use permit to reduce or waive parking or yard requirements under this section may be approved only when the following findings can be made: 
(1)  The modifications to the structure or to the property were completed by a prior owner of the property; 
(2)  The current owner of the property has not participated in or contributed to creating, increasing, or compounding of the degree of severity of the violation; 
(3)  The total cost of restoration of the property or structure to conform to the Zoning Regulations will exceed $1,000. 
In addition to the above findings, the Planning Commission shall make such additional findings as required by this chapter for the approval of use permits. 
All properties or structures receiving parking or setback reductions or waiver under this section shall be classified as a nonconforming structure and shall receive all rights and privileges conferred by that status. 
(§ 8-5.5003, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 2, Ord. 009-03, eff. July 17, 2003)  
Article 51. - Specific Standards for Various Commercial, Industrial and Public Utility Buildings or Uses 
 
Sec. 8-5.5101. - Temporary use of a commercial coach. 
A commercial coach to be temporarily used as an office in a commercial or industrial district, must meet the following standards in addition to any other conditions imposed by the use permit: 
(a)  The commercial coach shall bear the tag or seal of the State as required by the Health and Safety Code of the State. 
(b)  The commercial coach shall carry a current State license. 
(c)  The commercial coach shall be kept mobile. 
(d)  Skirting shall be provided along all sides of the commercial coach. 
(e)  The exterior surface and roofing materials shall be consistent with those materials normally used in the construction of permanent office facilities. 
(f)  Parking spaces shall be provided for the occupants of the commercial coach as required by Article 61. 
(g)  The maximum term of the use permit is one year. Prior to the expiration of the use permit, the applicant may request one-year extension of time. Upon conclusion of either the initial one-year period or, if granted by the Planning Commission, the one-year extension of time, the commercial coach shall be removed, and the site shall be returned to its natural state. 
(§ 8-5.5101, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 002-10, eff. April 1, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5102. - Permanent use of a commercial coach. 
(a)  Commercial coach as mobile home sales office. A commercial coach may be used as a sales office for a mobile home sales facility, provided that the standards in Section 8-5.5101 of this article, above (except the time limits) are met, and all other site development standards required for primary use are met. 
(b)  Commercial coach as classrooms for K-12 schools. A commercial coach may be used as classrooms for schools that provide kindergarten through 12th-grade educational instruction, provided that the standards in Section 8-5.5101 of this article, above (except the time limits) are met, and all other site development standards required for the use are met. The commercial coach is required to comply with all applicable building, fire, and life safety codes, including, but not limited to, Title 4, Chapter 5 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(c)  Commercial coach as an ancillary office for an industrial use. A commercial coach nay be used as an office in the M-1 or M-2 District, provided that the office is clearly ancillary to a principally-permitted use in the district in which the office is proposed to be located. The commercial coach must be located on the same site as the primary industrial use that it is intended to support. The issuance of either a zoning clearance of a use permit is required prior to the installation of a commercial coach to be used as an office in the M-1 or M-2 District. 
(1)  A zoning clearance for the use of a commercial coach as an ancillary office for an industrial use may be issued, subject to the following requirements: 
(i)  The standards in Section 8-5.5101 of this article, above (except the time limits) are met, and all other site development standards required for the primary use and ancillary office use are met. 
(ii)  The commercial coach is required to comply with all applicable building, fire, and life safety codes, including, but not limited to, Title 4, Chapter 5 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(iii)  The commercial coach shall be less than 10,000 square ft. in area. 
(iv)  The commercial coach shall be fully screened from view of the public right-of-way, either by landscaping or by other buildings. 
(2)  Provided that all of the standards listed in Section 8-5.5102(c)(1) are met, with the exception of items (iii) and (iv), a use permit may be requested for the use of a commercial coach as an ancillary office for an industrial use, in accordance with the requirements of Article 70 of this chapter. 
(§ 8-5.5102, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 002-10, eff. April 1, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5103. - Temporary outdoor sales. 
(a)  The following are permitted in all commercial and industrial districts: 
(1)  Sidewalk and parking lot display and sales. Promotional sales events held outside the confines of the commercial or manufacturing structure(s) in which such business is normally conducted may be conducted by one or more businesses subject to the following: 
(i)  Merchandise display areas within ten ft. of the building (provided they are not in the parking area) are permitted, subject to subsection (a)(1)(iii) below. 
(ii)  Parking lot sales are permitted quarterly for up to one week with the issuance of a zoning clearance (Section 8-5.7002) and on weekends between noon Friday and noon Monday. Both are subject to subsection (a)(1)(iii) below. 
(iii)  Sidewalk and parking lot display and sales are subject to the following criteria: 
A.  The outdoor display/sales shall be located on a paved or concrete area on the same lot as the structure(s) containing the business. 
B.  Sales are limited to merchandise which is normally displayed and sold within the structure(s) containing the business. 
C.  Sales events shall be conducted solely on private property and not encroach within the rights-of-way. 
D.  Location of the displayed merchandise shall be such that fire, safety and pedestrian access is maintained. 
(2)  Annual sales of Christmas trees, fireworks, pumpkins and related items. 
(3)  Fundraising sales for up to three days per event conducted on a site by a nonprofit organization, not to be conducted more frequently than four times per year per site. 
(b)  The following is prohibited in all commercial and industrial districts: 
The parking of private used automobiles in commercial and industrial parking lots for the express purpose of offering the vehicle for sale. This does not apply to bona fide vehicle sales lots. 
(§ 8-5.5103, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.5104. - Recycling collection facilities. 
In the zone districts that permit this use, recycling collection facilities must meet the following criteria: 
(a)  The facility shall be established in conjunction with an existing commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the City of Yuba City; 
(b)  The facility shall be set back at least ten ft. from any street line and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
(c)  The facility shall accept only glass, metal, plastic containers, paper and reusable items; 
(d)  The facility shall use no power-driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines; 
(e)  The facility shall store all recyclable material in containers or in a mobile unit vehicle, and shall not leave materials outside of containers when attendant is not present; 
(f)  Shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and mobile facilities for which truck or containers are removed at the end of the collection day, shall be swept at the end of the collection day; 
(g)  Shall not exceed noise levels of 60 decibels as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property; 
(h)  Facilities shall not be located within 100 ft. of a property zoned or occupied for residential use; 
(i)  Containers shall be clearly marked to identity the type of materials that may be deposited; the facility shall be clearly marked to identity the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation, and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside of the recycling enclosure or containers; 
(j)  Signs may be provided as follows: 
(1)  Recycling facilities may have identification signs comprising a maximum of 16 square ft.; 
(k)  The facility shall not impair the landscaping required by local ordinance for any concurrent use or any permit issued pursuant thereto; 
(l)  Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant may not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary host use unless either of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The facility is located in a convenience zone or a potential convenience zone as designated by the California Department of Conservation. 
(§ 8-5.5104, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.5105. - Sex oriented businesses. 
(a)  Purpose. The City Council finds that sex oriented entertainment businesses have objectionable and deleterious operational characteristics and effect on adjacent areas, particularly when located in close proximity to each other, located in the vicinity of facilities frequented by minors, and when located in close proximity to residentially zoned or used property. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhoods. The primary purpose of the regulation is to prevent the concentration or clustering of these businesses in any one area and preserve the public health, safety and welfare of the citizenry. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  "Sex oriented entertainment business" shall mean any sex oriented bookstore, sex oriented motion picture theater, sex oriented hotel or motel, sex oriented motion picture arcades, sex oriented cabaret, model studio, sexual encounter center, or any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment of which a preponderance of the business is characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  "Sex oriented bookstore" shall mean an establishment where a preponderant portion of its stock in trade books, magazines and other periodicals is distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a preponderant segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
(3)  "Sex oriented motion picture theater" shall mean an enclosed or unenclosed building or structure where a preponderant portion of the material presented therein is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(4)  "Sex oriented hotel or motel" shall mean a hotel or motel wherein a preponderant portion of any material presented is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(5)  "Sex oriented motion picture arcade" shall mean any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated, or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to persons, and where a preponderant portion of the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(6)  "Sex oriented cabaret" shall mean a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances where a preponderant portion of the performances are by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers, whose performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(7)  "Model studio" shall mean any business where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display specified anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity. 
(8)  "Sexual encounter center" shall mean any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons, not all members of the same family, may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
(9)  "Specified sexual activities" may include: 
(i)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(ii)  Sex acts normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including but not limited to masturbation, ejaculation, sexual intercourse, coitus, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral/anal copulation, bestiality, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship; the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, or zooerasty; 
(iii)  Fondling or other touching or sexual stimulation of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast; 
(iv)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(v)  Touching, fondling, masturbating, copulating or other erotic or lewd contact with an animal by a human being; 
(vi)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(10)  "Specified anatomical areas" shall include: 
(i)  Less than completely and opaquely covered (a) human genitals or pubic region; (b) buttock; (c) anus; (d) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(ii)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(c)  Special regulations. 
(1)  The establishment of any sex oriented entertainment business in any zone wherein such use is permitted under the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the special regulations contained in this section in addition to the regulations applicable to the zone wherein the use is established. No sex oriented entertainment business shall be established: 
(i)  Except in a General Commercial (C-3) District; 
(ii)  Within 500 ft. of any area zoned or used for residential purposes; 
(iii)  Within 1,500 ft. of any other sex oriented entertainment business; 
(iv)  Within 500 ft. of any public or private school, public park, playground, recreational area, public building, church, or any noncommercial establishment operated by a bona fide religious organization. 
(2)  The establishment of any sex oriented entertainment business shall include the operating of such a business as a new business, the relocating of such business, or the conversion of an existing business location to any sex oriented entertainment business use. 
(3)  Distances required by this section shall be measured from the nearest property lines of the parcels on the zone in question or containing the use in question. 
(4)  All windows, doors or other apertures shall be architecturally screened or otherwise obscured so as to prevent the viewing of the interior of the sex oriented entertainment business from without. 
(5)  No advertisement displays or merchandise available for sale or rent that includes or depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall be visible from any public right-of-way. 
(6)  All sex oriented entertainment businesses shall provide security personnel to control behavior of both indoor and outdoor patrons so they do not violate any laws. The security personnel shall be provided at a ratio of one per ten parking spaces. 
(7)  No loitering or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in sex oriented entertainment business parking lots. Parking lots shall contain signage stating that loitering and consumption of alcoholic beverages are prohibited in parking lots. 
(8)  Total wall sign area shall not exceed 20 square ft. Businesses located on a corner lot may have a maximum of 25 square ft. No signage associated with the business, including monument signs, shall be visible from a State highway. 
(9)  Parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space per two seats and/or one space per 100 square ft. of gross leasable floor area, as determined by the Planning Department. The Department's determination shall be based on the extent to which the sex oriented entertainment business provides seating for patrons. 
(10)  Hours of operation of the business shall be limited to between 10:00 a.m. and midnight daily. 
(d)  Waiver of locational provisions. 
(1)  Any property owner or his or her authorized agent may apply to the Planning Commission for a waiver of any locational provisions as set forth in this section. The Planning Commission, after a hearing, may waive any locational provisions, if all of the following findings are made: 
(i)  The proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intent of this chapter will be observed; 
(ii)  The possible harm created by the proposed use is outweighed by its benefit; 
(iii)  The proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a blighted or skid row area; 
(iv)  The establishment of the proposed use in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any program of urban renewal; 
(v)  All applicable regulations of this chapter will be observed. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, original jurisdiction to hear applications for waivers under this section is vested in the Planning Commission. The procedure for this hearing shall be the same as that provided for in this chapter for the issuance of conditional use permits by the Planning Commission, including the same notice requirements, the same right of appeal to the City Council and the same fees payable by the applicant. 
(§ 8-5.5105, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 012-94, eff. January 5, 1995; §§ 1, 2, Ord. 04-95, eff. March 23, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.5106. - Resource extraction. 
(a)  On-site use. As part of a development project, existing on-site natural resource materials may be processed for utilization as construction materials necessary to construct an approved project on the same site. This shall not be construed to permit the installation of permanent processing facilities, the importation of materials to be processed, or the commercial excavation of natural resources to be sold off-site. 
(b)  Exportation of resources. Because the operation of extracting resources must occur where the resource lies, the commercial excavating of natural materials for off-site sale for building or construction purposes may be permitted, provided that a use permit (Section 8-5.7003) is first secured. This is not intended to apply to gravel crushing or cement of asphalt batch plants, which must be located in an M-2 District. 
(§ 8-5.5106, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.5107. - Public utilities and telecommunication facilities. 
(a)  Public utilities. All underground and aboveground utility installations, and single poles 60 ft. in height or less, provided they are for local service, are permitted in all districts, except that a use permit (Section 8-5.7003) shall be required for substations, transmission lines, towers, single poles over 60 ft. in height, generating plants and similar facilities. 
(b)  Telecommunication facilities. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage the appropriate location and development of wireless communication facilities. The City wants to minimize the impact of such sites by encouraging their location on existing structures, collocating on existing communication structures, and making provisions on their facility for future collocation opportunities and by applying appropriate siting standards for standalone facilities. 
(2)  Applicability. Wireless communication facilities are permitted, subject to the provisions of this section, in C-O, C-2, C-3 and C-M Commercial Districts and M-1 and M-2 Industrial Districts and PF Public Facilities District. The following types of antennas shall be exempt from the provisions of this section if, and to the extent that, a permit issued by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC), or other applicable Federal or State law specifically provides that the antenna is exempt from local government regulation: noncommercial antennas, including dish antennas, television and radio antennas, and antennas used in amateur radio. 
(3)  Zoning clearance. A zoning clearance may be issued for the installation of any wireless communication facility provided the following standards are complied with: 
(i)  The wireless communication facility consists of a monopole as defined by Section 8-5.8039(a). Maximum height of the facility shall not exceed 60 ft. in the C Districts or 80 ft. in the M and PF Districts. 
(ii)  The equipment shelter or cabinet must be concealed to the extent possible from public view and be made compatible with the architecture of surrounding structures. The equipment shelter or cabinet shall be regularly maintained. 
(iii)  The shelter or cabinet shall meet the building setback standards established in the district in which the facility is to be located. 
(iv)  Landscaping shall be provided for and maintained to screen any ground structures or equipment visible from a public right-of-way. 
(v)  All equipment, antennas, poles or towers shall be painted or otherwise treated to minimize visual impact. Antennas mounted on the side of a building shall be painted or otherwise treated to match the exterior of the building or the antenna's background color. 
(vi)  Roof-mounted antennas may extend one ft. up for each one ft. setback from the edge of the building to a maximum of 60 ft. in the C Districts and 80 ft. in the M and PF Districts. Antennas mounted on the side of a building shall not extend above the building parapet. Ancillary roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from public view. 
(vii)  The applicant shall agree to accept proposals from future applicants to collocate at the approved site. An exception to this requirement may be made by the Community Development Director if the applicant provides evidence that such collocation would adversely affect the facility's capability of providing necessary communication services. 
(4)  Use permit. Wireless communication facilities that cannot meet the provisions or that exceed the height limitations for the issuance of a zoning clearance shall obtain approval of a use permit (Section 8-5.7003) from the Planning Commission. 
(i)  In reviewing applications pursuant to this section, the City shall not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services. 
(ii)  Any decision to deny a permit shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. 
(5)  Removal of facilities. The operator of a wireless communication facility shall be required to remove all unused or abandoned equipment, antennas, poles or towers within 30 days of abandonment. The facility shall be deemed abandoned if it has not been operational for a consecutive six-month period. 
(§ 8-5.5107, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 04-97, eff. December 4, 1997; § 1, Ord. 06-01, eff. August 16, 2001)  
Sec. 8-5.5108. - Carnivals, fairs and festival events. 
All carnivals, fairs and festival events to be located on private property must obtain a zoning clearance (Section 8-5.7002). Carnivals or similar type events shall be permitted in C-2 and C-3 Districts, limited to twice a year between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. not to exceed five consecutive days. Prior to the issuance of the zoning clearance the event representative shall submit, at least seven days prior to the event, to the Planning Director the following: 
(a)  A letter from the property owner(s) granting permission for the event to be held on their property. 
(b)  Written notice(s) describing the event, including the event proponent, location, days and hours of operation, along with addressed and stamped envelopes for all developed properties adjoining the event site. Staff will be responsible for mailing the notices to the adjoining property owners. 
(c)  The Police Department must approve and verify to the Planning Department that the event will have security which meets the Police Department standards. 
After the above information has been submitted and approved by the Planning Director, a zoning clearance may be issued. 
(§ 8-5.5108, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.5109. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-5.5110. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-5.5111. - Emergency shelters. 
Emergency shelters shall be subject to the development standards in the zone district(s) that permit this use. In accordance with the authority granted to the City in Government Code § 65583(a)(4), emergency shelters shall also meet the following standards: 
(a)  Location. An emergency shelter shall not be located within 250 ft. of another emergency shelter. 
(b)  Maximum number of beds. The emergency shelter shall be limited to 25 beds. 
(c)  Length of stay. Occupancy for any one individual in the emergency shelter shall be limited to six months. 
(d)  Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at the ratio of one space per six beds, plus one space per manager or staff person on duty. 
(e)  On-site waiting and intake areas. If the emergency shelter provides on-site waiting and intake areas, such areas shall be located either inside the facility or fully screened from view of the public right-of-way and neighboring properties. 
(f)  Management plan. Prior to commencing operation, the emergency shelter provider must have a written management plan which shall be approved by the Community Development Director. The management plan must include the following: 
(1)  Provisions for staff training; 
(2)  Resident identification process; 
(3)  Neighborhood outreach; 
(4)  Policies regarding pets; 
(5)  Timing and placement of outdoor activities; 
(6)  Temporary storage of residents' belongings; 
(7)  Safety and security; 
(8)  Screening of residents to ensure compatibility with services provided at the facility; 
(9)  Description of training, counseling, and social service programs provided for residents, if applicable. 
(§ 1, 009-10, eff. September 16, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5112. - Rotating church cold weather shelters. 
Existing churches shall be allowed to operate a rotating cold weather shelter program from within their facilities during the months of November 1 through April 30 through the zoning clearance process, subject to the following standards: 
(a)  The maximum number of participants that can stay at a single church facility is 30 people. 
(b)  The maximum length of stay at a participating church facility by an eligible participant is seven days. Once a church facility has hosted a cold weather shelter for seven days, the church shall wait 21 days before serving as a cold weather shelter again. 
(c)  Eligible participants at the shelter(s) shall be oriented to families. 
(d)  Eligible participants shall be brought to the participating church facility not before 6:00 p.m. and shall depart the facility by 7:30 a.m. the next day. 
(e)  As part of the zoning clearance process, participating churches in the rotating cold weather shelter program shall submit an operations plan that provides the following information: 
(1)  Screening process for eligible participants. 
(2)  Occupancy schedule. 
(3)  No loitering policy. 
(4)  Transportation plan. 
(§ 8, Ord. 015-10, eff. December 16, 2011; § 1, Ord. 007-11, eff. December 15, 2011)  
Article 52. - Cannabis Uses[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 011-17 , §§ 3, 5, adopted November 21, 2017, repealed the former Art. 52, § 8-5.5201, and enacted a new Art. 52 as set out herein. The former Art. 52 pertained to specific use prohibitions and derived from § 1, Ord. 001-05, eff. February 17, 2005; § 1, Ord. 003-05, eff. April 14, 2005. 
 
Sec. 8-5.5201. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to regulate the cultivation of medical cannabis pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act (Health and Safety Code § 11362.5 ("CUA") or the Medical Marijuana Program Act (Health and Safety Code § 11362.7 et. seq.) ("MMPA") and the cultivation of non-medical cannabis pursuant to Proposition 64, also known as the Control, Regulate, and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act ("AUMA"), and amended by the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA"), in a manner that protects the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
In addition, this article imposes zoning restrictions on commercial cannabis businesses in the City as authorized and/or licensed by the State of California pursuant to State law. This article is not intended to, and does not, give any person or entity independent legal authority to operate a cannabis business. Moreover, this article is intended to implement reasonable regulations to regulate the cultivation of medical and non-medical cannabis in a manner that protects the health, safety and welfare of the public consistent with the CUA, MMPA, AUMA and MAUCRSA. Nothing in this article is intended to authorize the cultivation, possession or use of medical or non-medical cannabis in a manner in violation of State or Federal Law. 
(Ord. No. 011-17 , § 5, 11-21-2017)  
Sec. 8-5.5202. - Applicability. 
No part of this article shall be deemed to conflict with federal law, as contained in the Controlled Substances Act, nor to otherwise permit any activity that is prohibited under that Act or any other local, state, or federal law, statute, rule, or regulation. Nothing in this article shall be construed to allow any conduct or activity relating to commercial cultivation, distribution, dispensing, sale or consumption of cannabis that is otherwise illegal under local or state law, unless expressly permitted. No provision of this article shall be deemed a defense or immunity to any action brought against by person by the District Attorney's office, the Attorney General of the State of California, or the United States of America. 
(Ord. No. 011-17 , § 5, 11-21-2017)  
Sec. 8-5.5203. - Commercial cannabis activity prohibited. 
(a)  The establishment or operation of any business or entity engaged in commercial cannabis activity is prohibited in all zoning districts in the City. Such prohibited businesses or operations may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Cannabis distribution facility. 
(2)  Cannabis laboratories and research. 
(3)  Cannabis manufacturing. 
(4)  Medical cannabis collective, cooperative, dispensary, operator, establishment, or provider. 
(5)  The transportation, storage, distribution, or sale of cannabis, cannabis products, or cannabis accessories. 
(6)  Delivery regardless of whether the delivery is initiated within or outside of the City, and regardless of whether a technology platform is used for delivery by a dispensary. This subsection does not apply to delivery services that are using public roads to travel through the City as permitted under state law, although such delivery services must comply with all other state laws and local ordinances as applicable. 
(7)  Any other business licensed by the state or other government entity pursuant to the MCRSA, AUMA, or MAUCRSA as they may be amended from time to time. 
(8)  Cannabis cultivation unless expressly permitted by this article. 
(Ord. No. 011-17 , § 5, 11-21-2017)  
Sec. 8-5.5204. - Cannabis cultivation. 
The following regulations shall apply to the cultivation of cannabis within the City: 
(a)  Cannabis cultivation. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to cultivate medical or non-medical cannabis within the City limits, except as provided in this Article. 
(b)  Residency requirement. A person cultivating cannabis shall reside full-time in the residence where cannabis cultivation occurs. 
(c)  Outdoor cultivation. It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to cause or allow any property within the City limits to be used for the outdoor cultivation of cannabis plants. 
(d)  Residential structure cultivation. It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to cultivate cannabis inside any residential structure or building without registering with the City for cannabis cultivation; issued by the Development Services Director or his or her designee, as provided herein. 
(e)  Indoor cultivation. The indoor cultivation of cannabis shall only be conducted within a detached, fully-enclosed and secure structure or within a residential structure conforming to the following minimum standards: 
(1)  The registration of any detached structure, regardless of square footage, constructed, altered or used for the cultivation of cannabis must be issued by the Development Services Director. 
(2)  Indoor grow lights shall not exceed 1,200 watts and shall comply with the California Building, Electrical and Fire Codes as adopted by the City. Gas products (including, without limitation, CO2, butane, propane, and natural gas), or generators shall not be used within any detached structure used for the cultivation of medical or non-medical cannabis. 
(3)  Any detached, fully-enclosed and secure structure or residential structure used for the cultivation of medical or non-medical cannabis must have a ventilation and filtration system installed that shall prevent cannabis plant odors from exiting the interior of the structure and that shall comply with the California Building Code Section 402.3 Mechanical Ventilation. The ventilation and filtration system must be approved by the Building Official and installed prior to commencing cultivation within the detached, fully-enclosed and secure structure or residential structure. 
(4)  A detached, fully-enclosed and secure structure used for the cultivation of cannabis shall be located in the rear yard area of a legal parcel or premises, maintain a minimum ten foot setback from the rear yard property line and a side yard setback that is equal to the same side yard setback required for the residential lot on which the home sits, and the area surrounding the structure or back yard must be enclosed by a solid fence at least six feet in height. 
(5)  Cannabis cultivation occurring within a residence and detached structure shall be in a cumulative area totaling no larger than 75 square feet. 
(6)  Cultivation of cannabis within a residence and detached structure shall not exceed a total of six cannabis plants, regardless of persons residing on the property. 
(7)  Cultivation of cannabis shall not inhibit the occupancy of the residence or take place in the kitchen or bathrooms of any building. 
(8)  Cultivation of cannabis shall not take place on any carpeted surface. 
(9)  Cannabis cultivation for sale is prohibited. 
(10)  Cannabis cultivation areas, whether in a detached building or inside a residence, shall not be conducted by or be accessible to persons under 21 years of age. 
(11)  From a public right-of-way, there shall be no exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation occurring at the property. 
(f)  Cultivation registration. Prior to commencing any cannabis cultivation the person(s) owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any property where cannabis cultivation is proposed to occur must be registered with the City from the Development Services Director or his/her designee. The following information will be required with the initial registration application and subsequent extensions: 
(1)  The owner of the property acknowledges the cultivation of cannabis at the premises on a form provided by the City. 
(2)  The name of each person, owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of any property where cannabis will be cultivated. 
(3)  The name of each person who participates in the cannabis cultivation. 
(4)  The physical site address of where the cannabis will be cultivated and a description of the growing area(s). 
(5)  A signed consent right to entry form, acceptable to the City, authorizing City staff, including the police/planning department, authority to conduct an inspection of the detached, fully enclosed and secure structure or area of the residence used for the cultivation of cannabis upon 24 hours' notice. 
(g)  Registration validity. 
(1)  The initial registration shall be valid for no more than two years and may be extended in increments of two years. 
(2)  To the extent permitted by law, any personal or medical information submitted for medical cannabis or non-medical cultivation registration or extension shall be kept confidential and shall only be used for purposes of administering this article. 
(3)  The Development Services Director, or his/her designee, may, in his or her discretion deny any application for a medical or non-medical cannabis cultivation registration, or extension thereof, where he or she finds, based on articulated facts, that the issuance of such registration, or extension thereof, would be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare. The Development Services Director shall deny the registration for a medical or non-medical cannabis cultivation, or extension thereof, that does not demonstrate satisfaction of the minimum requirements of this Article. The denial of any registration, or extension, may within ten days after such action, be appealed to the City Manager or his/her designee. Said appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(4)  The Finance Director may establish a fee or fees required to be paid upon filing of registration(s) as provided by this article, which fees shall not exceed the reasonable cost of administering this article. 
(Ord. No. 011-17 , § 5, 11-21-2017)  
Sec. 8-5.5205. - Violation. 
An act or activity that does not comply with this article constitutes a violation of this article and is subject to the civil penalties and enforcement as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 011-17 , § 5, 11-21-2017)  
Sec. 8-5.5206. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Public nuisance. The violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  Abatement. A violation of this article may be abated by the City Attorney by the prosecution of a civil action for injunctive relief and by the summary abatement procedure set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Summary abatement procedure. 
(1)  The enforcement official is hereby authorized to order the abatement of any violation of this article by issuing a notice and order to abate which shall: 
i.  Describe the location of and the specific conditions which represent a violation of this article and the actions required to abate the violation. 
ii.  Describe the evidence relied upon to determine that a violation exists, provided that the enforcement official may withhold the identity of a witness to protect the witness from injury or harassment, if such action is reasonable under the circumstances. 
iii.  State the date and time by which the required abatement actions must be completed. 
iv.  State that to avoid the civil penalty provided in subsection (c)(4) of this section and further enforcement action, the enforcement official must receive consent to inspect the premises where the violation exists to verify that the violation has been abated by the established deadline. 
v.  State that the owner or occupant of the property where the violation is located has a right to appeal the notice to abate by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk no later than five business days from the service of the notice. The notice of appeal must include an address, telephone number, fax number, if available, and e-mail address, if available. The City may rely on any of these for service or notice purposes. If an adequate written appeal is timely filed, the owner or occupant will be entitled to a hearing as provided in subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
vi.  State that the order to abate the violation becomes final if a timely appeal is not filed or upon the issuance of a written decision after the appeal hearing is conducted in accordance with subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
vii.  State that a final order of abatement may be enforced by application to the superior court for an inspection and/or abatement warrant or other court order. 
viii.  State that a final order to abate the nuisance will subject the property owner and the occupant to a civil penalty of $250 for each day that the violation continues after the date by which the violation must be abated as specified in the notice and order to abate. The penalty may be recovered through an ordinary civil action, or in connection with an application for an inspection or nuisance abatement warrant. 
(2)  The notice described in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Civil Procedure Code Part 2, Title 5, Chapter 4, Article 3 (§ 415.10 et. seq.), or by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the option of the City. If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of not less than ten days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation pursuant to Government Code § 6062. 
(3)  Not sooner than five business days after a notice of appeal is filed with the City Clerk, a hearing shall be held before the City Manager or a hearing officer designated by the City Manager to hear such appeals. The appellant shall be given notice of the date, time and place of the hearing not less than five days in advance. The notice may be given by telephone, fax, e-mail, personal service or posting on the property. At the hearing, the enforcement official shall present evidence of the violation, which may include, but is not limited to, incident and police reports, witness statements, photographs, and the testimony of witnesses. The property owner and the occupant of the property where the violation is alleged to exist shall have the right to present evidence and argument in their behalf and to examine and cross examine witnesses. The property owner and property occupant are entitled at their own expense to representation of their choice. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager or hearing officer shall render a written decision which may be served by regular first class mail on the appellants. 
(4)  A final notice and order to abate the nuisance will subject the property owner or owners and any occupant or occupants of the property who are cultivating cannabis in violation of this article to a civil penalty of $250 for each day that the violation continues after the date by which the violation must be abated as specified in the final notice and order to abate. 
(5)  The enforcement official or the City Manager or hearing officer hearing an appeal pursuant to subsection (c)(3) of this section may reduce the daily rate of the civil penalty for good cause. The party subject to the civil penalty shall have the burden of establishing good cause, which may include, but is not limited to, a consideration of the nature and severity of the violation, whether it is a repeat offense, the public nuisance impacts caused by the violation, and the violator's ability to pay. The daily penalty shall continue until the violation is abated. The penalty may be recovered through an ordinary civil action, or in connection with an application for an inspection or nuisance abatement warrant. 
(Ord. No. 011-17 , § 5, 11-21-2017)  
Sec. 8-5.5207. - Remedies and penalties not exclusive. 
The remedies and penalties provided herein are cumulative, alternative and nonexclusive. The use of one does not prevent the use of any other civil, or administrative remedy or penalty authorized by, or set forth in, the Yuba City Municipal Code. None of the penalties or remedies authorized by, or set forth in the Yuba City Municipal Code shall prevent the City from using any other penalty or remedy under state statute which may be available to enforce this Article or to abate a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 011-17 , § 5, 11-21-2017)  
Sec. 8-5.5208. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings when used in this article: 
(a)  "Bedroom" shall mean a room inside a residential building being utilized by any person for sleeping purposes. 
(b)  "Cannabis" means all or any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indicia, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis, and cannabis as defined by section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code, as it may be amended. For purposes of this Article, "cannabis" means and includes both cannabis for medical purposes and non-medical, "adult-use" purposes, unless otherwise specified, but does not include industrial hemp. 
(c)  "Commercial cannabis activity" means and includes any and all commercial cannabis uses authorized by the state of California and subject to state licensing, including but not limited to cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery, or sale of cannabis and cannabis products as provided in state law, including wholesale and resale of cannabis for medical or non-medical adult use, and including any business, person or entity that conducts or engages in these commercial cannabis activities, regardless of whether a state license has issued. 
(d)  "Cannabis distribution facility" means any facility engaged in the procurement, temporary storage, non-retail sales, and transport of cannabis or cannabis products between State-licensed cannabis business, including warehouses and similar structures. 
(e)  "Cannabis laboratories and research" means a laboratory, facility, or entity that offers or performs tests or testing of cannabis or cannabis products. It includes start-up or incubator research activities, which typically include but are not limited to research, design, analysis, development, and/or testing of a cannabis product, and laboratories or facilities engaged in scientific research studies, investigation, testing, or experimentation, but not including cannabis manufacturing or sales of cannabis. 
(f)  "Cannabis manufacturing" means the compounding, blending, extracting, infusing, or otherwise making or preparing a cannabis product. For purposes of this article, cannabis manufacturing expressly includes the production, preparation, propagation, processing, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products directly or indirectly, including through extraction and/or chemical synthesis methods. Cannabis manufacturing may include distribution of wholesale products from the premises, but shall not include any retail sales of cannabis or cannabis products or other sales to consumers. 
(g)  "Cultivation" shall mean the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, or processing of cannabis plants or any part thereof. 
(h)  "Delivery" means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer, or independently licensed under California law, that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of cannabis or cannabis products. 
(i)  "Detached, fully-enclosed and secure structure" shall mean a building completely detached from a residence that complies with the Yuba City Building Code and has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, a foundation, slab or equivalent base to which the floor is secured by bolts or similar attachments, is secure against unauthorized entry, and is accessible only through one or more lockable doors. 
(j)  "Rear yard" shall mean the rear open space portion of any premises, whether fenced or unfenced. 
(k)  "Residential structure" or "residence" or "private residence" shall mean any building or portion thereof legally existing which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, and includes a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling. 
(l)  "Solid fence" shall mean a fence constructed of substantial material (such as wood) that prevents viewing the contents from one side to the other. 
(Ord. No. 011-17 , § 5, 11-21-2017)  
Article 53. - Special Provisions for Mobile and Open Air Vending Operations 
 
Sec. 8-5.5305. - Declaration of purpose. 
The City Council of Yuba City expressly finds that the vending of produce and prepared or prepackaged foods, goods, wares, and/or services on public streets, sidewalks, or alleys and on private property could potentially pose unsafe conditions and special dangers to the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Yuba City. It is the purpose and intent of the City Council, in enacting this article, to provide those persons who engage in those types of vending operations with clear and concise regulations to prevent safety, traffic, and health hazards, as well as to preserve the peace, safety, and welfare of the community. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5310. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Business owner" shall mean any person, firm, or corporation, which owns or controls any interest in any business engaged in vending as defined in subsection (u) of this section. 
(b)  "Building complex" shall mean a grouping of any number of buildings that was comprehensively planned as a single or multi-phased project. Building complexes are characterized by shared ingress/egress and parking improvements and master planned utility infrastructure. Building complexes can be located on the same or separate parcel(s) of land. 
(c)  "Commissary" shall mean a food establishment in which food, containers, equipment, or supplies are stored or handled for use in motorized food wagons or conveyance. 
(d)  "Conveyance," as used in this chapter, shall mean any vehicle (except motorized food wagons, as defined below), trailer, cart, wagon, or stand, with or without wheels, which may be moved from one place to another under its own power or by other means. 
(e)  "Fixed place of business" shall mean a commercial activity operating from an immoveable building or enclosed structure at a permanent location which complies with applicable City, State and Federal regulations. 
(f)  "Itinerant merchant," for purposes of this chapter, shall mean any person who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, or merchandise within the City, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building structure, motor vehicle, tent, public rooms in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops, or any street alley, or other place within the City, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, or merchandise, either privately or at public auction; provided that any person so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer. 
(g)  "Mobile vendor" shall mean a person conducting commercial activity from either a motorized or nonmotorized vehicle offering goods for sale on a temporary, intermittent or seasonal basis in which customers approach the vehicle to make a purchase. This term includes mobile caterers, lunch wagons, eating cars, ice cream trucks, pushcarts, bicycle carts, motorized food wagon or conveyance. 
(h)  "Mobile unit" shall mean any vehicle, truck, trailer, cart, pushcart, wagon, bicycle, dray, conveyance or structure on wheels, not firmly fixed to a permanent foundation, which is not required to have a license to operate issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(i)  "Motor vehicle" shall mean any automobile, truck, trailer or other conveyance requiring a license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(j)  "Motorized food wagon" shall mean any vehicle as defined in the California Vehicle Code, which is equipped and used for retail sales of prepared, prepackaged, or unprepared, unpackaged food or foodstuffs of any kind on any public street, alley, highway, or private street, alley, or property within the City of Yuba City. For the purposes of this chapter, a motorized food wagon shall also include any trailer or wagon pulled by a vehicle. 
(k)  "Open air vendor" shall mean a person conducting commercial activity from either a motorized or nonmotorized vehicle at a fixed location on private property, offering goods for sale on a temporary, intermittent or seasonal basis in which customers approach the vending operation to make a purchase. Open air vendor operations are not mobile enough to comply with the time requirements identified for mobile vendors and are therefore constrained to setting up operations at an approved fixed location. 
(l)  "Operator's permit" shall mean either a mobile vendor permit or an open air vendor permit as provided for in this article. 
(m)  "Peddler," for purposes of this chapter, shall mean any person traveling by ft., motor vehicle, mobile unit or any other type of conveyance from place to place conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, foods, farm products, or provisions, or personal property of any nature whatsoever, and hawking or offering and exposing the same for sale, soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for the same or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer or solicit or taking or attempting to take orders for the same for sale from a motor vehicle or mobile unit. 
(n)  "Peddle" and "peddling" shall mean traveling by ft., motorized vehicle, nonmotorized vehicle or any other type of conveyance from place-to-place, house-to-house, or from street-to-street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, or food and concurrently offering or exposing the same for sale. 
(o)  "Peddling" shall mean the act of being a peddler. 
(p)  "Permittee" shall mean the person issued a permit to operate either a mobile or open air vending operation by the City of Yuba City. 
(q)  "Persons" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation, and includes, but is not limited to, owners, operators, drivers, lessors, and lessees of motorized food wagons and conveyances. 
(r)  "Public sidewalk or street" shall mean all of those areas dedicated as public thoroughfares, including, but not limited to, roadways, parkways, medians, alleys, sidewalks and public ways or dedicated easements for public rights-of-way. 
(s)  "Solicitor," "drummer," or "canvasser" shall mean any person who goes from house to house or from place to place taking, or attempting to take, orders for the sales of goods, wares, and merchandise of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has a sample, or whether or not he or she is collecting advance payments. "Canvasser" shall also include any person who goes from house to house or place to place for the purpose of leaving samples and/or advertisements for any goods, wares, or merchandise or for services to be rendered. 
(t)  "Traveling merchant" shall mean any person who engages in buying, selling, trading or exhibition for purchase, sale or trade of any goods, wares, merchandise or services door-to-door, street-to-street or on a temporary or intermittent basis from a location which is not a fixed place of business. Traveling merchant includes, but is not limited to mobile street vendors and persons commonly referred to as solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants, door-to-door salesman and transient vendors. 
(u)  "Vend" or "vending" shall mean the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, prepared, prepackaged, or unprepared, unpackaged food or foodstuffs of any kind from private or public property. 
(v)  "Vendor"/"operator" shall mean any person who sells and makes immediate delivery, or offers for sale and immediate delivery, any goods, wares, or merchandise, or drives, operates, vends, and/or prepares food on or from a motorized food wagon or conveyance. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5315. - Regulation of sales. 
It is unlawful for any person to vend, or attempt to engage in vending or operate any vehicle or conduct any business for the purpose of vending from any vehicle, motorized food wagon, or conveyance parked, stopped, or standing upon any public street, alley, highway, or property, or private street, alley, or property within the City of Yuba City except in accordance with all applicable provisions of this Code. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5320. - Permit to operate—Mobile vendors. 
A person desiring to engage in a mobile vendor operation, as defined by this article, shall submit a written application for a zoning clearance permit with all supporting information required by the City of Yuba City. Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable, non-transferable application fee in an amount as may be established by resolution of the City Council. Any such permit shall be required to be renewed annually and a separate nonrefundable, nontransferable application fee shall be paid annually for such renewal application. Vendors must have the permit in their possession when vending. Additionally, the permittee shall display a City issued permit sticker upon each of their mobile unit, motor vehicle, or motorized food wagon as defined herein to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(a)  As part of the permit to operate application, the vendor or business owner shall provide the following: 
(1)  Name, mailing address, and telephone number of applicant; 
(2)  Presentation of a California driver's license, if any, or other photographic identification issued by a State or United States Federal agency establishing the applicant's age as 18 or older; 
(3)  Proof of current vehicle registration and a copy of an applicable vehicle insurance policy for any vehicles used in the vending activity; 
(4)  Four photographs (showing different exterior views) of each motorized food wagon or conveyance; 
(5)  A copy of a current Sutter County Environmental Health permit for any food service vending operation; 
(6)  A copy of the vendor or business owner's current business tax certification and applicable Board of Equalization Seller's Permit; 
(7)  Business owners must show proof of payment to a commissary for the prior 12 months for all cases involving the reissuance of a permit; and proof of current payment for new vendors; 
(8)  Satisfactory proof of insurance as required by Section 8-5.5355; 
(9)  A description of the goods, wares, merchandise, products, or any other thing or representation of value on consignment which will be the subject of the applicant's peddling or itinerant merchant business or activity. 
(b)  A permit to operate shall be granted unless: 
(1)  The operator fails to submit a complete application; 
(2)  The operator makes any omission, untrue statement or material misrepresentation in the application or provides fraudulent documentation with the application; 
(3)  The operator has violated this article within the last 12 months; 
(4)  Any vehicle proposed to be operated lacks the required equipment, is improperly licensed or is unsafe; 
(5)  The operator has not otherwise complied with this article. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5325. - Conditions to operate—Mobile vendors. 
A person who has obtained a zoning clearance permit to operate a mobile vending operation shall comply with all of the required conditions below or be subject to revocation of the permit as described in Section 8-5.5360. 
(a)  No permittee shall engage in business activity between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except upon invitation of the occupant or business owner. 
(b)  No permittee shall solicit or attempt to solicit on any premises on which a notice or sign is clearly posted prohibiting solicitations or indicating the owner or occupant desire not to be solicited. 
(c)  The peddling of goods, merchandise, wares or foods within a public or private parking lot is prohibited, unless the permittee can provide written permission from the property owner of the subject property to be located at said location. 
(d)  The permit shall be exhibited by the permittee whenever requested by a law enforcement officer or at the request of any citizen the permittee is engaged in selling or soliciting. 
(e)  The permittee shall maintain a valid City of Yuba City Business License at all times. 
(f)  No permittee shall peddle goods from any motorized vehicle that is not properly licensed and insured as required by the State of California. 
(g)  Any permittee engaged in the sale of tangible personal property that would normally be subject to sales tax if sold at retail shall maintain and have available for review, their California Sellers Permit issued by the State Franchise Tax Board. 
(h)  No permittee shall intentionally or deliberately obstruct the free movement of any member of the public on any sidewalk, street or public place. 
(i)  No permittee shall peddle items or solicit to a captive audience, including persons in lines or seated in public places. 
(j)  No permittee shall peddle any prepackaged food unless the items have all State and Federally required food labels and a Sutter County Environmental Health permit, to sell such items. 
(k)  Except as otherwise provided, no permittee shall peddle any goods, merchandise, wares or foods by sitting, standing or walking on a public street, or upon a median or parkway within a public street or right-of-way. 
(l)  No permittee shall peddle or attempt to peddle to the occupant(s) of a vehicle in a public street or highway. 
(m)  The permittee may not park, store or maintain a vehicle on a residentially zoned parcel in the City or a public street in a residential area. 
(n)  The permittee shall comply with all California State Vehicle Code Requirements. 
(o)  The peddling of goods, merchandise, wares or foods from a nonmotorized vehicle with the exception of bicycle carts shall be limited to the public or private sidewalk. Except for bicycle carts peddling is prohibited from or within a public street or highway. 
(p)  The use of amplified music and horns must comply with the City's noise regulations as specified in Title 4, Chapter 17. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5330. - Parking and stopping restrictions—Mobile vendors. 
(a)  A mobile vendor may locate and operate in the public right-of-way subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A vendor shall not operate within 100 ft. of any street intersection. 
(2)  No mobile vendor shall stop to conduct his or her business or activity from a motor vehicle or mobile unit within 200 ft. of another mobile vendor who has already stopped to conduct business. 
(3)  A mobile vendor shall move not less than 600 ft. at least every 30 minutes and may not return to a previous location or within 600 ft. of a previous location on the same calendar day. 
(i)  The lone exception to the above requirement is at an industrial building or office building where there are multiple shift changes during the course of a 24-hour day. For those occurrences, a mobile vendor can return to the same location a maximum of two times during a calendar day. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5335. - Condition/appearance of site and motorized food wagon and conveyance—Mobile vendors. 
(a)  Any permitted mobile vendor who stops at a site shall maintain the property as follows: 
(1)  The site shall be maintained in a safe and clean manner at all times. 
(2)  No tables, chairs, fences, shade structures, or other site furniture, (permanent or otherwise) or any freestanding signs shall be permitted for the customers of the business. 
(3)  Exterior storage or display of surplus refuse, equipment, materials, goods, wares, or merchandise associated with the vendor is prohibited. 
(b)  Any permitted mobile vendor shall comply with the following standards for the condition/appearance of their motorized food wagon and conveyance: 
(1)  The vendor shall display, in plain view and at all times, current permits and licenses in or on their vehicle. 
(2)  Any motorized food wagon or conveyance used in the course of vending shall be entirely self-sufficient in regards to gas, water, and telecommunications. 
(3)  Should any utility hook-ups or connections to on-site utilities be required, the vendor shall be required to apply for appropriate permits to ensure building and public safety and consistency with applicable building and zoning regulations. 
(4)  The vendor shall not discharge items from any motorized food wagon or conveyance vehicle onto the sidewalk, gutter, storm inlets, or streets. 
(c)  Any permitted mobile vendor shall comply with the following sanitation standards. 
(1)  All motorized food wagons or conveyances shall operate out of a commissary pursuant to the requirements of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(2)  All motorized food wagons or conveyances shall be equipped with refuse containers large enough to contain all refuse generated by the operation of such a vehicle, and the vendor of the motorized food wagon or conveyance shall pick up all refuse generated by such operation within a 25 ft. radius of the vehicle before such vehicle is moved. No vendor shall dispose of any trash or refuse in any such public or private trash receptacle other than a trash receptacle owned, operated, or otherwise provided by and under the control of such vendor. 
(3)  A motorized food wagon or conveyance shall comply with California Health and Safety Code regarding the availability of adequate toilet facilities for use by food service personnel. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5340. - Permit to operate—Open air vendors. 
A person desiring to engage in an open air vendor operation, as defined by this article, shall submit a written application for a use permit with all supporting information required by the City of Yuba City. Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable, nontransferable application fee in an amount as may be established by resolution of the City Council. Any such permit shall be required to be renewed annually and a separate nonrefundable, nontransferable application fee shall be paid annually for such renewal application. Vendors must have the permit in their possession when vending. There must be at least one vendor with a valid permit present whenever vending is taking place. 
(a)  As part of the permit to operate application, the vendor or business owner shall provide the same information as specified in Section 8-5.5320(a). In addition, the applicant must also provide the following: 
(1)  An affidavit in a form approved by the City from the property owner (if other than self) permitting the vendor to locate on the site; 
(2)  A site plan, drawn to scale and with dimensions, indicating the location of all existing buildings, structures, driveways, parking spaces, traffic controls, and improvements, and the location or areas where the proposed vending activity, structures, and improvements related to the vending activity will be located upon the site; 
(3)  If the open air vendor is located within 400 ft. of a business selling similar goods and products, then the vendor shall obtain written approval from said business and submit such written approval as part of the application. 
(b)  The open air vending application for a use permit shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for review unless: 
(1)  The operator fails to submit a complete application; 
(2)  The operator makes any omission, untrue statement or material misrepresentation in the application or provides fraudulent documentation with the application; 
(3)  The operator has violated this article within the last 12 months; 
(4)  Any vehicle proposed to be operated lacks the required equipment, is improperly licensed or is unsafe; 
(5)  The operator has not otherwise complied with this article. 
(c)  Any use permit request for an open air vending operation shall be processed in accordance with Section 8-5.7003. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5345. - Conditions to operate an open air vending operation. 
(a)  Open air vending operations are allowed under the following conditions or be subject to revocation of the permit as described in Section 8-5.5360: 
(1)  Vendors may only locate on private property. No open air vending operations shall be allowed on public property, including the public right-of-way. 
(2)  Open air vending operations are allowed in areas where there is a large unmet need for service to be offered by the open air vendor; in general, open air vending operations shall only be allowed in the following areas of the City: 
(i)  Industrial building/complex greater than 65,000 square ft. 
(ii)  Office building/complex greater than 50,000 square ft. 
(iii)  Retail building/complex greater than 100,000 square ft. 
The Planning Commission may issue use permits for open air vending operations in areas of less square footage than shown above when the findings for issuance of a use permit, as provided in section 8-5.7003(d), and in particular, finding number (d)(5), can be made, based on information in the record. The obligation to present evidence of an unmet need in areas of less square footage than shown above is the responsibility of the applicant. 
(3)  Open air vending operations shall comply with the following development standards: 
(i)  An open air vendor shall be incidental to a primary use of the subject property on which it's located, with the primary use having a valid City of Yuba City Business License. 
(ii)  An open air vendor shall not be permitted as an accessory use to a stand-alone parking lot. 
(iii)  If the open air vendor is located within 400 ft. of a business selling similar goods and products, then the vendor shall obtain written approval from said business before being issued permit to operate. 
(iv)  An open air vendor cannot utilize, or be located on, parking spaces required for the primary use at that property. 
(v)  An open air vendor cannot be located on a vacant, undeveloped parcel or lot. 
(vi)  An open air vendor must be located on a paved concrete or asphalt parking surface. 
(vii)  An open air vendor cannot interfere with access, parking, aisles, circulation, driveways, or fire lanes and hydrants. 
(viii)  An open air vendor cannot interfere with pedestrian movement or create a pedestrian hazard. 
(ix)  An open air vendor shall not peddle any food unless the items have all State and Federally required food labels and a Sutter County Environmental Health permit, to sell such items. 
(x)  An open air vendor engaged in the sale of tangible personal property that would normally be subject to sales tax if sold at retail shall maintain and have available for review, their California Seller's Permit issued by the State Franchise Tax Board. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5350. - Condition/appearance of site—Open air vendors. 
(a)  Any permitted open air vendor who is located at an approved fixed location shall maintain the property as follows: 
(1)  The site shall be maintained in a safe and clean manner at all times. 
(2)  No tables, chairs, fences, shade structures, or other site furniture, (permanent or otherwise) or any freestanding signs shall be permitted for the customers of the business. 
(3)  Exterior storage or display of surplus refuse, equipment, materials, goods, wares, or merchandise associated with the vendor is prohibited. 
(b)  Any permitted open air vendor shall comply with the following standards for the condition/appearance of their motorized food wagon and conveyance. 
(1)  The vendor shall display, in plain view and at all times, current permits and licenses in or on their vehicle. 
(2)  Any motorized food wagon or conveyance used in the course of vending shall be entirely self-sufficient in regards to gas, water, and telecommunications. 
(3)  Should any utility hook-ups or connections to on-site utilities be required, the vendor shall be required to apply for appropriate permits to ensure building and public safety and consistency with applicable building and zoning regulations. 
(4)  The vendor shall not discharge items from any motorized food wagon or conveyance vehicle onto the sidewalk, gutter, storm inlets, or streets. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5355. - Insurance requirements. 
To obtain an operator's permit from the City, the operator must demonstrate that it maintains, at its sole expense, liability insurance meeting the following requirements: 
(a)  General liability coverage of $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury personal injury and property damage. 
(b)  Separate commercial automobile liability insurance for each motor vehicle proposed to be operated within the City pursuant to the operators permit, with at least the following limits of liability: $1,000,000 per accident for bodily injury and property damage. 
(c)  Evidence that the operator has procured workers compensation insurance covering all employees of the operator. 
(d)  Required insurance must be issued by companies admitted to do business in California, with a current A.M. Best rating of no less than A:VI. Exception may be made for the State Compensation Insurance Fund when not specifically rated. 
(e)  Each insurance policy required by this Section 8-5.5355 shall provide a minimum scope of insurance at least as broad as: 
(1)  Insurance Services Office Commercial General Liability coverage (occurrence Form CG 00 01). 
(2)  Insurance Services Office Form Number CA 00 01 covering Automobile Liability, Code 1 (any auto). 
(f)  The general liability and automobile liability policies are to contain the following provisions: 
(1)  The City, its officers, agents, officials, employees and volunteers must be named as additional insureds under the policies. General liability coverage shall be provided in the form of an additional insured endorsement (CG 20 10 11 85 or equivalent) to the operator's insurance policy, or as a separate owner's policy. 
(2)  For any claims related to the operator's permit or vehicle, the operator's insurance coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the City, its officers, agents, officials, employees and volunteers. 
(3)  Each insurance policy required by this Section 8-5.5355 shall be endorsed to state that coverage shall not be canceled by either party, except after 30 days' prior written notice has been provided to the City. 
(4)  Any deductible or self-insured retentions must be declared to and approved by the City. At the option of the City, either: the insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-insured retentions as respects the City, its officers, officials, employees, and volunteers, or the operator shall provide a financial guarantee satisfactory to the City guaranteeing payment of losses and related investigations, claim administration, and defense expenses. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5360. - Revocation of permits. 
Any permit issued by the City under this article may be revoked by the issuing party for any of the following reasons, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  The existence of any fact which, at the time of application, would have caused the City to deny the application, whether such fact existed at the time of the application or occurred thereafter; 
(b)  Any violation of laws relating to the requirements for operation of a mobile or open air vending operation; 
(c)  Failure to maintain insurance as required by this article; 
(d)  Failure to maintain a mobile or open air vending operation in a safe and sanitary condition such that the vehicle could pass, at any time throughout the permit period, the inspection required for the issuance of a permit; 
(e)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or a false statement made in the course of applying for a permit or carrying on the business of a vendor; 
(f)  The conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(g)  Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public; or 
(h)  Any violation of this article. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5365. - Appeal of revocation or denial. 
An operator or applicant to for an operator's permit shall be entitled to appeal the City's decision to revoke or deny a permit by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten days from the date the notice of revocation or denial is mailed. The appeal shall set forth the reasons why such action is not proper. Failure to set forth specific reasons why the action is improper or to timely file such appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal, and the proposed adverse action shall become final. The appeal shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of Article 70 of the Zoning Code. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5370. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(a)  Any person engaged in vending conducted in connection with the operations of a State-certified open-air market or an authorized street fair or event under a special event permit, lease, real property license, agreement, or other entitlements issued by the City of Yuba City. 
(b)  Any person delivering any goods by vehicle where such goods have been ordered in advance for such delivery from any business located at a permanent location and which goods are being delivered from such location to the customer by vehicle, regardless of the point of sale. 
(c)  Persons invited to call upon private residences or businesses that operate from a fixed place of business located in or outside the City limits. 
(d)  Persons selling or soliciting sales of daily or weekly newspaper as defined by the California Government Code. 
(e)  Persons soliciting or canvassing on behalf of or against any candidate for public office or any ballot initiative. 
(f)  Persons engaged in selling or soliciting sales as a fundraiser for a local school, civic or nonprofit corporation. For the purposes of this section, local shall mean within a seven-mile radius of the City limits. 
(g)  Persons engaged in religious solicitation or other protected religious activities. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5375. - Applicability of regulations to existing vending operations. 
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the herein described activities were established before or after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this article into law except for those three preexisting businesses identified by the City Council which shall be required to enter into a separate agreement with the City to allow for the continued operation of those businesses (which include: Fat Daddy's Hot Dogs; Fotine's Greek Café; and Rosie's Snobiz). Said agreement, among other things, shall specify that the operators of those three pre-existing, nonconforming businesses can continue to operate at their current locations, selling those items currently sold. The right to operate these businesses shall not be transferable and no expansion of the site or business shall be allowed. These businesses must obtain the insurance required by this article, comply with all applicable Sutter County Health Department regulations and possess a valid City of Yuba City Business License at all times of operation. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5380. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this article is subject to the following penalties: 
(a)  Violations are subject to enforcement by any means authorized in this Code, including but not limited to the administrative enforcement provisions established in Section 1-6.010 of the Municipal Code; 
(b)  Revocation of permit to operate/conditional permit to operate as defined herein in Section 8-5.5360. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.5385. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article may be enforced by any peace officer, or the Director of Community Development or his/her designee. 
(§ 2, Ord. 004-10, eff. June 17, 2010)  
PART IV. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
Article 55. - Building Sites 
 
Sec. 8-5.5501. - Measurements. 
All measurements of land and structures shall be computed to the nearest foot. 
(§ 8-5.5501, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.5502. - Creating new lots. 
(a)  Depth to width ratio. Any lot created after the effective date of this chapter shall not be greater than three times deeper (front to rear) than it is wide (side to side) except as follows: 
(1)  When created as part of an overall development project with unified site design. The site development plans and intended uses must be approved concurrently with the land division; or 
(2)  The lot is created as part of a condominium or similar type project that has a unified site design and the parcel is needed for access, landscaping or other common use; or 
(3)  The resulting lot has a minimum width of 300 ft. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Public uses and public utilities. The minimum building site in any district shall not apply to lots created for public use or public utility. 
(2)  Condominiums. The minimum lot size provided in any district does not apply to condominium developments. 
(§ 8-5.5502, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.5503. - Buildable lots. 
(a)  Substandard sized lots. All legally created lots of record that contain less area than required by the applicable district are considered a building site if one of the following criteria is met: 
(1)  All other development standards of the district in which the lot is located, except lot size, are met; or 
(2)  A variance (Section 8-5.7004) for the building is approved by the Planning Commission. 
(b)  Plot plan approval. When a plot plan has been filed for a building permit upon which a single lot of record or contiguous lots of record under one ownership are shown to contain a single building site, no part of the property may be used for an additional building site, unless a new plot plan for the entire property, conforming to all the provisions of this chapter, is filed with the Building Inspector for approval by the Planning Director. 
(§ 8-5.5503, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Article 56. - Height of Buildings and Structures 
 
Sec. 8-5.5601. - Measurement. 
The height of a building or structure shall be determined from the average finished grade of the ground to the highest point of the building or structure. 
(§ 8-5.5601, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995) 
   
Sec. 8-5.5602. - Commercial and industrial buildings over 25 ft. high. 
In commercial and industrial districts lots that have interior side and/or rear lot lines abutting a residential district, no portion of a building shall encroach into a building plane, along those lot lines, of one ft. horizontally for each one ft. vertically, with such plane beginning at a point 25 ft. above the ground level, 15 ft. from the property line. 
(§ 8-5.5602, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.5603. - Exceptions to height limits. 
The following structures may be built to a greater height than the limit established for the district in which they are located; provided, however, no such structure in excess of the building height limit shall be used for sleeping or eating quarters or for any commercial purpose other than such as may be incidental to the permitted uses of the main building: 
Belfries; 
Chimneys; 
Communication poles and towers (Section 8-5.5107); 
Cupolas; 
Domes; 
Scenery lofts; 
Silos; 
Similar structures covering not more than 15% of the ground area of the building, including mechanical appurtenances; 
Smokestacks; 
Spires; 
Vents; and 
Water tanks. 
(§ 8-5.5603, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.5604. - Use permits for additional height exceptions. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any building or structure in any zone district may be erected to a greater height or number of stories than the limit established for the district in which the structure is located, provided that a use permit (Section 8-5.7003) is first secured. 
(§ 8-5.5604, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Article 57. - Yards 
 
Sec. 8-5.5701. - Determining lot frontage. 
(a)  Corner lot. Either street frontage may be deemed the front of the lot, provided that under the chosen arrangement, rear yard requirements are met. 
(b)  Through lot. The front yard borders the street primarily used as frontage by neighboring lots. 
(§ 8-5.5701, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.5702. - Determining yard areas. 
Yards shall be determined from the property line except when abutting an existing or proposed street for which the right-of-way is narrower than the right-of-way ultimately required for the street. In those cases a yard shall be established from the future right-of-way, as provided in Article 75 of this chapter. 
(§ 8-5.5702, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.5703. - Yards on alleys. 
(a)  Yards for lots adjacent to alleys. If a side lot line abuts an alley the yard shall be considered an interior side yard. 
(b)  Rear and side yards. 
(1)  In computing the depth or width for any lot where such yard abuts an alley, no part of the width of the alley may be considered as a portion of such measurement. 
(2)  A garage utilizing an alley for access shall only be required to have a five-ft. yard. 
(§ 8-5.5703, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.5704. - Exceptions—Residential districts. 
(a)  Lots with 50 ft. or less street frontage. Minimum side yard is three ft. for lots of 50 ft. or less in width, if the lot was created prior to the adoption date of this chapter; provided, however, no eave or architectural projection is nearer than three ft. from the property line. 
(b)  Architectural projections. Ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses, architectural features, and eaves are allowed provided none shall extend into a minimum yard or court more than three ft. or be nearer than three ft. to any property line. 
(c)  Fire escapes and stairways. Open or enclosed fire escapes and fireproof outside stairways may extend not more than three ft. into any required yard or minimum court, but no nearer than three ft. to any property line. 
(d)  Chimneys and flues. The projections of chimneys and flues are to be placed so as not to obstruct light and ventilation and must be located a minimum of three ft. from any property line. 
(e)  Reduced rear yard. The minimum rear yard may be reduced to ten ft. for single story construction provided the rear yard average is equal to or exceeds the rear yard required by the primary district. 
(f)  Residential accessory buildings (including guest houses). See Section 8-5.5001(c) of this chapter. 
(g)  Patio covers in yard areas. See Section 8-5.5001(d) of this chapter. 
(§ 8-5.5704, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Article 58. - Exterior Lighting 
 
Sec. 8-5.5801. - Required parking lot lighting. 
Parking lots for uses that require five or more spaces shall be lit in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Residential parking lots. Open parking lots and carports shall be provided with a maintained minimum of one foot-candle of light on the entire paved area of the parking surface during the hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by weather and vandal resistant covers. 
(b)  Nonresidential parking lots. Open parking lots and access thereto, for use by the general public, shall be provided with a maintained minimum of one foot-candle of light on the entire parking surface from dusk until the termination of the business every operating day. 
(c)  Lighting type/height. Lights shall be an energy-efficient, indirect diffused type and shall not exceed a height of greater than 18 ft. above finished grade. 
(d)  Coordination with landscape plans. Lighting design shall be coordinated with the landscape plan to assure that vegetation growth will not interfere with the intended illumination. 
(§ 8-5.5801, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.5802. - Required building lighting. 
(a)  Multiple-family residential buildings. Aisles, passageways and recesses related to and within the building complex shall be illuminated with an intensity of at least .25 foot-candle at the ground level during the hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by weather and vandal resistant covers. 
(b)  Nonresidential buildings. All exterior doors, during the hours of darkness, shall be illuminated with a minimum of one foot-candle of light. All exterior bulbs shall be protected by weather and vandal resistant covers. 
(§ 8-5.5802, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.5803. - Light shielding. 
In all districts lighting erected to provide illumination of private property for security purposes shall be shielded so as not to produce obtrusive glare onto the public right-of-way or adjoining properties. 
(§ 8-5.5803, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.5804. - Required lighting documentation. 
Photometric data shall be submitted, prior to the issuance of building permits, to prove that the above lighting requirements have been satisfied. 
(§ 8-5.5804, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.5805. - Use permit for additional height exceptions. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, parking lot lighting in any zone district may be erected to a greater height than the limit established for the district in which it is located, provided that a use permit (Section 8-5.7003) is first secured. 
(§ 1, Ord. 06-01, eff. August 16, 2001)  
Article 59. - Fences, Walls, Hedges and Intersection Visibility 
 
Sec. 8-5.5901. - Applicability. 
At the time of installation, erection, enlargement, increase in capacity of any building, fence, outdoor use or change in type of use, all fencing and walls shall conform to the provisions of this article. 
(§ 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996)  
Sec. 8-5.5902. - Standards applied to all walls and fences. 
(a)  Measurement. The height of a wall, fence or hedge shall be measured on the premises required to provide it and from the finish level of the ground beneath it. 
(b)  Prohibited fence materials. In all zoning districts, for fences along street frontages, the use of coiled barbed wire, coiled razor wire or similar material in conjunction with any fence, wall, roof hedge, or by itself is prohibited with the following exceptions: 
(1)  If required by any law or regulation of the City, the State of California, Federal Government, or other agency thereof. 
(2)  On properties in the M Districts located on streets not identified in the General Plan as an arterial or collector and that are not within 50 ft. of a General Plan street. 
(c)  Maintenance. All walls and fences shall be maintained in a safe, neat and orderly condition at all times. 
(d)  Traffic safety sight area—All districts. Within the sight distance triangle, defined in Section 4-9.1901 et seq. of the Municipal Code, no wall, fence, hedge, sign or other structure, shrubbery, mounds of earth, or other visual obstruction over 30 in. in height, above the nearest street curb elevation, shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow which would impair the vision of a person entering or exiting property or a street intersection. For all required front and street side yards, out-side of the sight distance triangle, no wall, fence, hedge, sign or other structure, shrubbery, mounds of earth, or other visual obstruction shall exceed 36 in. in height. Exceptions to this standard are for: 
(1)  Public utility poles; 
(2)  Official traffic warning signs and signals; 
(3)  Trees trimmed (to the trunk) to provide a minimum clearance of seven ft. above any sidewalk and 14 ft. above any adjacent public or private right-of-way or intersection. 
(§ 8-5.5901, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996)  
Sec. 8-5.5903. - Exceptions—Use permit. 
Exceptions to the standards provided in this article may be permitted if a use permit (Section 8-5.7003) is first secured. 
(§ 8-5.5902, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996)  
Sec. 8-5.5904. - One- and two-family residences—Maximum fence height within required yards. 
The maximum height of walls, fences and hedges is three ft. in any required front yard or street side yard and six ft. in any other required yard, unless as otherwise provided for elsewhere in this chapter. 
(§ 8-5.5903, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996) 
   
Sec. 8-5.5905. - Required multiple-family, commercial and industrial fences and walls. 
(a)  Multiple-family residential district. Where a multiple-family development will be adjacent to a single-family residential district a six ft. high masonry wall shall be constructed along all common property lines. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial districts. 
(1)  Outdoor storage. All outdoor storage or equipment rental areas fronting on a public right-of-way or customer parking area shall be screened from view by a six-ft. high wall made of masonry or masonry pilasters and wood or similar decorative materials. Living vegetation may also be utilized provided the type of shrubbery used are a minimum of five gallon in size (tree size see Section 8-5.6004(a)(4), are of a fast growing variety and will grow into a solid barrier within three years of installation. 
(2)  Outdoor sales areas. If a permitted outdoor sales display area is proposed by the business owner to be fenced, such as with plant nurseries or sales of automobiles, motorcycles, mobile homes, boats, recreational vehicles, etc. all fencing fronting on the public right-of-way shall consist of a masonry wall, masonry pilasters and wood fencing, or if open screening is to be used, it shall be made of a decorative material, including wrought iron, masonry pilasters and open mesh wiring or other similar material as approved by the Planning Director. 
(3)  Walls and fences in front and street side yards. All walls or fencing fronting a public right-of-way shall be placed in back of required landscaped areas. 
(4)  Walls and fences in interior side or rear yards. Where a commercial or industrial development is adjacent to residential property, a six-ft. high masonry wall shall be constructed along all common property lines. Otherwise, walls and fences not visible from the public right-of-way are not limited to a material type. 
(§ 8-5.5904, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996))  
Article 60. - Landscaping 
 
Sec. 8-5.6001. - Applicability. 
The requirements of this article shall be applied to the installation, erection, enlargement increase in capacity of any building or change in type of use, except that landscaping shall not be required for the following: 
(a)  One-family residence, halfplex, or a two-family residence; 
(b)  Landscaping which is a part of a registered historic site, park, golf course facility, or cemetery. 
(§ 8-5.6001, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996)  
Sec. 8-5.6002. - Landscape plans. 
(a)  Preliminary plan. For projects that must go through Planning Commission and/or City Council review, preliminary landscape plans are required. The preliminary landscape plan is a conceptual plan that depicts the location of the following: 
(1)  Property lines; 
(2)  Building(s), existing and proposed; 
(3)  Location of existing trees (with trees to be saved and removed identified); 
(4)  Planter areas; 
(5)  Location of tree and plant materials; 
(6)  Walkways; 
(7)  Streets within and adjacent to the project property; 
(8)  Walls, fences, or other structure of site feature that may affect landscape design; 
(9)  Shading requirements; and 
(10)  Parking areas and percentage of parking lot to be landscaped and shaded. 
(b)  Detailed landscape plan. The detailed landscape plan must be submitted after an applicant has Planning Commission or City Council approval of the project, or when a project is submitted for staff approval if Commission or Council approval is not required. The detailed landscape plan must show all the information as required on the preliminary plan plus the following additional information: 
(1)  Plans shall include the name, address, phone number, date and signature of person who prepared the plans; 
(2)  Plans shall be prepared to delineate all proposed improvements, including utilities, such as gas, electrical, water and sewer lines; 
(3)  Show location and size of plant materials; 
(4)  Botanical and/or common names of all plants; 
(5)  Specification of quantity, and installation of plants; 
(6)  Meter size and location; 
(7)  Type, size, and location of backflow device(s) proposed; 
(8)  Location of control valves; 
(9)  Location of automatic controllers; 
(10)  Outdoor lighting plan. 
(§ 8-5.6002, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996)  
Sec. 8-5.6003. - Areas to be landscaped. 
(a)  Parking lots. Parking lots of five spaces or more shall provide landscape areas in the interior of the parking lot covering a percentage of the total parking area as follows: 
Parking spaces required 	% of Total Parking Areas to be Landscaped 
5—24 spaces 	5.0% minimum 
24—49 spaces 	7.5% minimum 
50+ spaces 	10.0% minimum 
 
(b)  Property perimeters. 
(1)  Street frontages. All areas adjacent to a street shall be landscaped with a planter averaging at least ten ft. in width excluding curbing. For commercial and industrial developments exceeding 75,000 square ft. in building area the planter shall average a minimum of 20 ft. in width, excluding curbing. In commercial and industrial districts where a building is constructed a distance from the right-of-way line of less than the required landscaping, then the remainder area shall be landscaped. In addition, any area within the street right-of-way between the back edge of the sidewalk and the property line shall be developed as a planter or landscaped area in conjunction with the required landscape area mentioned above, subject to approval of an encroachment permit, unless this requirement is waived by the Public Works Director or his or her designee. 
(2)  Interior property lines. Planting shall be required along interior property lines in commercial and industrial districts abutting a residential district and in the R-3 District when abutting a commercial, industrial, R-1 or R-2 Districts. The planting shall be placed along the length of side and rear interior property lines in a five-ft. wide planter. 
(c)  Building perimeters. The portion of a building that faces onto a customer parking lot or fronts directly onto the street shall have a landscape planter(s) installed along at least 20% of that building face. 
(d)  Trash enclosures. For specific details see Article 64 of this chapter. 
(§ 8-5.6003, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996)  
Sec. 8-5.6004. - Landscaping materials. 
(a)  Shading and tree standards. 
(1)  Existing trees. Existing healthy trees shall be maintained whenever possible and may be used in lieu of planting new trees. 
(2)  Parking lot shading. All parking lots shall include shade tree planting designed so that a minimum of 50% of the parking area (including parking spaces and maneuvering areas) is shaded by the tree canopies within 15 years of planting. 
Tree coverage shall be determined by the approximated crown diameter of each tree type at 15 years, as estimated on the approved tree list by the Planning Director. The percentage of area required to be shaded shall be calculated based on the uncovered above ground parking spaces and their respective maneuvering areas and shall not include the maneuvering area that is attributable to covered parking spaces. 
(3)  Street trees. Street landscape areas must be planted with trees from the approved tree list at 30-ft. intervals. When abutting a street, trees shall be planted at least five ft., but not further than ten ft., from the back of the sidewalk. 
(4)  Minimum tree size. All trees shall be a minimum of 15 gallons in size with a one in. dbh (diameter at breast height). 
(5)  Orchard parking. As required by Section 8-5.6102(a), orchard parking shall consist of trees planted toward the rear of parking stalls to create a grid of trees rather than isolated rows of trees. It provides more trees than typical parking lot landscaping approaches without the need for islands between the parking bays. This type of tree placement provides better shade on the passenger compartment and more even shade and vegetation throughout the parking area. 
(b)  Perimeter screening. Required perimeter planters shall include trees, shrubs, hedges and other features such as a berm, designed to form a partial visual screen at least three ft. in height, except within the sight distance triangle, see Section 8-5.5901(d), where landscaping (excluding trees) shall not exceed 30 in. in height. Along interior property lines, where no vehicular traffic is involved, there shall be no height limitation. 
(c)  Amount/combination of vegetation. Within five years of planting all landscape areas shall have a combination of at least 50% area coverage by ground cover, lawn or shrubbery or other type of living vegetation. All unpaved areas shall be planted with an affective combination of trees, ground cover, lawn, shrubbery and/or approved dry landscape materials. 
Required interior perimeter landscaping intended to buffer differing uses, as required in Section 8-5.6003(b)(2) of this chapter, shall be heavily landscaped to provide a visual barrier between uses. 
Varied tree and plant species shall be used throughout the parking lot. No one species shall comprise more than 60% of the plantings within each site. 
(d)  Turf allowance/drought tolerant materials. The maximum amount of lawn in required landscape areas shall be 25%. The use of drought tolerant plant materials is encouraged. 
(e)  Clearance. Landscaping in planters at the end of parking aisles shall not obstruct the driver's vision of vehicular and pedestrian cross traffic. Mature trees shall have a foliage clearance of eight ft. from the grade of the parking area with other plant materials not to exceed 30 in. in height. 
(f)  Protection of vegetation. 
(1)  Design. All required parking lot landscaped areas shall be designed so that plant materials, at maturity, are protected from vehicle damage by providing a minimum of 2½-ft. clearance of low growing plants where vehicle overhang is permitted or wheel stops are set 2½ ft. from the back of the curb. 
(2)  Curb. All required parking lot landscaping shall be within planters bounded by a concrete curb at least six in. wide by six in. high. No planter, except building perimeter planters, shall be smaller than 25 square ft., excluding curbing. 
(g)  Walkways. A barrier-free, four-ft. wide walk shall be provided through the required planter at primary street and driveway intersections to the parking lot. Such a walkway shall be located so as to facilitate the most direct movement of persons using sidewalk curb ramps to access buildings. 
(h)  Lighting vs. landscaping. Design and placement of security lighting in landscaped areas shall be coordinated with the landscape plan to assure that vegetation growth will not interfere with the intended illumination. 
(§ 8-5.6004, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.6005. - Irrigation standards and procedures for water efficiency. 
An irrigation system shall be installed that consists of underground piped water lines with low water flow sprinklers and/or a drip or trickle irrigation systems. Each system shall be designed to provide adequate coverage to all plant material. Water meter and line sizes shall be calculated for total water demand, which should be, at least, the sum of the maximum irrigation demand and all building demand unless on separate meters. Due to varying irrigation requirements, separate control valves and/or sprinkler/emitter heads shall be used when shrubs and turf all appear on the same landscape plan. The irrigation system shall be designed to minimize over-spray and runoff onto streets, sidewalks, windows, walls and fences. The irrigation plans shall include the following to provide better water efficiency for all landscape areas: 
(a)  Sprinklers and sprays should not be used in areas less than five ft. wide. Drip and bubbler systems shall be used in areas where watering needs do not exceed 1½ gallons per minute per device. 
(b)  Sprinkler heads must have matched precipitation rates within each control valve circuit. 
(c)  All irrigation systems shall be equipped with an automatic controller capable of dual or multiple programming. Controller must have multiple cycle start capacity and a flexible calendar program. 
(d)  Pop-up sprinklers in lawn areas shall have at least four in. pop-up height. 
(e)  All required irrigation systems shall be equipped with automatic rain shut-off devices. 
(§ 8-5.6005, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.6006. - Completion. 
(a)  All of the required landscaping must be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy in conformance with the requirements and standards; or 
(b)  A surety in the amount equal to 150% of the estimated cost of landscaping, including materials and labor, is on file with the City which guarantees that the required landscaping shall be installed within 120 days of issuance of a certificate of occupancy and an agreement is filed with the City to assure completion of the landscaping within such time. The surety may take the form of cash deposit, irrevocable letter of credit or bond; and together with the agreement, would provide for payment to the City of any costs incurred in contracting for completion of the required landscaping. 
(§ 8-5.6006, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.6007. - Maintenance. 
All planting shall be maintained in a good growing condition. Such maintenance shall include, where appropriate, pruning, mowing, weeding, cleaning, fertilizing, and regular watering. Wherever necessary, planting shall be replaced with other plant materials to ensure continued compliance with applicable landscaping requirements. Landscaping and irrigation systems shall be located, designed and maintained as specified on the approved plans. Trees shall be maintained by property owners to be free from physical damage or injury arising from lack of water, chemical damage, accidents, vandalism, insects and disease. Trees showing such damage shall be replaced with another tree. 
(§ 8-5.6007, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Article 61. - Off-Street Parking and Loading 
 
Sec. 8-5.6101. - Applicability. 
At the time of the installation, erection, enlargement or increase in capacity of any building, or change in type or expansion of use, or at the time there is a change in the nature of occupancy which would require increased parking requirements, or expansion of use of property, there shall be provided the following minimum off-street parking and loading spaces, together with provisions for ingress and egress in accordance with this section. 
(§ 8-5.6101, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996)  
Sec. 8-5.6102. - Number of parking spaces required. 
(a)  On-street parking adjacent to commercial and industrial properties in the C and M Districts may be counted towards the amount of required on-site parking. If provided parking exceeds by 10% or more the amount of parking required for the use then orchard parking at a ratio of one tree for each four parking spaces shall be installed. Fractional space requirements shall be rounded to the nearest whole space. The following minimum number of parking spaces shall be provided for each use. 
Note: "sf." refers to square ft. and "gfa." refers to gross floor area. 
Residential 	Number of Spaces 
One-family residence 	2 spaces per unit. 
Two-family residence 	2 spaces per unit. 
Mobile home parks 	2 spaces (may be tandem) per unit. Plus 1 space for each 5 units for guest parking. 
Multiple-family residences 	1 space per studio apartment or 1 bedroom dwelling unit; 1.5 spaces per 2 bedroom dwelling unit; and 2 spaces per 3 or more bedroom dwelling unit. Plus 1 guest space for each 10 units. 
Rooming houses, boarding houses, and bed and breakfast facilities 	2 spaces, plus 1 space per room for rent. 
Second one-family residence in the R-1 District: 
 Housing with at least 1 resident required to be 62 years of age or older 	1 space. 
 Containing only 1 bedroom 	1 space. 
 Containing two or more bedrooms 	2 spaces. 
Senior citizen housing projects 	.6 of a space per dwelling unit for those projects restricted to tenants who are either 62 years of age or older, or are handicapped; or 
Senior citizen congregate care facility parking requirements may be adjusted on an individual project basis, subject to a parking study based on project location and proximity to services for senior citizens, including, but not limited to, medical offices, shopping areas, transit availability, etc. 
Commercial 	Number of Spaces 
Amusement/recreational facilities: 
 Billiard/pool parlor 	2 spaces for each table. 
 Bowling alley 	3 spaces for each lane, plus as required for incidental uses (i.e., pro shop, coffee shop, etc.). 
 Miniature golf course 	1 space per hole, plus as required for incidental uses (i.e., food services, game room, etc.). 
 Movie theater 	1 space for each 4 seats. 
 Tennis/racquetball/health club 	1 space for each 400 sf. of gfa., plus 1.5 spaces per tennis court. 
 Theme/amusement park, recreational, go carts, etc. 	To be determined at time of project review. 
 Video game arcade 	1 space for each 200 sf. of gfa. 
Automotive related repair shops 	1 space for each 400 sf. of gfa. 
Bank 	1 parking space for each 175 sf. of gfa. or 1 parking space for each employee at maximum employment plus 1 parking space for each 250 sf. of gfa., whichever is greater. 
Dance halls and exhibition halls 	1 parking space for each 100 sf. used for assembly, skating or dancing area. 
Day care center 	1 space for each teacher, plus 1 space for each 400 sf. of the structure used by the children. 
Laboratory, medical and dental 	1 space for each 400 sf. of gfa. 
Mortuaries and funeral homes 	1 parking space for each 40 sf. of gfa. for assembly rooms used for services, but in no case less than 10 spaces. 
Motels and hotels 	1 parking space per unit, plus 1 space for each 2 employees, plus as required for associated facilities. 
Office, business 	1 parking space for each 300 sf. of gfa. 
Office, medical and dental 	1 space for each 200 sf. of gfa. or 5 spaces for each doctor, whichever is the greater. 
Outdoor sales (auto sales, boat sales, and other uses not contained in a building or structure, except for equipment storage yards) 	1 space for each 500 sf. of gfa. for office, showroom, vehicle repair and parts department, plus 1 space per 10,000 sf. of outdoor display area. 
Personal services (beauty parlor, barber shop, dog grooming, nail care, tanning salon, massage parlor, etc.) 	1 space for each 150 sf. of gfa. 
Retail 
 Food stores 	1 space for each 150 sf. of retail floor area, plus 1 space for each 500 sf. of storage, office space, etc. 
 Large appliance/furniture stores 	1 space for each 1,000 sf. of sale floor display area, office, etc., plus 1 space for each 2,000 sf. of warehouse storage. 
 Retail stores and shopping centers 	1 space for each 250 sf. of gfa., excluding food stores, see above. 
Retail nursery/garden shop 	1 space for each 250 sf. of indoor retail sales area, office, etc., plus 1 space for each 500 sf. of indoor plant display area, plus 1 space for each 2,500 sf. outdoor plant display area. 
Restaurant and cocktail lounges 	1 space for each 3 seats, plus 1 space for 50 sf. of dance floor or assembly area without fixed seats. No parking is required for outdoor seating when seats provided equal 50% or less of total indoor seating. 
Service stations 	1 space for every 3,000 sf. of land area. 
Schools (business and trade) 	1 space for each 150 sf. of gfa., or 1 space per 1.5 students and staff at design capacity, whichever is greater. 
Institutional 	Number of Spaces 
Churches, stadiums, arenas, assembly halls, clubs and auditoriums 	1 parking space for each 4 fixed seats. Where fixed seats consist of pews or benches, seating capacity shall be computed at 20 in. of lineal length for each seat. For those uses without fixed seats, 1 space for each 40 sf. of assembly seating area. 
Hospitals 	1 space for each bed, plus 1 space for each 300 sf. of area used for office, clinics, testing, research, administration and similar activities associated with the principal use. 
Libraries, museums, art galleries 	1 space for each 300 sf. of gfa. 
Rest rooms, residential care facilities for 7 or more individuals, convalescent hospitals, and sanitariums 	1 space for each 2 beds. 
Schools: 
 Nursery/pre-school 	1 space for each staff member, plus 1 space for each 10 children. 
 Elementary/junior high 	2 spaces for each classroom. 
 High School 	7 spaces for each classroom. 
 Community college/university 	10 spaces for each classroom. 
Industrial 	Number of Spaces 
Auto dismantling/junkyards/ recycling centers 	1 space for each 500 sf. of gfa., plus 1 space for each .5 acre of gross outdoor use area. 
Manufacturing 	1 parking space for each 2 workers, based on the work shift with the largest number of expected employees. 
Mini-storage facilities 	1 space per 300 sf. of office area, plus 4 spaces for customer parking. 
Warehouse and wholesale storage 	1 parking space for each 2,000 sf. of gfa. 
 
(b)  Requirements for uses not specifically set forth in the article shall be determined by the Planning Director based upon the requirements for comparable uses. 
(§ 8-5.6102, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.6103. - Handicapped requirements. 
Handicapped parking and accessibility shall be provided in accordance with the standards established by the California State Handicapped Access Regulations. 
(§ 8-5.6103, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.6104. - Design and dimensional standards. 
(a)  Standard space. Each parking space shall be a minimum of nine ft. in width and 18 ft. in length, exclusive of aisles and access drives. Each parallel parking space shall be a minimum of nine ft. in width and 24 ft. in length, exclusive of aisles and access drives. All parking areas shall be completely paved with asphalt or Portland cement concrete surfacing. 
(b)  Compact spaces. Compact spaces are not permitted for nonresidential uses. Parking lots existing on April 1, 1985, and designed to include compact car spaces shall be deemed to contain the number of parking spaces provided, including such compact car spaces, and shall not be required to eliminate compact car spaces upon a change of use or occupancy. 
Parking lots in residential districts, containing six or more spaces, may have 35% of all required spaces, compact. These spaces shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot and marked as compact car parking only. 
Each compact parking space shall be a minimum of seven ft. six in. in width and 16 ft. in length, exclusive of aisles and access drives. 
(c)  One- and two-family residential standards. 
(1)  Parking in yards. The parking of any vehicle is prohibited in any portion of a required front or street side yard, except on a driveway leading to required parking or to an improved parking space (see Section 8-5.6104(7)). Any driveway leading to a garage, carport or required parking space shall not be less than 20 ft. in length measured from the back of an existing or planned sidewalk. 
(2)  Recreational vehicle parking. A recreational vehicle may only be parked on the portions of a lot behind the front wall of the residence or, in the case of a corner lot, behind the wall of the residence facing each street or right-of-way. The recreational vehicle shall be screened to a height of six ft. from view from any public right-of-way. A recreational vehicle used as daily transportation may be parked overnight on recognized parking areas. 
(d)  Multiple-family residential, commercial and industrial uses. 
(1)  Location. All vehicular parking and maneuvering areas shall be located on-site. Use of the public right-of-way to exit an on-site parking space is prohibited. 
(2)  Entrances and exits. The location and design of all street and alley entrances and exits to off-street parking facilities shall be subject to the approval of the Public Works Director. 
(3)  Aisles. Aisle widths serving off-street parking areas in all districts shall be not less than the following schedule: 
(i)  For one-way traffic serving two or more spaces: 12 ft. 
(ii)  For two-way traffic serving two to four spaces: 12 ft. 
(iii)  For two-way traffic serving five to eight spaces: 16 ft. 
(iv)  For two-way traffic serving nine or more spaces: 24 ft. 
(4)  Overhang. Parking space lengths, except for parallel spaces, may be reduced by 2½ ft. when the space abuts a minimum five ft. wide landscaped area bordered by a six in. high by six in. wide continuous concrete curb or sidewalk a minimum of 2½ ft. wider than the minimum width required by the California State Handicapped Access regulations. 
(5)  Off-street parking layout. See Figure 61-01 at the end of this article. 
(6)  Shopping cart storage. When there are businesses that utilize shopping carts, adequate close-by temporary shopping cart storage areas shall be provided throughout the parking lots. No storage of shopping carts shall be allowed on walkways outside of buildings. 
(7)  Surfacing. All parking areas and accesses to such parking areas, as well as all outdoor sale display areas, shall be completely surfaced with asphalt or Portland cement concrete surfacing. Adequate drainage shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer. 
(§ 8-5.6104, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996; § 1, Ord. 08-99, eff. July 1, 1999; § 1, Ord. 03-00, eff. June 15, 2000)  
Sec. 8-5.6105. - Off-street loading areas. 
(a)  Location. All loading areas shall be located so as to prevent truck back-up maneuvering within any public right-of-way. 
(b)  Size. Loading spaces shall not be less than 12 ft. in width, 40 ft. in length, and 14 ft. in height, exclusive of aisles and access drives. 
(c)  Screening. 
(1)  Residential. When adjacent to or across the street from a residential zone district the following standards shall apply: 
(i)  A bermed 15 ft. wide street perimeter landscape strip shall be required with sufficient tree and shrub vegetation to produce a 75% opaque screen within five years of installation. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to maintain such landscaping to ensure adequate sight distance at points of ingress and egress. 
(ii)  A minimum eight ft. high masonry wall shall be constructed at the back of the landscape strip required in the subsection (c)(1)(i) above, with design to be approved by the Planning Director. 
(§ 8-5.6105, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.6106. - Joint use of common parking facilities. 
(a)  The Planning Commission may grant a use permit (Section 8-5.7003) for reduction in the total number of parking spaces when the joint use of a parking facility has divergent needs in relation to user on the basis of non-use by one user during a period of use by another such as during nighttime in relation to daytime hours, or weekdays in relation to Saturdays or Sundays. 
(b)  Conditions for allowing joint uses: 
(1)  The buildings or uses shall be within 500 ft. of the nearest point by walking distance to a parking facility; 
(2)  The applicant shall show there is minimal conflict in the principal operating hours of the buildings or uses for which the joint parking facilities are proposed; and 
(3)  The parties concerned in the joint use of off-street parking facilities shall show evidence of an agreement for such joint use by a proper legal instrument. Such instrument when approved as conforming to the provisions of this section shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder and copies thereof filed with the Building and Planning Departments of the City. 
(§ 8-5.6106, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.6107. - Off-site parking. 
The Planning Commission may grant a use permit, pursuant to Section 8-5.7003 of this chapter, for off-site parking provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The site is within 500 ft. (walking distance) of the use and is not separated from the use by any feature which would make pedestrian access inconvenient or hazardous. 
(b)  The site on which the parking is located shall be owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the party controlling the use. 
(c)  The site is surfaced as required by this article and is landscaped in conformance with Article 60 of this chapter. 
(§ 8-5.6107, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.6108. - Required bicycle parking facilities. 
(a)  Amount of bicycle parking spaces required. 
Commercial and Industrial 
Bicycle parking spaces shall be provided at a rate equal to 3% of required auto parking. 
Institutional 
Elementary schools, middle schools, high schools, and colleges 	100% of required auto parking. 
Cultural/library services, trade schools, business colleges, and commercial schools 	10% of required auto parking. 
 
(b)  Requirements for bicycle parking facilities. 
(1)  Location. Bicycle parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or building site as the building or use incurring these requirements, or shall be located on an adjacent, contiguous lot. Bicycle facilities shall be located so as to be at least as convenient as the majority of vehicular parking areas, and as closely oriented to adjacent bikeways as possible. 
(2)  Bicycle facilities standards. 
(i)  Bicycle parking facilities shall include provisions for storage and locking of bicycles, either in lockers or secured racks or equivalent installations in which the bicycle frame and wheels may be locked by the user. Racks or lockers shall be anchored so that they cannot be easily removed. It is recommended that bicycle facilities be covered and/or located so that they are protected from the elements. 
(ii)  Bicycle racks and lockers shall be designed with respect to safety, convenience, and security. 
(iii)  Bicycle racks shall be designed and located to ensure that they relate well to the remainder of the facilities, are architecturally consistent with the site and structures, and are located in the most appropriate location. 
(3)  Maintenance. Bicycle parking facilities as required herein shall be maintained for the duration of the use incurring said requirements and shall not be used for other purposes. 
(§ 8-5.6108, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.6109. - Waiver of on-site parking requirements. 
An existing building that lacks adequate required on-site parking and has lost its nonconforming status, may be reoccupied with a permitted use allowed in the district it is located if a use permit (Section 8-5.7003) is first secured. 
In those cases where a building is to be erected, enlarged, or increased in intensity of use, to a level of intensity similar to neighboring properties, parking standards may be reduced or waived to a level typically found in the vicinity if a use permit is first secured. 
In either case a finding must be made that adequate mitigations are proposed or that conditions exist such that neighboring property's on-site parking will not be unduly impacted. 
(§ 8-5.6109, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.6110. - Maintenance. 
All required parking facilities, including striping, handicapped parking and bicycle parking areas shall be well maintained, and kept free of litter and debris. 
(§ 8-5.6110, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995) 
  
OFF-STREET PARKING LAYOUT 
Article 62. - Public Improvements Required 
 
Sec. 8-5.6201. - Provisions. 
No building permit shall be issued to construct, erect, alter, or move on a lot any building or structure unless the owner of the property has dedicated, at no cost to the City, necessary rights-of-way or easements required for street or utility purposes, and provisions have been made for the improvement of that portion of a street upon which such lot fronts and adjoins. Alterations to one-family residences shall be exempt from required improvements. 
For the purposes of this subsection, the word "alter" shall mean any change, addition, or modification in construction which has a value of $5,000 or more, as determined by the Chief Building Inspector. 
For the purposes of this subsection, the words "provisions have been made for the improvement" shall be deemed to have been satisfied if any one of the following exists: 
(a)  All of the required improvements are in place in conformity with the existing requirements of the Public Works Department; or 
(b)  A good and sufficient improvement security is on file with the City which guarantees that upon 60 days' notice by the City the required improvements will be constructed; or 
(c)  In the event that it is not practical to construct the improvements at that time, as determined by the Public Works Department, the owner and/or developer has signed and filed with the City an agreement, approved by the Council, which guarantees that the required improvements will be constructed within two years of the date of the issuance of the building permit. 
For the purposes of this subsection, the word "improvement" shall mean and include the installation of not less than such curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and paving as are required on that side of the centerline of the street which adjoins such lot and the extension of water and sewer lines. Such improvements shall be constructed under permits issued by and to standards established by the Yuba City Public Works Department. 
If public improvements are required as a condition of a building permit the work to complete the improvements shall be subject to the plan check and inspection fees provided for by Section 8-2.106 of the Subdivision Ordinance. 
(Article 62, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996)  
Article 63. - Signs[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), adopted May 17, 2016, effectively repealed the former Art. 63, §§ 8-5.6301—8.5-6312, and enacted a new Art. 63 as set out herein. The former Art. 63 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 010-94, §§ 8-5.6301—8-5.6311, effective Jan. 5, 1995, as amended. See Ordinance Tables for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 8-5.6301. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate signs as an information system that expresses the character and environment of Yuba City and implements the General Plan, consistent with State and Federal law. These regulations recognize the importance of business activity to the economic vitality of the City as well as the need to protect the visual environment. Specifically, these regulations are intended to: 
(a)  Provide adequate opportunity for the exercise of the right of free speech by display of a message or image on a sign, while balancing that opportunity with other community and public interests; 
(b)  Provide minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property, public welfare, and traffic safety by controlling the design, quality of materials, construction, illumination, size, location and maintenance of signs and sign structures; 
(c)  Preserve and enhance the visual attractiveness of the City, for residents, businesses and visitors; 
(d)  Protect and enhance property values and community appearance by encouraging signs that are compatible with the architectural style, character, and scale of the building to which they relate and with adjacent buildings and businesses; 
(e)  Restrict signs that may create visual clutter or a nuisance to nearby properties, violate privacy, or create hazards or unreasonable distractions for pedestrians and drivers; and 
(f)  Ensure that commercial signs are accessory or auxiliary to a principal business or establishment on or near the same premises, rather than functioning as general advertising for hire. 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6302. - Applicability. 
This article regulates all signs on public and private property, except where expressly stated otherwise. No sign shall be erected or maintained anywhere in the City except in conformity with this article. 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6303. - Design principles. 
(a)  Architectural compatibility. A sign (including its supporting structure, if any) should be designed as an integral design element of a building's architecture and be architecturally compatible, including color and scale, with any building to which the sign is to be attached and with surrounding structures. A sign that covers a window or that spills over "natural" boundaries or architectural features and disrupts parts of upper floors of buildings is detrimental to visual order and is not permitted. 
(b)  Consistency with area character. The size, materials, colors, graphic style, illumination, and other features of the sign shall be in keeping with the visual character of the street or area in which it is proposed. Proposed new signs should reflect the highest quality of design possible for a given area. 
(c)  Legibility. The size and proportion of the elements of the sign's message, including logos, letters, icons and other graphic images, should be selected based on the anticipated distance and travel speed of the viewer. Sign messages oriented towards pedestrians may be smaller than those oriented towards automobile drivers. Colors chosen for the sign text and/or graphics should have sufficient contrast with the sign background in order to be easily read during both day and night hours. 
(d)  Readability. To ensure that signs perform their essential communicative function, characteristics such as the proportion between different parts of the sign, visibility from important vantage points, and other design features will be considered. A sign message should be easily recognized and designed in a clear, unambiguous and concise manner, so that a viewer can understand or make sense of what appears on the sign. Excessive use of large areas of several colors can create competition for the eye and significantly reduce readability. 
(e)  Finish. Signs must have finished edges with a clean, smooth, consistent surface. Lettering on the sign is to be of complementary size, proportion and font and either carved, routed, painted or applied. 
(f)  Visibility. A sign should be conspicuous and readily distinguishable from its surroundings. 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6304. - Permits required. 
With the exception of exempt signs as listed in Section 8-5.6305, permits shall be required as follows, unless otherwise stated. 
(a)  Zone clearance required. Subject to Section 8-5.7002, Zone clearance, the Development Services Department will review applications for building permits for signs and determine if the proposed signs are consistent with the requirements contained in this article. All signs, temporary or permanent, and flags per this article, shall require a zone clearance, unless specifically exempted. 
(b)  Master sign program (MSP). A master sign program is required for signage proposals as specified in Section 8-5.6316, Master sign program. 
(c)  Building permit required. No person shall erect, alter, repair, or relocate any sign without first obtaining any required building permit from the City for such work. No permit shall be issued until the City determines that such work is in accordance with the building or electrical codes of the City. Except as otherwise provided, permits required by this article will be issued pursuant to the same terms and according to the same fee schedule as all other building permits. 
(d)  Encroachment permit. Signs that project over a public street, sidewalk, or other City owned property or easement shall be subject to an encroachment permit approval by the Public Works Department. 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6305. - Exempt signs. 
The following signs are exempt from Planning permit requirements of this article and do not count toward the total sign area limit for a site, provided that they conform to applicable standards. Building permits may be required. 
(a)  Address signs and name plates. Each residence and establishment may post one address sign and one name plate, not to exceed four square feet. 
(b)  Barber poles. Barber poles less than 30 inches in height. 
(c)  City property/bus stop signs. Signs placed by the City or the transit authority on property or public right-of-way held by the City. 
(d)  Civic signs. Memorial signs and plaques installed by a civic organization. Said signs shall first be approved by the City Council. 
(e)  Commemorative signs. A sign, tablet, or plaque memorializing a person, event, structure, or site. Said sign shall be approved by the City Council. 
(f)  Decorative holiday decorations and lights. Provided that such displays are removed within 60 days of their installation. 
(g)  Equipment signs. Signs incorporated into permitted displays, machinery, or equipment by a manufacturer, distributor, or vendor and identifying or advertising only the product or service dispensed by the machine or equipment, such as signs customarily fixed to automated teller machines (ATMs) and gasoline pumps. 
(h)  Fence signs. Signs attached or painted on fences or freestanding walls that are not associated with a building may be permitted: 
(1)  When located for noncommercial purposes and for advertising community events, such as youth sports and events, school functions, or events organized by a government entity. Signs shall not exceed 48 square feet, and may be installed 30 days prior to the event it is promoting. Sign shall be removed within 48 hours after the event. Signs promoting a single event shall be spaced a minimum of 600 feet. Signs shall only promote events occurring within the City's sphere of influence. 
(2)  Along the boundary fences of sporting fields when not oriented towards the public right-of-way. 
(i)  Garage sales/yard sales. Limited to two such signs, having a maximum of five square feet each and not to exceed six feet high, located on private property with the property owner's permission. Signs may not be erected prior than 24 hours to the event and shall be removed no later than 24 hours of the conclusion of the sale. 
(j)  Gateway signs. Signs erected by the City or in partnership with the City, contents of which are limited to the name of the City and the name of or other information regarding civic, fraternal, or religious organizations located within the City. 
(k)  Interior graphics or signage. Visual communicative devices that are located entirely within a building or other structure and are not visible from the exterior thereof, or located on the inside of a building and at least three feet from the window, door, and/or opening. 
(l)  Memorial signs. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings or date of building erection, when cut into any masonry surface or when on a bronze plaque, or other durable material as approved by the Director. 
(m)  Missing person/lost pet. Signs seeking assistance locating a missing person or pet are exempt, so long as they remain in good condition, free of tears. Such signs shall not be placed or located in such a manner as to constitute a safety hazard or to impede the public use of the public right-of-way. 
(n)  Official government notices. Official and legal notices used by any court, public body, person, or officer in the performance of a public duty; any legal or official notices posted by a utility or other quasi-public agency; temporary or permanent signs erected and maintained by or required by the City, State, or Federal government, or government transportation or transit agencies, for the purpose of providing official governmental information to the general public, including, but not limited to: traffic direction, City entrance, or for designation of direction to any school, hospital, historical site, or public service, property, or facility; public hearing or meeting notices; seismic warning signs; or other signs required or authorized by law. 
(o)  Open/closed signs. Open/closed signs are permitted in commercial and industrial districts. Signs shall not exceed six square feet. Such signs shall not be placed or located in such a manner as to constitute a safety hazard or to impede the public use of the public right-of-way. 
(p)  Operational window signs. Window signs limited to the hours of operation, address, occupancy, and emergency information, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Limitations on placement. Operational window signs shall not be mounted or placed on windows higher than the second story. 
(2)  Maximum area. The maximum area of exempt window signage shall not exceed three square feet in area. 
(q)  Public carrier graphics. Graphic images mounted on carrier vehicles such as buses, taxicabs, and limousines that legally pass through the City. 
(r)  Traffic signs. Traffic, directional, warning, or informational signs required or authorized by a governmental agency. 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6306. - Prohibited signs. 
Unless expressly allowed by another subsection of this article or other applicable law, the following sign types, locations, and materials are prohibited: 
(a)  Animated signs/moving signs. Animated, flashing, blinking, reflecting, revolving, or other similar signs, or signs with visibly moving or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any kind, rolling or running letters or message. 
(b)  Flashing signs. No sign (including window sign, exterior lighting or window lighting) shall be permitted which is animated by means of flashing, scintillating, blinking, or traveling lights or any other means not providing constant illumination, except for date, time and temperature signs. 
(c)  Flying signs. Signs such as blimps or kits designed to be kept aloft by mechanical, wind, chemical, or hot air means. 
(d)  Pole signs. 
(e)  Posters. The tacking, painting, pasting or otherwise affixing of signs or posters of a miscellaneous character, visible from a public right-of-way, located on the walls of a building, bars, shed, on trees, poles, posts, fences, or other structures, or anywhere on public property is prohibited, unless permitted as a garage/yard sale sign. 
(f)  Roof signs. 
(g)  Signs blocking doors or windows. Signs shall not be located or installed on any door, window, or fire escape in a manner that will prevent free ingress or egress. 
(h)  Signs on standpipes or fire escapes. No sign shall be attached to any standpipe or fire escape, except those required by other codes. 
(i)  Snipe signs. All off-site signs, tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, trailers, temporary construction barriers, or other supporting structures. 
(j)  Signs in the public right-of-way. Unless otherwise noted, no sign shall be affixed within or on public property or public right-of-way, including but not limited to median strips or islands, on sidewalks, trees, retaining walls, bridges, benches, traffic signals, public fences, poles or utility equipment, street lighting, utility poles, traffic signs, or traffic sign posts, supporting structures, anchor wires, or guy wires. 
(k)  Signs that produce noise or emissions. Signs that produce noise or sounds that can be heard at the property line, excluding voice units at menu boards, and signs that emit visible smoke, vapor, particles, or odors. 
(l)  Signs creating a traffic hazard or affecting pedestrian safety. Signs placed or located in such a manner as to constitute a safety hazard or to impede the public use of the public right-of-way. 
(1)  Exits and entrances. No sign shall be placed, mounted, erected, or installed in any manner that obstructs the use of any door, window, or fire escape. 
(2)  Sidewalks. No sign shall be mounted or displayed in such a manner that it blocks or impedes the normal pedestrian use of public sidewalks. 
(3)  Intersections. No sign shall be erected or maintained at or near any street intersection that will obstruct the free and clear vision of drivers and pedestrians. Other than traffic control signals, no sign shall be installed in the visibility triangle at intersections pursuant to Public Works policy ST 22, Site Distance Triangle. 
(m)  Vehicle signs. Signs on vehicles, trailers, boats, storage boxes or other similar objects where such signs are not incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or other similar objects for conveyance of persons or property or storage of property, and where the primary purpose of the sign and vehicle or other similar object upon which the sign is attached or affixed is for advertising purposes. 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6307. - Measuring sign area. 
(a)  Single-faced signs. Sign area shall include the entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles (consisting of horizontal and vertical lines and no more than 12 corners) that enclose the extreme limits of all sign elements, including, but not limited to, sign structures or borders, written copy, logos, symbols, illustrations, and color. Supporting structures such as sign bases and columns are not included in the sign area provided that they contain no lettering or graphics except for addresses or required tags. The calculation of sign area for various types of single-faced signs is illustrated in Figure 8-5.6307-A(1). 
  
FIGURE 8-5.6307-A(1): MEASURING SIGN AREA
(b)  Double-faced signs. Where two faces of a double-faced sign are parallel, or less than an interior angle of 45 degrees from one another, the sign area shall be computed as the area of one face. Where the two faces are not equal in size, the larger sign face shall be used. Where two faces of a double-faced sign are located equal to or more than 45 degrees from one another, both sign faces shall be counted toward sign area. 
(c)  Multi-faced signs. On a three-faced sign, where at least one interior angle is 45 degrees or less, the area of two faces (the largest and smallest face) shall be summed to determine sign area. In all other situations involving a sign with three or more sides, sign area shall be calculated as the sum of all faces. 
  
FIGURE 8-5.6307-A(2): DOUBLE- AND MULTI-FACED SIGNS
(d)  Three-dimensional signs. Signs that consist of, or have attached to them, one or more three-dimensional objects (i.e., balls, cubes, clusters of objects, sculpture, or statue-like trademarks), shall have a sign area of the sum of all areas using the two vertical sides of the smallest cube that will encompass the sign. 
  
FIGURE 8-5.6307-A(3):
THREE-DIMENSIONAL
SIGNS
(e)  Measuring sign height. The height of a sign is the vertical distance measured from the finish grade directly beneath the sign to the highest point at the top of the sign. 
(f)  Measuring sign clearance. Sign clearance shall be measured as the smallest vertical distance between finished grade and the lowest point of the sign, including any framework or other embellishments. 
(g)  Measuring building frontage. Building frontage is the building facade that directly abuts a public street, private street, parking lot driveway, or parking spaces. For buildings with two or more frontages, the length of the wall and allowable sign area shall be calculated separately for each building frontage. 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6308. - General standards. 
(a)  Visibility triangles. No sign, permanent or temporary, flag, flagpole, etc. may be erected within the visibility triangle per Public Works Policy ST 22, Site Distance Triangle. 
(b)  Residential and nonresidential interface. Signs in commercial and industrial zone districts shall be set back a minimum distance of 45 feet from a residential zone district. 
(c)  Materials and mounting required. 
(1)  Materials. Signs shall be made of sturdy, durable materials. Paper, plastic, cardboard, and other materials subject to rapid deterioration may only be used for temporary signs. 
(2)  Mounting required. All permanent signs shall be firmly anchored, shall comply with all requirements for public safety, and shall satisfy all applicable safety codes and all other applicable governmental enactments, rules, regulations, or policies. 
(d)  Changeable copy. Non-electronic changeable copy shall cover no more than 20% of the total sign area, except for the following uses which are allowed up to 75% of the maximum sign area to be changeable copy: public facilities uses, indoor theaters, and fuel price signs. 
(e)  Illumination. The illumination of signs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to avoid negative impacts on surrounding rights-of-way and properties. The following standards shall apply to all illuminated signs: 
(1)  Shielding required. To the extent feasible, and at the discretion of the review authority, light sources shall be concealed or shielded to prevent or minimize light spillage, glare, momentary blindness, or other annoyance, disability, or discomfort to persons within the view of such light sources. 
(2)  Colored lights. Colored lights shall not be used at a location or in a manner so as to be confused or construed as traffic control devices. 
(f)  Light sources adjacent to residential areas. Signs that are adjacent to residential areas that in the opinion of the review authority (i.e., Development Services Director, Planning Commission, or City Council) shall come equipped with automatic dimming technology which automatically adjusts the brightness of the sign in direct correlation with ambient light conditions (i.e., daytime, nighttime, cloudy conditions). 
(g)  Concealed electrical systems. External conduits, boxes, and other connections related to the function of a sign and associated lighting shall not be exposed. A switch disconnecting each circuit shall be placed in plain sight and near the inspection opening. 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6309. - Permitted sign types by zone district. 
Additional regulations are denoted in the right hand column. Numbers indicated in parenthesis ( ) are references to notes at the bottom of the table. "Square feet" is represented as "sf," while "feet" or "foot" is "ft." 
Table 8-5.6309(A): Residential Zone Districts R-1(1), R-2(2), R-3) 
Sign Type 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Area Per Sign 	Maximum Sign Height 	Location Requirements 	Lighting Allowed? 	Additional Regulations 
Monument Signs 	1 per site. 	32 sf 	6 ft 	5 ft from all property lines. 	Yes, external, backlit, or halo. 	For public, quasi- public uses, religious institutions an Electronic Message Board copy sign is permitted provided it occupies no more than 50% of total sign area. Refer to Sec. 8-5.6312. (1) 
Directional Signs 	1 for one-way, 2 for two-way driveways. 	4 sf 	3 ft 	Outside of the public right-of-way. 	(2) 	
Directory Signs 	1 per building complex. 	8 sf 	6 ft 	As near the main entrance of the building complex as possible and not readable from the public right-of- way. 	(2) 	
Wall Signs 	1 sign per street frontage. 	32 sf 	Not to exceed the eaves of the building which it is affixed. 	Attached to building below eaves. 	Yes, external, backlit, or halo. 	For public, quasi- public, churches and similar uses a changeable copy sign is permitted provided it occupies no more than 50% of total sign area. 
Changeable Copy Signs 	1 attached to a wall or monument sign. 	50% or less of total permitted sign area to which it is attached. 			Yes, externally or internally. 	Limited to the activities and events to be offered by the use and public, quasi-public, religious institutions and similar uses. A changeable copy sign is permitted provided it occupies no more than 50% of total sign area. 
 
(1)  Requires a Use Permit. 
(2)  Yes, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. or during normal business hours, whichever is more restrictive. Lighting shall be limited to external, halo, or backlit. 
Table 8-5.6309(B): Commercial Zone Districts (C-0, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-M) 
Sign Type 	Maximum Number 	Building SF 	Maximum Area Per Sign 	Maximum Sign Height 	Location Requirements 	Lighting Allowed? 	Additional Regulations 
Monument Signs 
(1—4 businesses) 	1 sign per each 300 ft of lineal street frontage. 		C-O, C-1: 40 sf 	C-0, C-1, C-M: 6 ft 	5 ft from all property lines. 	Yes, externally or internally. 	(1) (2) (3) 
			C-M: 48 sf 				
			C-2, C-3: 64 sf 	C-2, C-3: 10 ft 			
Monument Signs (5 or more) 	1 sign per each 300 ft of lineal street frontage. 	1—50,000 	80 sf 	12.5 ft 	5 ft from all property lines. 	Yes, externally or internally. 	(1) (2) (3) 
		50,001— 
100,000 	96 sf 	15 ft 			
		100,001— 
150,000 	112 sf 	17.5 ft 			
		150,001+ 	128 sf 	20 ft 			
Directional Signs 	1 for one-way, 2 for two-way driveways. 		4 sf 	3 ft 	Outside of the public right-of-way and building setbacks. 	Yes, external, backlit, or halo lit 	
Tenant/ 
Occupancy Signs 	1 per building frontage. 		12 sf 	6 ft 	As near the main entrance of the building complex as possible and not readable from the public right-of-way. 	Yes, external, backlit, or halo lit. 	
Wall Signs 			C-0, C-1: 1 sf. for each 1 lineal ft. of building frontage. 	Not to exceed the building eaves of the building to which it is affixed. 	Attached to building below eaves. 	Yes, externally or internally. 	(3) (4) (5) 
			C-2, C-3, C-M: 1½ sf for each 1 lineal ft of building frontage. 				
Projecting Wall Signs 	Not to exceed combined total square footage allowed for wall signs. 		Not to exceed combined total square footage allowed for wall signs. 	Not to exceed the eaves of the building to which it is affixed. 	Lowest portion of the sign must be a minimum of 8 feet above the average grade. May not project more than 4 ft from the wall to which it is attached. 	Yes, external, backlit, or halo. 	(6) 
Blade/Valance 	1 per building frontage. 		6 sf 		The sign must be perpendicular to the building face and no less than 8 ft above the average grade. 	No. 	(6) 
Suspended Signs 	1 double-faced sign per business entrance. 		6 sf 	Must be located under a covered walkway and perpendicular to the walkway. 	Lowest portion of the sign must be a minimum of 8 ft above the average grade. 	No. 	
Awning/Canopy Signs 	Refer to Sec. 8-5.6311-C 	(7) 
A-frame Signs 	Refer to Sec. 8-5.6314 	(6) (8) 
 
(1)  Increased sign area and/or height in excess of maximums are only allowed following the approval by the Planning Commission of a Use Permit (Sec. 8-5.7003). Prior to the issuance of the Use Permit the finding must be made that the sign is needed to advertise a business(es) that have limited visibility from the adjacent public roadway. 
(2)  For an Electronic Message Boards, refer to Sec. 8-5.6312. 
(3)  Should a sign be within 100 feet of a Residential Zone District, lighting, if proposed, shall be backlit, external or halo. 
(4)  Buildings over one story: Signs located above the first or ground floor of a multiple story building shall be individual letters, externally lit, including but not limited halo lit or backlit. For signs located above the first floor, the maximum letter height shall be 3 ft. 6 inches, while the maximum symbol height shall be 3 ft. 10 inches, or as permitted per the underlying Zone District, whichever is less. Only one sign is permitted per building face above the first/ground floor. 
(5)  New cabinet or can signs shall not exceed 20% of the total area of the proposed sign(s). 
(6)  An encroachment permit issued by the Engineering Division of Development Services may be required if sign projects into a public right-of-way. 
(7)  Signs must be uniform in color, design and materials for all tenants identified within the center 
(8)  For regulations pertaining to the Civic Center Specific Plan, refer to the Plan. 
Table 8-5.6309(C): Industrial Zone Districts (M-1, M-2) 
Sign Type 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Area Per Sign 	Maximum Height 	Location Requirements 	Lighting Allowed? 	Additional Regulations 
Monument Signs 	1 sign per each 300 ft of lineal street frontage. 	48 sf 	6 ft 	5 ft from all property lines. Sight distance requirements must be maintained. 	Yes, externally or internally. 	(1) (2) (3) 
Directional Signs 	1 for one-way, 2 for two-way driveways. 	4 sf 	3 ft 	Outside of the public right-of- way. 	Yes, during the business hours only. 	
Directory Signs 	1 per building frontage. 	12 sf 	6 ft 	As near the main entrance of the building complex as possible and not readable from the public right-of-way. 	Yes, during the business hours only. 	
Off-site Advertising Signs 	Only with an approved Use Permit. 
Number based on Locational Requirements. 	300 sf 	30 ft 	Minimum distance of 1,000 ft from another off-site sign on same side of street and 500 ft apart if located on opposite sides of the street. 	No internally illuminated signs. May be externally illuminated, with no moving parts. 	
Wall Signs 		1 sf for each 1 lineal foot ft of building frontage. 	Not to exceed the eaves of the building to which it is affixed. 	Attached to building below eaves. 	Yes, externally or internally. 	(3) (4) 
Projecting Wall Signs 		Not to exceed total combined square footage allowed for wall signs. 	Not to exceed the eaves of the building to which it is affixed. 	Lowest portion of the sign must be minimum of 8 ft above the average grade. May not project more than 4 ft from the wall to which it is attached. 	Yes, external, backlit, or halo lit 	(5) 
Suspended Signs 	1 double-faced sign per business entrance. 	6 sf 	Must be located under a covered walkway and perpendicular to the walkway. 	Lowest portion of the sign must be a minimum of 8 ft above the average grade. 	No. 	(5) 
Awning/ 
Canopy Signs 	Refer to Sec. 8-5.6311(c) 	(5) 
A-frame Signs 	Refer to Sec. 8-5.6314 	(5) 
 
(1) Increased sign area and/or height in excess of maximums are only allowed following the approval by the Planning Commission of a Use Permit (Sec. 8-5.7003). Prior to the issuance of the use permit the finding must be made that the sign is needed to advertise a business(es) that have limited visibility from the adjacent public roadway. 
(2) Should a sign be within 100 feet of a Residential Zone District, lighting, if proposed, shall be external lit, backlit, or halo lit. 
(3) For an Electronic Message Board, refer to Sec. 8-5.6312. 
(4) Buildings over one story: Signs located above the first or ground floor of a multiple story building shall be individual letters, externally lit, including but not limited halo lit or backlit. For signs located above the first floor, the maximum letter height shall be 3 ft. 6 inches, while the maximum symbol height shall be 3 ft. 10 inches, or as permitted per the underlying Zone District, whichever is less. Only one sign is permitted per building face above the first/ground floor. 
(5) An encroachment permit issued by the Engineering Division of Development Services may be required if sign projects into a public right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6310. - Specific plan, master plan, or planned development areas. 
Any new sign or enlargement to an existing sign on property located within a specific plan, or master plan area or a planned development district shall comply with the more specific standards. 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6311. - Standards for specific sign types. 
This section establishes location and other general standards for specific sign types that apply to all areas where such signs are permitted. 
(a)  Wall signs. Wall signs are subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Projection allowed. Wall signs shall not extend more than 12 inches beyond the face of the wall to which they are attached. 
(2)  Placement. No wall sign may cover, wholly or partially, any wall opening. Wall signs shall not occupy more than 80% of any architectural element that they occupy (frieze, pilaster, etc.). 
(3)  Orientation. Signs shall be oriented towards a public street, a private street, or parking lot designated to serve patrons of said establishment. 
  
FIGURE 8-5.6311-A(1):
WALL SIGN
(b)  Monument signs. Monument signs are subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Base. Signs shall have a solid architectural base constructed of a permanent material, such as concrete block, stone, or brick. The base of the Monument Sign shall be a minimum width of 75% of the sign and a minimum 12 inches in height from the top of the finished grade. 
(2)  Depth. A monument sign shall have a depth of at least 12 inches between the two faces. 
(3)  Design. 
(i)  Architectural elements such as columns, pilasters, cornices, trellises, and similar details shall provide design interest and frame the sign. 
(ii)  Signs shall be constructed of materials and colors related to the principal building. 
(iii)  Monument signs shall have an encasing constructed of brick, stone, synthetic material, or masonry. An aluminum and/or sheetmetal encasing is not an acceptable material. 
(iv)  Embellishment, either structural or decorative elements of a sign incorporating representations of the significant architectural features of the associated building or development may be included. Embellishment shall not include letters, numerals, figures, emblems, logos, color bands, or other features conveying a commercial advertising message. 
(v)  Synthetic material shall adequately simulate the appearance of the natural material it imitates, demonstrates the ability to age similar to natural material, and should have the ability to withstand being pressure washed. 
(4)  Landscaping. Signs shall provide a minimum landscape area of five feet measured in all directions. 
  
FIGURE 8-5.6311-B(1): MONUMENT SIGNS
(c)  Awning signs. Signs painted on awnings, canopies, arcades, or similar features or structures are subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Location. Awnings shall be located on the ground floor of buildings. 
(2)  Maximum sign area per sign. Ten square feet or 25% of the surface area of the awning, whichever is less. 
(3)  Minimum sign clearance. Eight feet from finished grade. 
(4)  Signs or awnings which they are placed may not be plastic, transparent, or translucent, and may not be backlit from inside the awning. 
  
FIGURE 8-5.6311-C(1): AWNING SIGN
(d)  Projecting signs. Signs projecting from buildings are allowed, subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Maximum number. One per tenant space. 
(2)  Maximum sign area per sign. 12 square feet. 
(3)  Height limit. 12 feet. 
(4)  Minimum sign clearance. Eight feet from finished grade. 
(5)  Projection allowed. A projecting sign cannot extend more than four feet from the building to which it is attached and shall be designed and located so as to cause no harm to street trees. 
(6)  Illumination. No internal illumination is permitted. 
  
FIGURE 8-5.6311-D(1): PROJECTING SIGNS
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6312. - Electronic message board signs. 
Any electronic message board signage to be used must be high-quality resolution and shall comply with the following design standards: 
(a)  A use permit shall be required for electronic message board signs. A use permit shall not be required for static fuel price signs. 
(b)  Signs may be allowed for use in the project's monument signage. 
(c)  Signs are permitted only on parcels or unified developments of at least five acres in area and a minimum frontage of at least 300 feet along State Route 99 or State Route 20 (Colusa Highway). 
(d)  All nonconforming signs shall be made to conform to the strict requirements of this sign ordinance. Should a nonconforming monument, freestanding, and/or pole signs exist on the property, or in the case of a unified shopping center, all the parcels, all signs shall be brought into compliance with the strict application of this article as part of the use permit process. 
(e)  Electronic message boards may only advertise establishments and/or products available on-site. 
(f)  Electronic message boards shall be available for emergencies, such as distressed conditions (e.g., flood, natural disaster, etc.), law enforcement emergencies (e.g., Amber Alert), or issues of Statewide concern (e.g. drought conditions) at the request of the City. Time allocated for City requested messages shall not exceed 15%, unless determined to be an emergency by the City. 
(g)  All electronic signage shall display static images only. 
(h)  Message duration. Signs may only change their static images once every ten seconds. 
(i)  Transitions from one static image to the next shall appear instantaneous without the use of animation, swipes, flashing, or frame effects. 
(j)  Such signs shall come equipped with automatic dimming technology which automatically adjusts the brightness of the sign in direct correlation with ambient light conditions (i.e., daytime, nighttime, cloudy conditions). 
(k)  Signs shall be a constructed of high quality pixel pitch resolution. The pixel pitch resolution shall not exceed 14 mm. 
(l)  Signs shall be full color digital displays. No monochrome displays. 
(m)  Signs shall be comprised of high definition, light emitting diodes (LED). 
(n)  Signs shall not be illuminated between 10:00 p.m. and sunrise when located within 150 feet of a residential zone district. 
(o)  Electronic message boards shall not exceed a brightness level of 0.3 foot-candles above ambient light. 
(p)  The owner of any illuminated sign shall arrange for a certification by an independent contractor showing compliance with brightness standards at the request of the City. The results of the inspection shall be provided within 14 days of the request by the City. 
(q)  Default display. In the case of malfunction, digitally-illuminated signs shall contain a default design to freeze the sign message in one position. 
(r)  Each automatic changeable copy sign shall be operated with monitoring and methods in place that shall either turn off the display, or show a full black image on the display, in the event of a malfunction that affects more than 50% of the sign face. 
(s)  New electronic monument signs shall be located in an enhanced landscape planter within the project boundaries. The enhanced landscape planter shall be a minimum area of two times the size of the sign copy. 
(t)  Signs located on a project site with four or less business, no more than one-half of the monument sign shall be designed with electronic messaging. 
(u)  Signs located on project sites with more than five businesses, no more than one-third of the monument sign shall be designed with electronic messaging. 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6313. - Signage allowances for specific uses. 
This section establishes signage allowances for specific uses. These signs are allowed in addition to the signs allowed by zoning district, if any. 
(a)  Drive-through menu display boards. A maximum of two menu boards, not exceeding 20 square feet in area apiece, with a maximum height of six feet are permitted per drive-through. Should a facility have two drive-throughs, each drive-through may have two menu boards. All outdoor speakers shall be directed away from a residential zone district. 
(b)  Service stations. 
(1)  Monument signs may provide electronic fuel prices. A freestanding and/or monument sign that is to be converted to an electronic fuel price sign shall comply with the size requirements and setbacks required by the sign ordinance. 
(2)  Fuel prices shall be static and shall not be blinking, flashing, continuously changing colors, etc. 
(3)  Only one electronic fuel price sign is permitted per site. 
(4)  Electronic numbers shall not exceed 24 inches in height. 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6314. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  A-frame signs. A-frame signs shall comply with the standards below. A permit is not required. 
(1)  Quantity. A maximum of one A-frame sign per business is allowed. 
(2)  Locations. 
(i)  Private property. May be on privately owned commercial property landscape setbacks. 
(ii)  Public property. Where there is no private property available because the storefront of the business is directly adjacent to the public right-of-way, a business may place an A-frame sign on the sidewalk, directly in front of the subject business with the approval of an encroachment permit from the City. 
(iii)  If located on a pedestrian path four-foot-wide travel path shall be maintained for through pedestrian traffic. 
(iv)  A-frame signs shall not be located less than 18 inches from a curb. 
(v)  A-frame signs shall not be located in front of another commercial establishment. 
(vi)  A-frame signs shall not be located more than 50 feet from the establishment for which it is advertising. 
(vii)  May only be displayed during the normal business hours of the business it is advertising. 
(viii)  It is the business owner's responsibility to assure that signs remain in good condition and repair (no peeling paint, tacked on notices or general unkempt appearance). 
(3)  Lighting. A-frame signs shall not be illuminated except by ambient sources. 
(4)  Design. 
(i)  A-frame signs shall have no more than two sides. 
(ii)  The height of an A-frame signs shall be no less than 18 inches and no more than 36 inches. 
(iii)  The width of an A-frame signs shall be no less than 18 inches and no more than 24 inches. 
(iv)  Signs shall be professionally manufactured. 
(v)  The sign must be constructed of materials that present a finished appearance. The sign frame shall be painted or stained wood or anodized aluminum or metal. Plastic framed signs are prohibited, as are stenciled or spray painted signs. Chalkboard signs are permitted. 
(vi)  Common rough-cut plywood is not permitted. All interior parts of the signs shall be finished with a painted surface to blend with the rest of the sign design. 
(vii)  Paper signs, wind-activated items (such as balloons, windsocks, and pinwheels), and non-rigid changeable areas may not be attached to a sign. 
(viii)  Stabilization. Signs shall be able to withstand wind gusts or be removed during inclement weather. 
(ix)  Creative shapes that reflect the theme of the businesses are encouraged. 
(b)  Window signs. Permanent or temporary signs that are painted on, or otherwise displayed from the inside surface of a window, showcase, or other similar facility are permitted in addition to other permitted signs, provided that all such commercial and incidental signs (both temporary and permanent) do not exceed a combined maximum of 35% of the total window area. Window signs do not include window coverings, such as films, so long as the film does not provide advertising. 
(c)  Special event signs. Temporary flags, banners, moving signs, and inflatables (including air dancers, balloons, and similar objects) are allowed subject to temporary sign permit and/or zone clearance approval for establishments within nonresidential zone districts, subject to the following standards. Signs of this type do not count towards total maximum sign area. 
(1)  Maximum number. A maximum of one type of sign is allowed per street frontage, plus two flags per street frontage. 
(2)  Maximum height. If a banner is on a freestanding pole, the pole height shall not exceed ten feet; signs affixed to the building shall not be located above the roofline. Flags shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
(3)  Maximum size. The maximum total sign area is 60 square feet. 
(4)  Balloon sign/air-inflated signs. Air-inflated signs shall have a minimum separation of one-half mile from other air-inflated signs and may not be within 100 feet from residential zoning district. Air inflated signs shall not exceed 20 feet in height measured from the top of the finished grade to the top of the sign. 
(5)  Duration. No sign per this section shall be displayed for more than 30 days, and a period of 30 days must lapse before displaying another special event sign. Signs shall not be displayed for more than 90 total days during a calendar year. 
(6)  Removal. Signs shall be removed within 12 hours of completion of the event. 
(d)  Seasonal displays. For commercial zone districts, seasonal displays may be suspended from the parking lot light standards, such as bunting used to attract attention to a unified shopping center, provided the following can be met: 
(1)  The display does not advertise a company; product or special event associated with an individual business. 
(2)  The display is designed so it does not obstruct traffic, sight distance, parking area lighting or existing directional signs. 
(3)  Individual decorative features shall not exceed 12 square feet per light posts. 
(4)  There shall be a minimum clearance of eight feet from the floor to the bottom of a decorative feature attached to a light posts. 
(5)  Installation shall be subject to securing a zoning clearance (Section 8-5.7002) by the Development Services Director. 
(e)  Contractor signs. Contractor signs advertising materials, appliances, and building trades shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Maximum size. Signs shall not to exceed 80 square feet per street frontage. 
(2)  Maximum height. Signs shall not to exceed ten feet in height. 
(3)  Duration. Signs may be installed for the duration of an active building permit. Signs shall be removed within five days of a certificate of occupancy. 
(f)  Temporary subdivision signs. On-site temporary real estate signs advertising real property which has been subdivided for purposes of sale shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Zone clearance. A zone clearance is required. 
(2)  Location criteria. May not be located within 2,500 feet of another subdivision sign except in the case of signs on different corners of an intersection. 
(3)  Permitted subdivisions. Signs may only advertise subdivisions located within the City limits and/or within the City's sphere of influence and which have applied for annexation to the City. 
(4)  Maximum number. Two per subdivision, plus one additional sign for every 20 acres over 40 acres in area. Signs shall be on-site. 
(5)  Maximum sign area per sign. 48 square feet for sites less than 20 acres in area; 72 square feet for sites 20 acres or greater in area. 
(6)  Height limit. Ten feet. 
(7)  Duration. The sign shall remain only as long as a portion of the property advertised for sale remains unsold, or for a period of two years, whichever period is shorter. The two-year period shall begin on a date determined by the Director. The Director may extend this period. 
(8)  Illumination. Signs shall not be illuminated except by ambient sources. 
(9)  Design. 
(i)  The City name and logo shall be displayed prominently on the sign. 
(ii)  Signs shall be professionally manufactured. 
(iii)  Signs shall have no more than two sides. 
(iv)  Sign must be designed as an architecturally-enhanced structure that shall include features such as a decorative cap and cornice detail, stone-clad or masonry clad columns, stone-clad or masonry clad foundation, carved/sculptured wood construction, or other similar architectural features as determined to be appropriate by the Development Services Department. 
(v)  The sign must be constructed of materials that present a finished appearance. The sign frame shall be painted or stained wood or anodized aluminum or metal. Plastic framed signs are prohibited, as are stenciled or spray painted signs. 
(vi)  Nonstructural trim. Nonstructural trim shall be incorporated into signs. Surfaces may be of wood, metal, approved plastics, or any combination thereof, treated or painted to resist oxidation, decay or dry rot. 
(vii)  Common rough-cut plywood is not permitted. All parts of the signs shall be finished with a painted surface to blend with the rest of the sign design. 
(viii)  Stabilization. Signs shall be able to withstand wind gusts or be removed during inclement weather. 
(10)  There shall be no additions, tag signs, streamers, balloons, flags, devices, display boards, or appurtenances, added to the sign. 
(11)  Maintenance. It is the owner's responsibility to assure that signs remain in good condition and repair (no peeling paint, tacked on notices or general unkempt appearance). 
(12)  Signs shall not be a visibility hazard to traffic on adjacent streets or parking areas. 
(g)  Temporary subdivision flags. Bearing the name of the developer or development and only when utilized in association with an approved model home sales office for a new residential subdivision. Subdivision flags shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Two flags per model home and 4 flags at the subdivision entrance not to exceed a maximum area of 20 square feet each and a pole height of 20 feet. 
(2)  If there are no model homes, then up to four flags may be utilized in addition to those at the subdivision entrance. 
(h)  Real estate signs. Real estate signs are subject to the regulations below. A permit is not required. Real estate signs advertising real property for sale after being subdivided shall not be subject to this subsection, but shall be subject to subsection (g) (temporary subdivision signs) above. 
(1)  On-site real estate signs. On-premises signs conveying information about the sale, rental, or lease of the lot, premises, dwelling, or structure on which they are located, provided that they comply with the following standards: 
(i)  No more than one real estate sign per lot in a residential zone district, or one real estate sign per street frontage per lot in nonresidential districts, is displayed at any one time; 
(ii)  Height and area: 
  
(iii)  Wall signs shall not be higher than seven feet above grade in a residential zone district or 15 feet in nonresidential district. Freestanding signs shall not exceed six feet in height in residential districts or eight feet in height in nonresidential districts. 
(iv)  The sign or signs are not illuminated; and 
(v)  The sign or signs shall be removed within 15 days after the sale, lease, or rental of the property has been completed. 
(2)  Directional Signs for open houses. Up to three off-site signs directing the public to "open house" events for the viewing of lots, premises, dwellings, or structures that are for sale, lease, or rent, are permitted on public or private land, provided that they comply with the following standards: 
(vi)  No sign or signs shall exceed six square feet in area, or three feet in height from finished grade. 
(vii)  The sign or signs may not be placed more than 12 hours before the start or remain more than 12 hours after the conclusion of the open house event. 
(viii)  Signs shall not inhibit circulation nor be within the visibility triangle per Public Works Policy ST 22, Site Distance Triangle. 
(i)  Political/campaign signs. Shall comply with the standards below. Signs are not required to obtain a permit. 
(1)  Size. Signs shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
(2)  Height. Signs shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
(3)  Time limits. Signs shall be removed seven days after an election as determined by the County election office. 
(4)  Signs shall not obstruct. Signs shall be instructed in such a manner that they will, or reasonably may be expected to, interfere with, obstruct, confuse, or mislead the pedestrians, cyclist, or motorist. 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6315. - Flags. 
Freestanding flagpoles may be installed in accordance with the standards below and subject to a zone clearance per Section 8-5.7002. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Flags in residential zone districts shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from all property lines. 
(2)  Flags in commercial and industrial zone districts shall be set back a minimum of one foot for each foot in height from a residential zone district. 
(b)  Maximum flagpole height. The pole height shall not exceed 25 feet. 
(c)  Maximum size. 24 square feet in residential zone districts, 32 square feet in all other zone districts. 
(d)  Decorative flags. Flags may be for noncommercial purposes. Permitted flags include, but are not limited to, countries, counties, cities, branches of the military, or decorative flags that do not contain a commercial message. 
(e)  Residential zones. 
(1)  Developed with residential uses. One flagpole. 
(2)  Residential Zones developed with nonresidential uses. Two flagpoles. 
(f)  Commercial and industrial zones. Two flagpoles. 
(g)  Additional flagpoles. The Planning Commission may approve up to four flagpoles subject to approval of a use permit pursuant to Section 8-5.7003 in nonresidential districts. 
(h)  Temporary flags. For temporary flags refer to Section 8-5.6314(c), and for temporary subdivision flags refer to Section 8-5.6314(f). 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6316. - Master sign program. 
(a)  Projects requiring a master sign program. A master sign program is required for the following types of projects: 
(1)  Nonresidential or mixed use projects. All new nonresidential or mixed use projects of five or more separate tenants. 
(2)  Multiple signs. Proposals for five or more signs on the same building or site with one or two tenants, such as parking areas. 
(3)  Shopping centers. Any unified shopping center or shopping center that shares common areas. 
(4)  Electronic message boards. Signs with an electronic message board. 
(b)  Required submittals. An application of approval of a master sign program shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A site plan showing the location of buildings, parking lots, driveways and landscaped areas; 
(2)  Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum area for individual signs, the height of signs and the number of signs allowed; 
(3)  An accurate indication on the site plan of the proposed location of each proposed sign and existing sign which is to remain; 
(4)  Lighting and sign construction materials; and 
(5)  Sign dimensions (if tenants are not known, generic dimensions may be presented). 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6317. - Nonconforming signs. 
Refer to Section 8-5.7306 for nonconforming signs. 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6318. - Sign removal. 
Demolition or clearance of the site. Should a site be cleared, signs, including poles, foundations, etc., shall be removed. This includes sites that are cleared for redevelopment. 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.6319. - Sign maintenance. 
All signs and associated supporting structures shall be maintained in good condition, without rips, tears, and similar damage. 
(a)  Deteriorated signs. Any sign or sign structure that is sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed, broken, deteriorated, or in an otherwise dilapidated condition shall be promptly repaired, to the satisfaction of the City, or removed. 
(b)  Graffiti. Graffiti on a sign shall be removed within 48 hours of notice of its placement on such sign. 
(c)  Maintenance standards. All parts, portions, units, and materials composing a sign, together with the frame, background, surface, support, or enclosure shall be maintained in a safe condition, painted, and adequately protected from weathering with all braces, bolts, and structural parts, supporting frames, and fastenings reasonably free from deterioration, rot, rust, and loosening so that they do not create a hazard to persons, or property or constitute a nuisance. 
(d)  Summary removal of hazards. Whenever any sign, by virtue of its physical nature and condition, poses an immediate and serious threat to the public safety, it may be removed by City personnel, or have its physical deficiency cured, to the extent necessary to protect the public safety. The cost of such removal or repair shall be assessed against the sign owner. 
(e)  Repair or removal. Every sign displayed within the City, including but not limited to those signs for which permits are or are not required, shall be maintained in good physical condition. All signs, together with supports, braces, anchors, and electrical components, shall be kept in a safe, presentable condition. All defective or broken parts shall be replaced. Exposed surfaces shall be kept clean, in good repair, and painted where paint is required. The Development Services Director may order the repair or removal of any sign determined by the City to be unsafe, defective, damaged, or substantially deteriorated. 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Article 64. - Trash Enclosures 
 
Sec. 8-5.6401. - Requirements. 
All multiple-family, commercial or industrial structure(s) shall have a trash receptacle on the premises. The trash receptacle shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated on site and shall be located so that it is readily accessible to collection agency vehicles. If a trash bin or dumpster is used it shall be screened by a six ft. high solid masonry wall enclosure and a solid self-locking gate that are architecturally compatible with the main building. The gate shall be maintained in good working order and shall remain closed except when in use. All sides, excluding the gate side, visible from a public area shall be located in a landscaped area. For smaller businesses that utilize garbage cans or toters they shall be either located indoors or shall be screened from public view with material architecturally compatible with the main building. 
(§ 8-5.6401, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
PART V. - ADMINISTRATION 
The purpose of the administrative provisions are to provide procedures and permit options for the implementation of this chapter.  
Article 70. - Types of Review/Permits 
 
Sec. 8-5.7001. - Permitted uses—Level of review for multiple-family, commercial and industrial uses. 
This section specifies the level of review for proposed multiple-family, commercial and industrial uses of land or structures that are listed as "permitted" uses within the district the proposed use is located. The process provides for increasing levels of review based on the size or intensity of a project. For specific construction standards and regulations within flood hazard zones, see Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 9, Flood Damage Prevention, for additional information. 
(a)  Level of review. To determine the applicable review process, a proposed project shall be compared to the following matrix. When Planning Commission (Section 8-5.7001(c)) or City Council (Section 8-5.7001(d)) development plan review is required by this article and a use permit is also required then the site plan review process shall be used in lieu of the use permit process. 
Level of Review Matrix 
Land Use (1) 	Review Criteria 	Development Plan Review 
		Ministerial 	Planning Commission 	City Council 
Multiple-Family 	# of Units 	1—25 	26—100 	101+ 
Office 	Gross floor area (sf.) 	1—35,000 	35,001—100,000 	100,001+ 
Retail & Service Indoor Outdoor 	Square footage 	1—25,000 	25,001—100,000 	100,001+ 
	Square footage 	1—35,000 	35,001—125,000 	125,001+ 
Industrial Warehouse & Outdoor Storage 	Square footage 	1—35,000 	35,001—100,000 	100,001+ 
	Square footage 	1—50,000 	50,001—150,000 	150,001+ 
Conversion of an Existing Facility to a Different Category of Use 	Square footage of usable area 	1—35,000 	35,001—100,000 	100,001+ 
Conversion of Commercial or Industrial Sites to Same Category of Use 	Tenant Improvements 	All projects 		
Central City Specific Plan 		All projects 		
 
(1)  Expansion of facilities have the same level of review as a new project (considering expansion area only) provided it has been two years or more between original completion and beginning of the next expansion. Otherwise the total square footage is figured as cumulatively. 
(b)  Ministerial development plan review. 
(1)  Those projects determined to be ministerial shall be reviewed and decided upon by the Planning Director. No public hearing is required for this level of review. 
(2)  Following receipt of a complete application and review of the application, the Planning Director shall do one of the following: 
(i)  Approve the application if it is determined that the proposal will comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter and other City standards. Applications for all residential uses are required to satisfy at least one of the findings found in Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6 of the Municipal Code. The term to begin and complete construction for an approved development plan shall be the same as the building permit. 
(ii)  Deny the application if it is determined that the proposal will not comply with all applicable standards of this chapter and all other City standards. 
(iii)  Request further information as needed in order to make the determination to approve or deny the application. 
(3)  Appeals. The decision of the Planning Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission (Section 8-5.7104(a)). 
(c)  Planning Commission development plan review. This provides a review process for medium to large expansions or new projects that for which the anticipated uses are permitted by the district in which the proposal is located. Because of the scale of the proposal the Planning Commission's review is needed to assure that the project will be compatible with existing or expected neighboring improvements and that adequate public facilities are available to serve the project. 
(1)  Process. Following acceptance of a complete development plan application, the proposal shall be distributed by the Planning Department to other City departments and other relevant public agencies for review and comment. Following review by City staff and recommendation by the Planning Department, the Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposal. Procedures contained in Article 71 of this chapter are applicable to the Planning Commission development plan review. 
(2)  Notice and hearing. Notice of a public hearing shall be given pursuant to Government Code §§ 65090 through 65095. 
(3)  Determination. Following the close of the public hearing the Planning Commission shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application within 30 days of the close of the hearing. 
(4)  Findings for approval. Approval or approval with conditions shall be granted when the following findings can be made, based on information in the record: 
(i)  The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate said use, public access, parking and loading, yards, landscaping and other features required by this chapter. 
(ii)  The streets serving the site are adequate to carry the quantity of traffic generated by the proposed use. 
(iii)  The site design, design of the buildings and the scale of the project will complement neighboring facilities. 
(iv)  The application satisfies at least one of the findings found in Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6 of the Municipal Code. 
(5)  Appeals. The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council (Section 8-5.7104(b)). 
(d)  City Council development plan review. The City Council development plan review process shall be the same as established for the Planning Commission development plan review except that the Planning Commission, following a public hearing, shall make an advisory recommendation to the City Council. Following the Commission's recommendation, the Council shall conduct a public hearing. The development plan shall be decided based on the same findings as required of the Planning Commission. Procedures contained in Article 71 of this chapter are applicable to City Council development plan review. 
(§ 8-5.7001, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.7002. - Zoning clearances. 
When required by the district in which the use of land or a structure is located, a zoning clearance is required prior to commencing with either construction or use. The Planning Director is responsible for reviewing and determining whether the proposal meets all required standards for any of the uses for which zoning clearances are required by this chapter. Projects that meet all City requirements shall be approved. No public hearing is required for issuance of a zoning clearance. 
(a)  Action by the Director. Following receipt of a complete application and review of the application, the Planning Director shall do one of the following: 
(1)  Approve the application if it is determined that the proposal will comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter and other City standards. If conditions warrant, the Planning Director may apply a reasonable term to the permit. 
(2)  Deny the application if it is determined that the proposal will not comply with all applicable standards of this chapter and all other City standards. 
(3)  Request further information as needed in order to make the determination to approve or deny the application. 
(b)  Appeals. The decision of the Planning Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission (Section 8-5.7104(a)). 
(§ 8-5.7002, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7003. - Use permits. 
Uses requiring a use permit are those for which their effect on surrounding uses and the environment typically cannot be determined in advance of being proposed for a particular location. This process provides for the review of the location, configuration, design and impacts of the proposed use. 
(a)  Process. Following acceptance of a complete use permit application, the proposal shall be distributed by the Planning Department to other City departments and other relevant public agencies for review and comment. Following review by City staff and recommendation by the Planning Department, the Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposal. 
(b)  Notice and hearing. Notice of a public hearing shall be given pursuant to Government Code §§ 65090 through 65095. 
(c)  Determination. Following the close of the public hearing the Planning Commission shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the use permit application within 30 days of the close of the hearing. 
(d)  Findings for approval. Approval or approval with conditions shall only be granted when the following findings can be made, based on information in the record: 
(1)  The proposal is consistent with the General Plan. 
(2)  The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate said use, public access, parking and loading, yards, landscaping and other features required by this chapter. 
(3)  The streets serving the site are adequate to carry the quantity of traffic generated by the proposed use. 
(4)  The site design and the size and design of the buildings will complement neighboring facilities. 
(5)  The establishment or operation of the use or building applied for will not be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, comfort, and general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity of the proposed use or be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the City. 
(6)  At least one of the findings in Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6 of the Municipal Code is satisfied. 
(e)  Appeals. The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council (Section 8-5.7104(b)). 
(§ 8-5.7003, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.7004. - Variances. 
Variances are utilized to provide relief from the strict application of the provisions of this chapter where special circumstances pertaining to physical characteristics of the site are such that the strict application of the standards in this chapter deprives a property of the privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under the same zone district. Variances cannot be used to modify the types of permitted uses in a district. 
(a)  Application. Applications for variances shall be accompanied by a statement with supporting and other evidence showing that, due to special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict application of the provisions of this chapter deprives the property owner of privileges that are enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity with the same zoning classification. 
(b)  Process. Following acceptance of a complete variance application, the proposal shall be distributed by the Planning Department to other City departments and other relevant public agencies for review and comment. Following review by City staff and recommendation by the Planning Department, the Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposal. 
(c)  Notice and hearing. Notice of a public hearing shall be given pursuant to Government Code §§ 65090 through 65095. 
(d)  Determination. Following the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the variance request within 30 days of the close of the hearing. 
(e)  Findings for approval. Approval or approval with conditions shall only be granted when the following findings can be made based on information in the record: 
(1)  There are special circumstances applicable to the size, shape, topography, location or surroundings of the property, and because of these circumstances, the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and in the same zone district. 
(2)  Approval of the variance will not be a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and in the same zone district. 
(3)  The variance does not authorize a use not otherwise permitted by the zone district in which the property is located. 
(4)  Approval of the variance will not be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, comfort, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such use or be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the City. 
(f)  Appeals. The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council (Section 8-5.7104(b)). 
(§ 8-5.7004, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7005. - Application withdrawal. 
The Planning Director shall have the authority to accept the withdrawal of any application submitted for consideration pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The refund of any portion of the application fees shall be based on staff time spent during the review process prior to the date of the requested withdrawal. 
(§ 1, Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995)  
Article 71. - Permit and Variance Procedures 
 
Sec. 8-5.7101. - Filing applications. 
Applications and other approvals required by this chapter shall be filed with the Planning Department by at least one of the property owners, or by an authorized agent of the property owner. The application shall be on forms, and contain information, prescribed by the Planning Director. All applications required by this chapter shall be accompanied by the appropriate fees, as established by the City Council. 
(§ 8-5.7101, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7102. - Applicability. 
All permits and variances approved under the authority of this chapter shall run with the lot(s) for which the permit or variance is issued and not with a person, unless otherwise stated within the permit. 
(§ 8-5.7102, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7103. - Concurrent processing of multiple applications. 
Whenever there are multiple applications required by this chapter and Chapters 8-2 (Subdivisions), 8-6 (Condo Conversions), 8-7 (Stock Cooperatives) and 8-8 (General Plan Amendments) of the Municipal Code for a single project, the applicant may choose to have the applications processed concurrently. When this method is utilized, the decision on all the project applications shall be made by the highest level of review authority required for any of the applications. 
When concurrent applications are filed, which includes a General Plan amendment and/or rezoning, the time limits for processing project applications pursuant to Government Code § 65950 et seq. shall not commence until the General Plan amendment and zoning ordinance become effective. 
(§ 8-5.7103, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7104. - Appeals. 
(a)  Planning Director decisions. 
(1)  Filing. Any applicant or person claiming to be directly and adversely affected by any action of the Planning Director in carrying out the provisions of this chapter may, within ten days after such action, file a written appeal to the Planning Commission. Such appeal shall be filed with the Planning Department and shall stay the issuance of any permit in connection with the action pending a decision by the Commission. 
(2)  Decision. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Planning Commission shall, after receiving a report from the Planning Director and after holding at least one public hearing on the matter, render a decision sustaining, amending, or overruling the action of the Planning Director on such matter. 
(b)  Planning Commission decisions. 
(1)  Filing. Any applicant or person claiming to be directly and adversely affected by any action of the Planning Commission in carrying out the provisions of this chapter may, within ten days after such action, file a written appeal to the Council. Such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk. The filing of an appeal shall stay the issuance of any permit in connection with the action pending a decision by the Council. 
(2)  Decision. Upon receipt of such appeal, the City Council shall, after receiving a report from the Planning Commission and after holding at least one public hearing on the matter, render a decision sustaining, amending, or overruling the action of the Planning Commission on such matter. 
(§ 8-5.7104, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7105. - Expiration of permits and variances. 
Every permit and variance provided for in this chapter, unless otherwise provided or otherwise conditioned as part of the permit, expires and is null and void without further action by the City if the activity or use for which the permit was issued has not substantially commenced, or in the case of new construction, the construction has not been substantially commenced, within two years of the date of its approval or, in the case of appeals, the date the approval was affirmed or a denial was reversed. For the purpose of this article, "commencement of construction" means the installation of building foundations. 
In the case of phased projects decided upon by the Planning Commission or City Council, construction of the first phase must be substantially commenced within two years, additional phases may be granted additional time if provided as a part of the application process or as an amendment to the application. 
In the case of a project that has commenced construction prior to its expiration date, or its extended expiration date if an extension has been granted, or the phase expiration date if it is a phased project, construction must be completed within two years of the expiration date or the permit expires and becomes null and void without any further action by the City. 
When a use or action for which a permit was granted has been discontinued for a period of one year, that permit shall expire and becomes null and void without further action by the City. 
(§ 8-5.7105, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7106. - Extensions of time. 
The body that considered the original application may grant two-year extensions for any permit or variance. In order to grant the extension, a written request for an extension must be made by the applicant prior to the expiration date and it is determined that conditions have not changed to the extent that would warrant denial of the extension. No public hearing is required to grant an extension of time. 
(§ 8-5.7106, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7107. - Amendments to permits and variances. 
Amendments to permits may be granted as follows: 
(a)  Minor revisions for which the resulting project is considered by the Planning Director to be substantially the same as originally approved, may be approved by the Planning Director. 
(b)  All other revisions must be reviewed and decided upon by the body having the authority to decide upon the original application. Upon application for an amendment to a permit, the permit procedures and requirements set forth in this chapter shall be complied with. 
(§ 8-5.7107, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7108. - Failure to comply with conditions. 
Failure to comply with any permit or variance condition is a violation of the Zoning Code subject to enforcement provisions described in Article 74 of this chapter. Furthermore, a permit granted in accordance with this chapter may be revoked by the City Council (Section 8-5.7109) upon failure to comply with any of the conditions of the permit or any ordinance in connection with the permit. 
(§ 8-5.7108, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7109. - Revocation of permits and variances. 
Any permit or variance approved under the authority of this chapter may be revoked by the City Council. In lieu of revocation, the City Council may amend the existing conditions of approval or impose additional conditions, as appropriate. 
Whenever the Planning Director determines that one or more grounds may exist for the revocation of a permit or variance, the City Council may set the matter for a hearing. The holder of the permit or variance shall be given notice by mail of the time and place of the hearing at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
Grounds for revocation include: 
(a)  Noncompliance with conditions of approval. 
(b)  Violation of the law in connection with any permit or variance. 
(c)  Expansion of the use or facility without amending the existing permit or variance or not obtaining a new permit or variance. 
(d)  Conducting the use or exercising the variance in a manner that threatens or is injurious to public health or safety or constitutes a nuisance. 
(e)  False or erroneous information was provided as to a material matter or significant issue regarding the permit or variance. 
(§ 8-5.7109, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7110. - Reapplication. 
Following the denial of a permit or variance by the Planning Commission, or revocation or denial of an appeal by the City Council, no permit or variance for the same or substantially the same permit or variance shall be filed within six months after the date of the previous final action. 
(§ 8-5.7110, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Article 72. - Amendments to the Zoning Code 
The provisions of this chapter, including changing the boundaries of districts or changing the text of the ordinance, shall be by the procedure set forth in this article. 
 
Sec. 8-5.7201. - Initiation. 
An amendment may be initiated by: 
(a)  The petition of one or more owners of property affected by the proposed amendment; 
(b)  By action of the City Council; or 
(c)  By action of the Planning Commission. 
(§ 8-5.7201, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7202. - Process. 
(a)  Staff review. Following acceptance of a complete application, the proposal shall be distributed by the Planning Department to other City departments and other relevant public agencies for review and comment. Following review by City staff, a recommendation shall be prepared by the Planning Department and forwarded to the Planning Commission. 
(b)  Planning Commission review. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on a proposed amendment and shall give notice of such hearing as required by the Government Code §§ 65090 through 65095 and by such other means of notification the Planning Commission may require. 
At the conclusion of the public hearing the Planning Commission shall either: 
(1)  After making the appropriate findings, recommend approval of the proposed amendment or a modified amendment, in a written report to the City Council; or 
(2)  Disapprove the proposed amendment. Following a disapproval of the proposed amendment, a written notification of the disapproval shall be transmitted to the applicant and to the City Council. The Planning Commission's action shall become final within ten days after the Planning Commission decision unless an appeal is filed (Section 8-5.7104(b)). 
(c)  City Council review. Following receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission to approve an amendment, or upon the filing of an appeal, pursuant to Section 8-5.7104(b) of this chapter, the disapproval by the Planning Commission of an amendment petition, at least one public hearing before the Council shall be held. Notice of the hearing shall be given as required by the Government Code §§ 65090 through 65095 and by such other means of notification the Council may require. 
The City Council may approve or deny any recommendation of the Planning Commission, provided that any amendments made by the Council which were not considered by the Planning Commission shall first be referred to the Planning Commission for its recommendation. The Planning Commission is not required to conduct another public hearing on the matter. If the Planning Commission fails to make a recommendation within 40 days after the Council referred the matter to the Commission, the modification shall be deemed to be recommended for approval by the Commission. 
(d)  Findings. An amendment to this Zoning Code may be made only if the finding is made that the proposed amendment is consistent with the General Plan. 
(e)  Withdrawal of petition. Any petition for an amendment may be withdrawn upon the written application of a majority of all the persons who signed such petition. 
(f)  Abandonment of proceedings. The Planning Commission or City Council may, by resolution, abandon any proceedings initiated by its own action. 
(§ 8-5.7202, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Article 73. - Nonconforming Structures and Uses 
These provisions provide for the orderly correction or termination of nonconforming structures and uses in a reasonable manner to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
 
Sec. 8-5.7301. - Nonconforming structures. 
A nonconforming structure may continue and be maintained, subject to the following limitations: 
(a)  Maintenance, repairs, changes to interior partitions and other nonstructural improvements may be made to a nonconforming structure. 
(b)  Structural repairs, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, may be modified only when the Building Official determines that such modification or repair is immediately necessary to protect the health and safety of the public, occupants of the nonconforming structure or adjacent property, and the cost does not exceed one-half of the replacement cost of the nonconforming structure. 
(c)  If a nonconforming structure is damaged or partially destroyed by fire or any other calamity or act of God to the extent of not more than 50% of its replacement cost, it may be restored to its original dimensions, and no more. If such damage or destruction exceeds 50% of the fair market value of such nonconforming structure, no repairs or reconstruction shall be made unless every portion of such building and the site is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(d)  A nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged or extended in any manner unless all such changes and/or improvements conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(e)  If the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for a period of one year or more the structure shall lose its nonconforming status and shall not be reused unless it is brought into conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 8-5.7301, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7302. - Nonconforming use of a structure. 
The nonconforming use of a structure may be continued subject to the following limitations: 
(a)  A nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more restrictive classification; provided, however, when such use is changed to a use of a more restrictive classification, it shall not thereafter be changed back to a use of a less restrictive classification. 
(b)  If a nonconforming use of a structure or a portion thereof is converted to a conforming use, no nonconforming use may be resumed in the structure or portion thereof. 
(c)  A nonconforming use of a portion of a structure which otherwise conforms to the use regulations shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of a structure nor changed except to a conforming use. 
(d)  If any nonconforming use of a structure or portion thereof is abandoned, discontinued or terminated for a period of one year or more, the right to continue the nonconforming use shall expire and subsequent use of the structure or portion thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
Nonconforming use of a structure may be re-established in a structure which cannot be used for conforming uses because of the original design or because of lawful structural changes made for a previous nonconforming use. A use permit shall be required to re-establish uses. In order to grant a use permit, the Planning Commission shall be required to make the following findings: 
(1)  The structure can be reasonably expected to remain in active use for a period of 20 years without requiring repairs or maintenance in excess of 50% of the structure value within any five-year period. 
(2)  The continuation of the use or structure will not be incompatible with or detrimental to neighboring conforming uses. 
As a condition of the use permit, a time limit may be placed on the ongoing nonconforming use of the structure. 
(§ 8-5.7302, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7303. - Nonconforming use of land. 
The nonconforming use of land, except as otherwise provided in this article, may be continued, provided: 
(a)  No such nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or extended, either on the same or adjoining property. 
(b)  If such nonconforming use of land, or any portion thereof is discontinued for a period of one year, any future use shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(c)  A nonconforming use of land may change to only a use that is in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(§ 8-5.7303, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7304. - Nonconforming lots. 
Any lawfully created lot which fails to meet the standards for area or dimensions of the district in which it is located shall be considered buildable for purposes of this chapter, provided that all site development standards for the improvements are met or a variance (Section 8-5.7004) from any of the site development standards is approved. 
(§ 8-5.7304, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7305. - Nonconforming junkyards. 
Any junkyard which exists as a nonconforming use in any district other than a residence district shall, within one year after the effective date of any change in district creating such nonconforming use, be removed, be changed to a conforming use, or be completely enclosed within a building or within a continuous solid fence not less than eight ft. high so as to completely screen all the operations of such junkyard. 
(§ 8-5.7305, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7306. - Nonconforming signs. 
If the use of a nonconforming sign is abandoned, discontinued, or terminated for a period of six months or more, the right to continue to use the nonconforming sign shall expire and the sign shall be removed within 90 days. Said sign shall not be reused unless it is brought into conformance with the provisions of this chapter. In no event shall the nonconforming sign be used for anything other than permanent on-site business identification. The property owner is responsible for sign removal. 
Property owners that have existing standing nonconforming signs that have lost their right to continue use because of abandonment, discontinuance, or termination prior to the effective date of this section may regain the right to continue to use their nonconforming sign provided (i) an application for exemption is received by the planning department within three months of the effective date of this section, and (ii) the resignage is completed within nine months of the effective date of this section. 
All nonconforming signs shall be maintained in good physical condition as stated in Section 8-5.6303. 
(§ 8-5.7306, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996; § 3, Ord. 004-06, eff. June 15, 2006)  
Article 74. - Enforcement, Penalty for Violations 
 
Sec. 8-5.7401. - General requirements. 
Any building or structure constructed, erected, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, maintained, used or operated, or any use of property, contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any conditions attached to the granting of a variance, conditional use permit, site plan, or any other permit issued pursuant to this chapter is unlawful. 
(§ 8-5.7401, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7402. - Responsibility. 
All City officers, departments, and employees vested with the duty or authority to issue permits, licenses, or other entitlements shall do so subject to the requirements of this chapter. No permit, license, or other entitlement shall be issued or approved for any purpose or in any manner which conflicts with the provisions of this chapter. Any permit, license, or other entitlement issued in conflict with any provision of this chapter is null and void as of the date of issuance or approval. 
(§ 8-5.7402, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7403. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Authority. The Planning Director (or designee) is the enforcing officer for the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Fines. Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be an infraction. Upon a conviction there shall be a mandatory fine imposed pursuant to Section 1-2.02 of the Municipal Code. 
(c)  Continued violations. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, each and every day any violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the City shall be caused or allowed to continue shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)  Enforcement procedure. City staff may use administrative processes, such as notices of noncompliance, warning letters, stop orders, or cease and desist orders, in lieu of or prior to enforcing any provision of this chapter, if it is determined that the process may result in compliance with this chapter at less expense to the City. 
(e)  Right of entry. When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or when planning agency personnel have reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this chapter which makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, planning agency personnel may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this chapter, provided that if such building or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, planning agency personnel shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, planning agency personnel shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(f)  Enforcement costs. Whenever a judicial action or proceeding is brought to abate or enjoin any violation of this chapter, the City may recover in that action or proceeding all costs and expenses incurred in detecting, investigating, abating, and prosecuting the violation. 
The actual cost of Code Enforcement may be applied to those violations which result in any land use permit. Those fees shall be collected pursuant to the most current Resolution of the City Council in effect at the time of permit application. 
(§ 8-5.7403, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7404. - Issuance of an entitlement to a property in violation. 
No application for a land use permit, construction permit (if the issuance of the construction permit will become a party to or intensify the violation) or land division shall be approved where an existing land use, building or parcel is being maintained in violation of any applicable provision of the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter or any condition of approval of a land use permit, except where the application incorporates measures proposed by the applicant to correct the violation, and correction will occur before establishment of the new use, or recordation of a final or parcel map in the case of a subdivision. 
(§ 8-5.7404, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Article 75. - Official Street Map and Official Plan Lines 
 
Sec. 8-5.7501. - Official street map. 
As referred to in this chapter, highways, streets and alleys and their centerlines shall be as designated on the Official Street Map, as established by this article. 
(§ 8-5.7501, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7502. - Establishment of official plan lines. 
Official plan lines may be established for streets shown on the Circulation Element Map of the General Plan. The official plan lines show the ultimate right-of-way needs for the arterials and collectors in the City. 
(a)  Process. The proposal shall be distributed by the Planning Department to other City departments and other relevant public agencies for review and comment. Following review by City staff, a recommendation shall be prepared by the Planning Department and forwarded to the Planning Commission. 
(b)  Planning Commission review. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposal and shall give notice of such hearing as required by the Government Code §§ 65090 through 65095 and by such other means of notification the Planning Commission may require. 
At the conclusion of the public hearing the Planning Commission shall either: 
(1)  After making the appropriate findings, recommend approval of the proposal or a modified proposal, in a written report to the City Council; or 
(2)  After making the appropriate findings, recommend disapproval in a written report to the City Council. 
(c)  City Council review. Following receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission at least one public hearing before the Council shall be held. Notice of the hearing shall be given as required by the Government Code §§ 65090 through 65095 and by such other means of notification the Council may require. 
The City Council may approve or deny any recommendation of the Planning Commission, provided that any amendments made by the Council which were not considered by the Planning Commission shall first be referred to the Planning Commission for its recommendation. The Planning Commission is not required to conduct another public hearing on the matter. If the Planning Commission fails to make a recommendation within 40 days after the Council referred the matter to the Commission, the modification shall be deemed to be recommended for approval by the Commission. 
(§ 8-5.7502, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7503. - Rights-of-way shown on Official Street Map. 
Following their adoption [rights-of-way] shall be shown on the Official Street Map. 
(§ 8-5.7503, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.7504. - Determining yard areas. 
For streets that do not have full street improvements: 
Front, side, and rear yards which are established, pursuant to this chapter, shall be measured from official plan lines. 
If an official plan line is not adopted for a street, the yard shall be measured from the ultimate right-of-way line using the ultimate right-of-way width required for that street classification. 
(§ 8-5.7504, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
PART VI. - GLOSSARY  
Article 80. - Definitions 
 
Sec. 8-5.8001. - Scope of article provisions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used are defined in this article. If they are not defined herein or as provided in the following articles, then reference shall be made to a standard dictionary for the common definition. 
(§ 8-5.8001, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8002. - Accessory use. 
A use incidental or subordinate to the existing primary use, is located upon the same lot, and does not alter the character of the principal use. 
(§ 8-5.8002, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8003. - Alley. 
A public or private right-of-way or easement not more than 30 ft. wide that primarily provides secondary access to abutting property. 
(§ 8-5.8003, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8004. - Apartment. 
See Section 8-5.8051, "Residence, multiple-family." 
(§ 8-5.8004, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8004a. - Bars and drinking places. 
Includes establishments within a building where alcoholic beverages are sold for on-site consumption, that are not a part of a restaurant. Includes bars, sport bars, taverns, pubs, brew pubs, and similar establishments where any food service is subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(§ 3, Ord. 006-08, eff. September 4, 2008; § 3, Ord. 008-09, eff. August 18, 2009; § 1, Ord. 008-10, eff. September 16, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.8005. - Bed and breakfast inn. 
A one-family residence that provides guest rooms, without individual kitchen facilities, for temporary sleeping accommodations for overnight guests. It may also include meal service limited to overnight guests. 
(§ 8-5.8005, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8006. - Billboard. 
See Section 8-5.8056, "Sign types, Off-site sign." 
(§ 8-5.8006, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8007. - Boarding house. 
A dwelling where lodging or lodging and meals are provided for compensation for four or more persons. "Boarding house" does not include a residential care facility. 
(§ 8-5.8007, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8008. - Building. 
Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, used for or intended to be used for the shelter or housing of persons, animals, goods or property of any kind. 
(§ 8-5.8008, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8009. - Building frontage. 
The lineal measurement of building walls which face upon a road or a primary customer parking area. 
(§ 8-5.8009, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8010. - Building, accessory. 
A detached subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to the main building or to the main land use, and is located on the same building site as the main building or use. 
(§ 8-5.8010, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8011. - Building, main. 
A building within which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. In any residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building upon the lot. 
(§ 8-5.8011, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8012. - Building site. 
One or more lots under common ownership or control, occupied or to be occupied by a main building or buildings, and accessory buildings or by a use, together with all the yards, parking areas and other required open space areas. 
(§ 8-5.8012, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8013. - City. 
The City of Yuba City. 
(§ 8-5.8013, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8014. - City council. 
The City Council of the City of Yuba City. 
(§ 8-5.8014, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8015. - Condominium. 
An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a residential, commercial, or industrial building on the real property. In addition, a condominium may include a separate interest in other portions of the real property. 
(§ 8-5.8015, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8016. - Convalescent hospital. 
See Section 8-5.8057, "Skilled nursing/Intermediate care facility." 
(§ 8-5.8016, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8017. - Day care center. 
Any child care facility other than a small or large day care home. 
(§ 8-5.8017, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8018. - Day care home, large. 
A residence for which the occupants regularly provide non-medical supervision for seven to 12 children for a period of less than 24 hours per day. "Children" includes the children of the licensee under the age of 12 and all other children under the age of 18. 
(§ 8-5.8018, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8019. - Day care home, small. 
A residence for which the occupants regularly provide non-medical supervision for six or fewer children, for a period of less than 24 hours per day. "Children" includes the children of the licensee under the age of 12 and all other children under the age of 18. 
(§ 8-5.8019, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8020. - Duplex. 
See Section 8-5.8050, "Residence, two-family." 
(§ 8-5.8020, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8020a. - Eating and drinking establishments—Full service restaurant. 
Includes establishments primarily engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food and beverages, where food is ordered and served at a table, and which may include sales of alcoholic beverages as an accessory or secondary service. A full service restaurant does not include a place where food service is incidental to the service of alcoholic beverages, constituting less than 60% of sales. Upon request by City officials, the owner/operator of a business shall submit evidence of total food service sales to the City to verify compliance with this definition. In the event that it is determined that food service is less than 60%, the subject business/use shall be considered a "bar and dining place" as defined in Section 8-5.8004(a). For purposes of this chapter, to the extent that a restaurant is open after 11:00 p.m. on Sundays through Thursdays and/or after 12:00 a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays and is incorporating any components of "entertainment" as defined herein, the restaurant shall be considered a nightclub and a Use Permit shall be required. 
(§ 3, Ord. 006-08, eff. September 4, 2008; § 3, Ord. No. 008-09, eff. August 18, 2009; § 1, Ord. 008-10, eff. September 16, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.8021. - Family. 
One or more persons occupying a residence and living as a single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house or hotel. 
(§ 8-5.8021, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8022. - Frontage, building. 
See Section 8-5.8009, "Building frontage." 
(§ 8-5.8022, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8023. - General Plan. 
The Yuba City Urban Area General Plan, as adopted or amended by the City Council. 
(§ 8-5.8023, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8024. - Guest house. 
A residential accessory building with living and sleeping quarters, but without kitchen facilities, located on the same premises with a main building, for the use of family, nonpaying guests or servants of the occupants thereof and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
(§ 8-5.8024, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8025. - Halfplex. 
Two one-family residences, attached by a common wall, each being on separate lots (a duplex with each unit being under separate ownership). 
(§ 8-5.8030, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996)  
Sec. 8-5.8026. - Height, structure. 
The vertical distance measured from the average level of the highest and lowest point of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point of the roof, ridge, or parapet wall. 
(§ 8-5.8025, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996)  
Sec. 8-5.8027. - Home occupation. 
An income producing activity customarily conducted within a residence or residential accessory building, only by the inhabitants thereof, which use is incidental to and does not change the character of the residential use of the property. 
(§ 8-5.8026, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996)  
Sec. 8-5.8028. - Hotel. 
Any building, or portion thereof, containing six or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used, let, or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied by six or more guests upon payment of a compensation. 
(§ 8-5.8027, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996)  
Sec. 8-5.8029. - Junk. 
Any cast-off, damaged, discarded, junked, obsolete, salvage, scrapped, unusable, worn-out, inoperable or wrecked object, vehicle, thing or material composed in whole or in part of asphalt, brick, metal, paper, plaster, plaster of Paris, rubber, terra cotta, wool, cotton, cloth, canvas, organic matter or other substance, having no reasonably realistic market value or requiring reconditioning in order to be used for its original purpose. 
(§ 8-5.8028, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996; § 1, August 16, 2001)  
Sec. 8-5.8030. - Junkyard. 
The use, except within an enclosed building, of either more than 200 square ft. of the area of any lot, or of any portion of the front half of any lot, from on or which any junk is abandoned, bailed, bartered, bought, brought, bundled, deposited, disassembled, disposed of, exchanged, handled, kept, packed, processed, scattered, shipped, sold, stored or transported, regardless of whether or not such activity is done for profit. 
(§ 8-5.8029, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 07-95, eff. August 31, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996)  
Sec. 8-5.8031. - Kennel. 
Any lot, building, structure, enclosure, or premises whereon or wherein five or more dogs aged ten weeks or older are kept. 
(§ 8-5.8031, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8032. - Kitchen. 
Any room or area intended or designed to be used for the preparation and cooking of food. 
(§ 8-5.8032, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8033. - Lot. 
A parcel of land under one ownership, including a building site together with such yards and other spaces as are required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 8-5.8033, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8034. - Lot coverage. 
The area of all buildings on a lot, including all projections except eaves and patio covers pursuant to Section 8-5.5001(d) of this chapter and residential accessory buildings with less than 120 square ft. of roof area. 
(§ 8-5.8034, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8035. - Lot lines. 
Front lot line. The lot line abutting the road. In the case of corner lots, the property owner may choose the front lot line. In the case of through lots it shall be the lot line on the street primarily used as the front lot line by neighboring lots. 
Rear lot line. The lot line, not intersecting a front lot line, which is most distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot line. 
Side lot line. Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line. 
Note: See Section 8-5.8068, "Yard types" for an illustration showing lot lines. 
(§ 8-5.8035, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8036. - Lot types. 
Corner lot. A lot located at the junction of two or more streets or upon two parts of the same street, and such streets or parts of the same street form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
Interior lot. A lot other than a corner lot. 
Through lot. A lot having frontage upon two parallel or nearly parallel streets. 
(§ 8-5.8036, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995) 
   
Sec. 8-5.8037. - Manufactured home. 
See Section 8-5.8038, "Mobile home." 
(§ 8-5.8037, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8038. - Mobile home. 
A structure designed to be used as a residence and certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974. "Mobile home" does not include recreational vehicle, trailer or motor home. 
(§ 8-5.8038, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8039. - Mobile home park. 
A building site where two or more mobile homes or mobile home sites or any combination thereof are rented or leased, or offered for rent or lease. 
(§ 8-5.8039, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8039A. - Monopole. 
A monopole is a wireless communication facility which consists of a monopolar structure, erected on the ground to support wireless communication antennas and connecting appurtenances. 
(§ 1, Ord. 04-97, eff. December 4, 1997)  
Sec. 8-5.8040. - Motel. 
See Section 8-5.8027, "Hotel." 
(§ 8-5.8040, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8040a. - Nightclubs. 
Includes establishments or places of entertainment within a building, open primarily at night, usually but not necessarily serving alcohol, and providing amplified live or recorded music, and/or a space reserved for dancing. Does not include adult entertainment businesses which are prohibited. Nightclub uses shall not be located within 500 ft. of a residential zone district as measured from the residential zone district boundary to the structure where the nightclub use is proposed. 
(§ 3, Ord. 006-08, eff. September 4, 2008; § 3; Ord. 008-09, eff. August 18, 2009; § 1, Ord. 008-10, eff. September 16, 2010)  
Sec. 8-5.8041. - Nonconforming structure. 
A structure, portion of a structure or site on which the structure is located that was lawfully constructed, erected or altered, but does not conform to the subsequently enacted site development standards of this chapter. 
(§ 8-5.8041, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8042. - Nonconforming use. 
A use of property and/or a structure which was lawful at the time of its establishment, but which under subsequently enacted zoning regulations is no longer a permitted use or is permitted only if a use permit (Section 8-5.7003) is first secured. 
(§ 8-5.8042, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8043. - Parcel. 
See Section 8-5.8033, "Lot." 
(§ 8-5.8043, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8044. - Person. 
Any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, company, joint stock association, corporation, estate, trust, organization, business, business trust, public agency, school district, State of California and its political subdivisions, receiver, syndicate or any group or combination thereof, acting as a unit, including any trustee, receiver or assignee. 
(§ 8-5.8044, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8045. - Planning Commission. 
The Planning Commission of the City of Yuba City. 
(§ 8-5.8045, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8046. - Planning Director. 
The Planning Director of the City of Yuba City. 
(§ 8-5.8046, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8047. - Residence. 
A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by one family for living purposes, having only one kitchen. 
(§ 8-5.8047, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8048. - Residence, group. 
Two or more detached one-family, two-family, or multiple-family residences, other than mobile home parks, located upon a building site, together with all open spaces as required by the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 8-5.8048, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8049. - Residence, one-family. 
A detached building containing not more than one residence. 
(§ 8-5.8049, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8050. - Residence, two-family. 
A building containing two residences. 
(§ 8-5.8050, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8051. - Residence, multiple-family. 
A building containing three or more residences. 
(§ 8-5.8051, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8052. - Residential care home, small. 
A home for up to six children, elderly, and/or mentally or physically disabled persons, not including members of the family or employees of the operator, that is certified, authorized, or licensed by the State of California. 
(§ 8-5.8052, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 04-97, eff. December 4, 1997)  
Sec. 8-5.8052A. - Residential care home, large. 
A home for seven to 12 children, elderly, and/or mentally or physically disabled persons, not including members of the family or employees of the operator, that is certified, authorized, or licensed by the State of California. 
(§ 1, Ord. 04-97, eff. December 4, 1997)  
Sec. 8-5.8053. - Senior congregate care facility. 
A facility providing residence for senior citizens 60 years of age or more or handicapped people of any age. Care may include central kitchen and dining, laundry, recreational activities, etc. with separate bedrooms or living quarters. Nursing is not provided on a 24-hour basis. 
(§ 8-5.8053, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8054. - Setback. 
See Section 8-5.8067, "Yard." 
(§ 8-5.8054, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8055. - Sign. 
Any visual device or representation designed or used for communicating a message, or identifying or attracting attention to a premise, product, service, person, organization, business, or event. 
(§ 8-5.8055, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8056. - Sign types. 
Address sign. The numeric reference of a structure or use to a street. 
A-frame sign. A free standing sign usually hinged at the top or attached in a similar manner, and widening at the bottom to form a shape similar to the letter "A." 
Animated sign. A sign with messages that visually change, or images that move or appear to move, more frequently than once every 24 hours, regardless of the method by which the visual change is affected. This definition does not include traditional barber poles, hand-held signs, personally attended signs, commercial mascots, scoreboards, or signs which merely display time or temperature. 
Awning sign. A nonelectric sign that is printed on, painted on, or attached to an awning, canopy, or marquee. 
Banner. Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted to a pole or a building at one or more edges. Flags are not within this definition. 
Cabinet sign. A sign that contains all the text and/or logo symbols within a single enclosed cabinet and may or may not be illuminated. 
Canopy sign. See "Awning sign." 
Changeable copy sign. A sign designed to allow the changing of copy through manual [or] mechanical means, including date, time, and temperature. This does not include an electric message board. 
Civic event sign. A temporary sign, other than a commercial sign, posted to advertise a civic event sponsored by a public agency or similar noncommercial organization. 
Developer/contractor sign. A temporary sign erected on a parcel on which construction is taking place, indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors, and similar artisans, and the owner, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals of firms having a major role or interest with respect for the structure or project. 
Directional sign. Signs limited to directional messages for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as "one-way," "entrance," and "exit." 
Directory sign. A sign listing the tenants or occupants and their suite numbers of a building or center. 
Face. That portion of a sign upon which the copy is mounted or displayed. 
Flag. Any fabric or banner containing distinctive colors, patterns, or design that displays the symbol(s) of a nation, state, local government, company, organization, belief system, idea, or other meaning. 
Freestanding sign. A permanent sign that is self-supporting in a fixed location and not attached to a building. Freestanding signs are of two types: monument and pole. Monument signs are connected or attached to a sign structure, fence, or wall that is not an integral part of a building. Pole signs are mounted on a pole(s) or other support(s) that are placed on and anchored in the ground or on a base and that is independent from any building or other structure. Flag poles are not within this definition. 
Master sign program. A coordinated sign plan which includes details of all signs (not including exempt or temporary signs) which are or will be placed on a site, including master identification, individual business, and directory signs. 
Monument sign. A freestanding sign erected to rest on the ground or to rest on a monument base designed as an architectural unit. The width of the base of a monument sign is at least 75% of the width of the top of the sign. 
Name plate. A sign that identifies an occupant and/or address. 
Off-site sign. A sign that advertises or informs in any manner, businesses, services, goods, persons, or events at a building site other than upon which the sign is located. Off-premises sign, billboard, and outdoor advertising sign are equivalent terms. 
Pennant. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, attached to a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind and attract attention. Flags and banners are not within this definition. 
Pole sign. A freestanding sign mounted on freestanding poles, columns, or other supports. 
Political sign. A temporary sign directly associated with national, state, or local elections. 
Projecting sign. Any sign that is perpendicular to the face of a building and projects more than 18 inches from the face. This category includes awning and under canopy signs. 
Real estate sign. Any sign, temporary in nature, with copy which concerns a proposed sale, rent, lease, or exchange of real property. This definition does not include occupancy signs at establishments offering transient occupancy, such as hotels, motels, and "bed and breakfast" facilities. 
Roof sign. A sign erected, constructed, or placed upon or above a roof of a building. 
Roofline. The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or minor projections. 
Sign. Any identification, description, illustration, or device illuminated or non-illuminated, which is visible to the general public from any exterior public right-of-way, and directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business, or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise; or any emblem, painting, banner, pennant, or placard designed to advertise, identify, or convey information. A display, device, or thing need not contain lettering to be a sign. Notwithstanding the generality of the foregoing, the following are not within this definition: 
•  Architectural features. Decorative or architectural features of buildings (not including lettering, trademarks, or moving parts), that do not perform a communicative function; 
•  Fireworks, etc. The legal use of fireworks, candles, and artificial lighting not otherwise regulated by this Code; 
•  Foundation stones, cornerstones; 
•  Grave markers, grave stones, headstones, mausoleums, shrines, and other markers of the deceased; 
•  Personal appearance. Items or devices of personal apparel, decoration, or appearance, including tattoos, makeup, wigs, costumes, and masks, but not including commercial mascots or hand-held signs; and 
•  Symbols embedded in architecture. Symbols of noncommercial organizations or concepts, including, but not limited to, religious or political symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of a permanent building, including stained glass windows on churches, carved or bas relief doors or walls, bells, and religious statuary. 
Sign area. The area contained within a single continuous perimeter enclosing all parts of such sign copy, excluding any structural elements outside the limits of the sign required to support the sign 
Snipe sign. A sign made of any material when such sign is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to trees, poles, fences or other objects, and the advertising matter appearing thereon is not applicable to the present use of the premises upon which such sign is located. 
Special event sign. A sign including but not limited to banners, flags, pennants, or balloons intended to be erected on a temporary basis, and displayed for a limited period of time, to promote a new business, the sale of new products, new management, new hours of operation, a new service, or to promote a special sale. 
Suspended sign. A sign that is suspended from the underside of a canopy, portico or like structure. 
Temporary sign. A structure or device used for the public display of visual messages or images, which is typically made of lightweight or flimsy materials which is not intended for or suitable for long term or permanent display 
Vehicle sign. A sign which is attached to, or painted on or carried in a vehicle, the principal purpose of which is to attract attention to a product sold or an activity or business. 
Wall sign. Any sign attached to, erected against, or painted upon the wall of a building or structure, the face of which is in a single plane parallel to the plane of the wall. Wall signs also include signs on a false or mansard roof. 
Window sign. Any sign painted, etched, or otherwise affixed to an exterior window of a building, or in the interior of the building, within three feet of a window, intended to be viewed from the exterior of such building. On-site advisory signs are not considered window signs. 
(§ 8-5.8056, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 10-96, eff. December 19, 1996; § 3, Ord. 004-06, eff. June 15, 2006) 
( Ord. No. 006-16 , § 2(Att. A), 5-17-2016)  
Sec. 8-5.8057. - Skilled nursing/intermediate care facility. 
A facility or part of a hospital which provides 24-hour inpatient care which may include skilled nursing, physician and pharmaceutical services. 
(§ 8-5.8057, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8058. - Story. 
That portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling above it. 
(§ 8-5.8058, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8059. - Street, General Plan. 
Any street or highway shown in the General Plan as an existing or proposed State highway, arterial or collector. 
(§ 8-5.8059, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8060. - Street, local. 
Any street not shown in the General Plan and that is not an alley. 
(§ 8-5.8060, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8061. - Structure. 
Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a permanent location upon the ground or attachment to something on the ground. 
(§ 8-5.8061, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8062. - Structural alterations. 
Any change of the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, floor joists, ceiling joists, or roof rafters. 
(§ 8-5.8062, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8063. - Trailer. 
See Section 8-5.8038, "Mobile home." 
(§ 8-5.8063, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8064. - Transitional housing. 
Housing for the homeless where shelter is provided for an extended period of time (up to 18 months) and generally includes the opportunity for training and counseling to acquire the needed skills (such as home management or job-training) to assist in the transition to self-sufficiency through the acquisition of permanent income and housing. 
(§ 8-5.8064, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8065. - Use. 
The purpose for which a structure or premises is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which they may be occupied or maintained. 
(§ 8-5.8065, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8066. - Use, accessory. 
A use that is subordinate to an existing primary use and does not change the character of the primary use. 
(§ 8-5.8066, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8067. - Yard. 
Land surrounding a building site which is unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure from the ground upward except for encroachments permitted by the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 8-5.8067, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
Sec. 8-5.8068. - Yard types. 
Front yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot measured from either the existing or future street right-of-way line or back of sidewalk, whichever is closest to private property and to a depth required by the district in which said lot is located. 
Interior side yard. A yard on the interior side(s) of a lot extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line, and to a width required by the district in which said lot is located. 
Rear yard. A yard extending along the width of the rear lot line, and to a depth required by the district in which said lot is located. 
Street side yard. A yard in a corner lot, extending along the width of the street measured from either the existing or future right-of-way line, or back of sidewalk, whichever is closest to private property and to a depth required by the district in which said lot is located. 
  
(§ 8-5.8068, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995; § 1, Ord. 06-01, eff. August 16, 2001)  
Sec. 8-5.8069. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-5.8070. - Zero lot line. 
A one-family residence with an exterior wall located along a property line. 
  
(§ 8-5.8070, Ord. 010-94, eff. January 5, 1995)  
CHAPTER 6. - CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS 
 
Sec. 8-6.01. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by the regulation of conversion of multiple-family rental housing to condominiums, community apartments or stock co-operatives. The Chapter is intended to: 
(a)  Implement the Yuba City Urban Area General Plan Housing Element by: 
(1)  Providing a wide range of housing opportunities for all segments of the population. 
(2)  Providing for balanced neighborhoods with differing housing supplies. 
(b)  Establish criteria for the conversion of existing multiple-family rental housing to condominiums, community apartments, and stock apartments: 
(1)  Reducing the impact of such conversion on residents of rental housing who might be displaced. 
(2)  Assuring adequate information is provided to purchasers of such conversions. 
(§ 1, Ord. 836, eff. March 3, 1980)  
Sec. 8-6.02. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  "Community apartment project" shall mean a project in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon. 
(b)  "Condominium" shall mean an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. 
(c)  "Condominium project" shall mean the subdivision of real property to create five or more condominiums. 
(d)  "Stock co-operative" shall mean a corporation which is formed or availed of primarily for the purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of years, improved real property, if all or substantially all of the shareholders of such corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the real property, title to which is held by the corporation, which right to occupancy is transferable only concurrently with the transfer of share or shares of stock in the corporation held by the person having such right of occupancy. 
(§ 1, Ord. 836, eff. March 3, 1980)  
Sec. 8-6.03. - Permit required. 
No person, firm corporation, partnership or other entity shall convert existing dwelling units to a condominium project, community apartments, or stock co-operative without first having secured approval of a permit allowing such conversion by the Planning Commission or, upon appeal, the City Council and having been issued a conversion permit by the Planning Director. Any permit issued hereunder may be made subject to such reasonable terms and conditions as in the judgment of the Commission is necessary to ensure compliance with the purpose, spirit and intent of this ordinance. 
(§ 1, Ord. 836, eff. March 3, 1980)  
Sec. 8-6.04. - Application for permit. 
Application for permit pursuant to this chapter shall include the following: 
(a)  A facilities plan prepared by an appropriately California licensed architect or California registered civil or structural engineer detailing the condition and estimated useful life of all elements of the existing buildings and other structures involved in the project, including, but not limited to, roofs, foundations, exterior and interior paint, floor coverings, built-in appliances, mechanical systems, electrical systems, plumbing systems, fire protection systems, heating and air conditioning systems, swimming pools, parking lots, driveways, walks and other paved areas. The facilities plan will include the costs and schedule for replacement of any elements that do not meet current City standards as provided in the Municipal Code and resolutions or would have useful life of less than five years. 
(b)  A development plan of the project site including: 
(1)  The exterior boundaries and dimensions of the project site and the names and locations of adjacent streets. 
(2)  The physical development existing or proposed on the site, including the size, shape, location, type of materials used and use of all buildings, structures, paved areas, landscaped areas, open spaces, walls, fences, recreational facilities, utilities, exterior lighting, directional signs and other common facilities. 
(3)  Existing and proposed elevations. 
(c)  A schedule of completion for all physical development of common facilities proposed in the project. 
(d)  A maintenance plan, including projected costs and payment therefore, for all physical development. 
(e)  A structural pest report. 
(f)  A history report, including: 
(1)  The date of construction of all elements of the project. 
(2)  A statement of the use or the uses of the facilities since construction. 
(3)  The date and description of each repair or renovation requiring an expenditure of $1,000 or more. 
(4)  A statement regarding current ownership of all improvements underlying property. 
(g)  A copy of the proposed covenants, conditions, and restrictions to be applied to the project. 
(h)  A report on existing tenancy in the rental apartment units to be converted, including: 
(1)  The names and addresses of the tenants. 
(2)  The number of families, by category, occupying the units who are on fixed incomes, have children, or include handicapped individuals. 
(3)  The size and rental cost of each unit. 
(4)  The number, rental cost and size of units occupied under any federal or state assistance program (Section 8, etc.) 
(i)  A report detailing the project's program for relocation of displaced tenants. The applicant shall show evidence that the current residents have received notification of intent to convert the apartments into condominiums at least 30 days prior to filing the application for permit. 
The final form of the application shall be as approved by the Planning Director and shall remain on file in the Planning Department for review by any interested persons. The application shall be referenced in the Department's report to the Planning Commission. 
(§ 1, Ord. 836, eff. March 3, 1980)  
Sec. 8-6.05. - Standards. 
Building requirements: 
(1)  The project shall conform to the applicable standards of the adopted building related codes found in Title 7, Yuba City Municipal Code, unless discrepancies are specifically listed together with mitigation satisfactory to the Yuba City Building Inspection Department of the facilities plan required by Section 8-6.04, Application for Permit. An inspection shall be made by the Building Inspection Department to ensure that the building is in compliance with the above mentioned codes. 
(2)  Fire alarm systems shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief. 
(3)  Smoke detectors shall be provided in each unit. 
(4)  Fire Protection shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief. 
(5)  Sound transmission shall meet standards established in Article 4 of Title 25, California Administrative Code. The developer shall provide a detailed report prepared by certified acoustical experts stating the existing conditions—whether each unit meets current sound transmission standards. 
(6)  Separate meters for gas and electricity shall be provided for each unit. 
(7)  Provision for joint use of water service shall be provided. 
(8)  Exterior-interior construction shall be refurbished to a degree of quality and safety to the satisfaction of the Chief Building Inspector. 
(9)  Weatherized, lockable storage facilities shall be provided at a rate of 200 cubic ft. per unit where individual garages do not exist. 
(10)  Declarations of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall include a statement requiring each individual owner and the owners' association to comply with all building and safety codes enforced by the City Building and Fire Departments. 
(11)  Domestic water shall be metered. Master meters shall be used wherever possible. 
(12)  A one-year unconditional consumer warranty guaranteeing repair or replacement of all appliances. 
(§ 1, Ord. 836, eff. March 3, 1980)  
Sec. 8-6.06. - Private interior streets. 
(1)  Streets shall be in a maintained condition equivalent to two in. type B A.C. on four-in. class II aggregate base to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director. 
(2)  Drainage shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director. 
(3)  Minimum width of interior streets shall be 24 ft. 
(4)  Minimum curve radii shall meet the requirements of the Fire Department. 
(5)  Streets shall be identified as private streets and posted for no parking. 
(6)  Dead-end streets shall provide turn-around space as required by the Fire Chief and Public Works Director. 
(§ 1, Ord. 836, eff. March 3, 1980)  
Sec. 8-6.07. - Other requirements. 
(1)  Screened rubbish collectors shall be provided sufficient to serve all units and located for convenience to users and rubbish disposal contractors. 
(2)  Pedestrian pathways shall connect parking areas to individual units. 
(3)  Lighting shall be provided to avoid dark spots in the common areas. 
(4)  Sewer collection system shall be designed to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director. 
(5)  Landscaping and recreation facilities shall be provided in conformity with the plan submitted. Such landscaping shall cover at least 15% of the site and be designed to maximize the benefit to the residents of all units in the development. 
(6)  Laundry facilities shall be provided for the units. Common laundry facilities shall provide one washing machine and one clothes dryer per eight units without individual facilities. 
(7)  Unit numbers shall be provided so as to be visible for emergency use to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief. 
(8)  Lighted directory providing guidance to units shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief. 
(9)  All improvements identified as necessary within two years shall be replaced. 
(10)  A sinking fund or maintenance surety fund shall be established by the developer to cover all projected maintenance or replacements projected for five years. This sinking fund shall be administered by the Homeowners' Association and shall be so noted in the Association documents. 
(§ 1, Ord. 836, eff. March 3, 1980 as amended by § 1, Ord. 866, eff. November 23, 1980)  
Sec. 8-6.08. - Parking lots. 
(1)  Parking lots shall be paved with two in. B Type a.c. on four-in. Class II aggregate base. 
(2)  Drainage shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. 
(3)  Parking shall be provided at a rate of at least 1½ spaces per one bedroom or studio unit and two spaces per unit containing two or more bedrooms per unit. 
Such spaces shall be assigned to specific individual units to provide no less than one designated space per one bedroom or studio unit and no less than two designated spaces per unit containing two or more bedrooms. Guest parking shall additionally be provided at a rate of one space per three units. Required guest parking may include spaces not assigned to individual units. Such spaces shall be designated for guest parking only. 
(4)  Parking spaces and maneuvering areas shall be designed in accordance with City regulations. 
(5)  Declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall provide that no recreational vehicles or trailers shall be parked on the project property unless a parking area for such vehicles is specifically set aside and such parking area is in excess of the 2.3 parking spaces per unit required under Section 8-6.08(3). 
(§ 1, Ord. 836, eff. March 3, 1980 as amended by § 2, Ord. 866, eff. November 23, 1980)  
Sec. 8-6.09. - Hearing. 
The Planning Commission, or the City Council on appeal, shall hold a public hearing to review all applications for conversions submitted pursuant to the ordinance. Notice of the hearing shall be provided to all tenants of the project at least ten days prior to the hearing date. 
(§ 1, Ord. 836, eff. March 3, 1980)  
Sec. 8-6.10. - Findings. 
The Planning Commission, or the City Council on appeal, shall not approve any application for conversion of rental units unless the planning commission or City Council can find that: 
(a)  All provisions of this chapter are met. 
(b)  The project is not detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community. 
(c)  The project is consistent with the General Plan Housing Element. 
(d)  The vacancy rate for rental units of similar size and rental rates is above 5% as determined in January and July by the Planning director, or at any other time as directed by the Planning Commission. 
(e)  Relocation payments to displaced tenants are provided at a rate of no less than 1½ times the monthly rental of the unit. The developer will actively seek alternative housing for families displaced by conversion. 
(f)  The relocation program provides for deferred displacement of families with children, elderly tenants, and handicapped tenants. 
(g)  No rent increase has been made to reduce or eliminate tenancy in preparation for conversion. Each non-purchasing tenant, not in default under the obligations of the rental agreement or lease under which he or she occupies his or her unit, shall have not less than 120 days from the date of filing of the final subdivision map or parcel map to find substitute housing and to relocate. 
(h)  Diverse forms of financing acquisition of the units, including FHA, VA, Cal Vet, conventional, etc., shall be available to allow the best terms to the existing tenants. 
(i)  At least one of the findings in section Title 6, Chapter 9, Article 6 of the Municipal Code is satisfied. 
(§ 1, Ord. 836, eff. March 3, 1980) 
( Ord. No. 009-16 , § 2(Att. A, § 4), 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 8-6.11. - Report of Planning Commission action. 
Report to the City Council. Following action by the Planning Commission, a report on the project and the Planning Commission action thereon shall be transmitted to the City Council for its information. 
(§ 1, Ord. 836, eff. March 3, 1980)  
Sec. 8-6.12. - Fees. 
The City Council shall establish by resolution, and may amend and revise from time to time, fees for processing the various applications authorized or required by this chapter. All fees shall be paid at the time an application is filed, and no processing shall commence until the fee is paid in full. 
(§ 1, Ord. 836, eff. March 3, 1980; § 1, Ord. 1022, eff. May 11, 1987; § 1, Ord. 17-92, eff. September 3, 1992)  
Sec. 8-6.13. - Modifications of chapter provisions. 
The requirements of this chapter may be modified by the Planning Commission, or on appeal by the City Council, when at least one of the following findings can be made based on evidence presented at the hearing: 
(a)  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property; or 
(b)  The unique nature of the particular project requires design innovations to carry out the intent of this chapter; or 
(c)  The granting of the modification will not be detrimental to the public welfare or safety or be injurious to other property in the surrounding area. 
(§ 1, Ord. 836, March 3, 1980)  
Sec. 8-6.14. - Appeals. 
Appeals may be made from any determination of the Planning Commission in the same manner as prescribed for subdivision appeals in Section 8.2-1101 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(§ 1, Ord. 836, eff. March 3, 1980)  
CHAPTER 7. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS, CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS, COMMUNITY APARTMENT PROJECTS, STOCK COOPERATIVE PROJECTS 
 
Sec. 8-7.01. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by the regulation of development of planned unit developments, condominiums, community apartments and stock cooperatives. The chapter is intended to implement the Yuba City Urban Area General Plan Housing Element by: 
(a)  Providing a wide range of housing opportunities for all segments of the population. 
(b)  Providing for balanced neighborhoods with differing housing supplies. 
(c)  Reducing impact of planned unit developments, condominium projects, community apartment projects and stock co-operative projects on adjacent residential areas. 
(§ 1, Ord. 839, eff. July 16, 1980)  
Sec. 8-7.02. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Community apartment project" shall mean a project in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon. 
(b)  "Condominium" shall mean an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. 
(c)  "Condominium project" shall mean the subdivision of real property to create five or more condominiums. 
(d)  "Planned unit development" shall mean a residential development in which the subdivision and zoning regulations apply to the project as a whole, rather than to its individual lots. Densities are calculated on a project-wide basis permitting, among other things, the clustering of houses and provision of open space. Overall density cannot exceed that established in the General Plan. 
(e)  "Stock co-operative" shall mean a corporation which is formed or availed of primarily for the purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of years, improved real property, if all or substantially all of the shareholders of such corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of real property, title to which is held by the corporation, which right to occupy is transferable only concurrently with the transfer of share or shares of stock in the corporation held by the person having such right of occupancy. 
(§ 1, Ord. 839, eff. July 16, 1980)  
Sec. 8-7.03. - Permit required. 
No person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity shall develop a planned unit development, a condominium project, a community apartment project or stock co-operative project without first having secured approval of a permit allowing such development by the Planning Commission or upon appeal, the City Council and having been issued a development permit by the Planning Director. Any permit issued hereunder may be made subject to such reasonable terms and conditions as in the judgment of the Commission is necessary to ensure compliance with the purpose, spirit and intent of this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 839, eff. July 16, 1980)  
Sec. 8-7.04. - Application for permit. 
Application for permit pursuant to this chapter shall include the following: 
(a)  A development plan of the project site including: 
(1)  The exterior boundaries and dimensions proposed at the project site and the names and locations of adjacent streets. 
(2)  The physical development proposed on the site, including the size, shape, location, type of materials to be used and use of all buildings, structures, paved areas, landscaped areas, open spaces, walls, fences, recreational facilities, utilities, exterior lighting, directional signs and other common facilities. 
(3)  Proposed elevations. 
(b)  A schedule of completion for all physical development of common facilities proposed in the project. 
(c)  A maintenance plan for all physical development detailing landscape, paving and building maintenance features of the project. 
(d)  A copy of the proposed covenants, conditions, and restrictions to be applied to the project. 
The final form of the application shall be as approved by the Planning Director and shall remain on file in the Planning Department for review by any interested persons. The application shall be referenced in the Department's report to the Planning Commission. 
(§ 1, Ord. 839, eff. July 16, 1980)  
Sec. 8-7.05. - Standards. 
Building requirements: 
(a)  The project shall conform to the applicable standards of the adopted building related codes found in Title 7, Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(b)  Structures abutting or within 45 ft. of developed R-1 zoned property shall be limited to one story. 
(c)  Fire alarm systems shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief. 
(d)  Fire protection shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief. 
(e)  Separate meters for gas and electricity shall be provided for each unit. 
(f)  Sound transmission shall meet standards established in Article 4 of Title 25, California Administrative Code. 
(g)  Provision for joint use of water service shall be provided. 
(h)  Weatherized, lockable storage facilities shall be provided at a rate of 200 cubic ft. per unit where individual garages do not exist. 
(i)  Declarations of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall include a statement requiring each individual owner and the owners' association to comply with all building and safety codes enforced by the City Building and Fire Departments. 
(j)  Domestic water shall be metered. Master meters shall be used wherever possible. 
(§ 1, Ord. 839, eff. July 16, 1980)  
Sec. 8-7.06. - Private interior streets. 
(a)  Streets shall be constructed with a minimum structural section of two in. type B a.c. on four-in. Class II aggregate base to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director. 
(b)  Drainage shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director. 
(c)  Minimum width of interior streets shall be 24 ft. 
(d)  Minimum curve radii shall meet the requirements of the Fire Department. 
(e)  Streets shall be identified as private streets and posted for no parking. 
(f)  Dead-end streets shall provide turn-around space as required by the Fire Chief and Public Works Director. 
(g)  No obstructions shall be placed within 14.5 ft. vertical clearance. 
(h)  Private street intersections with public streets shall be constructed as standard intersections or driveways as required by the Public Works Director. 
(i)  Private streets shall be designed in loops wherever possible. 
(§ 1, Ord. 839, eff. July 16, 1980)  
Sec. 8-7.07. - Other requirements. 
(a)  Screened rubbish collectors shall be provided sufficient to serve all units and located for convenience to users and rubbish disposal contractors. 
(b)  Pedestrian pathways shall connect parking areas to individual units. 
(c)  Lighting shall be provided to avoid dark spots in the common areas. 
(d)  Sewer collection system shall be designed to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director. 
(e)  Landscaping and recreation facilities shall be provided in conformity with the plan submitted. Such landscaping shall cover at least 15% of the site and be designed to maximize the benefit to the residents of all units in the development. 
(f)  Laundry facilities shall be provided for the units. Common laundry facilities shall provide one washing machine and one clothes dryer per eight units without individual facilities. 
(g)  Unit numbers shall be provided so as to be visible for emergency use to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief. 
(h)  Lighted directory providing guidance to units shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief. 
(i)  All other regulations of the City and State of California applicable to the development project, including subdivision and zoning regulations, shall be complied with. 
(§ 1, Ord. 839, eff. July 16, 1980)  
Sec. 8-7.08. - Parking lots. 
(a)  Parking lots shall be paved with two in. type B a.c. on four-in. Class U aggregate base. 
(b)  Drainage shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. 
(c)  Parking shall be provided at a rate of at least 1½ spaces per one bedroom or studio unit and two spaces per unit containing two or more bedrooms per unit. Such spaces shall be assigned to specific individual units to provide no less than one designated space per one bedroom or studio unit and no less than two designated spaces per unit containing two or more bedrooms. Guest parking shall additionally be provided at a rate of one space per three units. Required guest parking may include spaces not assigned to individual units. Such spaces shall be designated for guest parking only. 
(d)  Parking spaces and maneuvering areas shall be designed in accordance with City regulations. 
(e)  Declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall provide that no recreational vehicles or trailers shall be parked on the project property unless a parking area for such vehicles is specifically set aside and such parking area is in excess of the 2.3 parking spaces per unit required under Section 8-5.708(c). 
(§ 1, Ord. 839, eff. July 16, 1980)  
Sec. 8-7.09. - Public notice. 
Public notice of consideration of all applications pursuant to this chapter by the Planning Commission, or the City Council on appeal shall be given in the same manner as that given for subdivision considerations. 
(§ 1, Ord. 839, eff. July 16, 1980)  
Sec. 8-7.10. - Findings. 
The Planning Commission, or the City Council on appeal, shall not approve any applications unless the Planning Commission or City Council can find that: 
(a)  All provisions of this chapter are met. 
(b)  The project is not detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community. 
(c)  The project is consistent with the General Plan Land Use and Housing Elements. 
(§ 1, Ord. 839, eff. July 16, 1980)  
Sec. 8-7.11. - Report on Planning Commission action. 
Report to the City Council. Following action by the Planning Commission, a report on the project and the Planning Commission action thereon shall be transmitted to the City Council for its information. 
(§ 1, Ord. 839, eff. July 16, 1980)  
Sec. 8-7.12. - Fees. 
The City Council shall establish by resolution, and may amend and revise from time to time, fees for processing the various applications authorized or required by this chapter. All fees shall be paid at the time an application is filed, and no processing shall commence until the fee is paid in full. 
(§ 1, Ord. 839, eff. July 16, 1980; § 1, Ord. 1022, eff. Mary 11, 1987; § 1, Ord. 17-92, eff. September 3, 1992)  
Sec. 8-7.13. - Modifications of chapter provisions. 
The requirements of this chapter may be modified by the Planning Commission, or on appeal by the City Council, when at least one of the following findings can be made based on evidence presented at the hearing: 
(a)  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property; or 
(b)  The unique nature of the particular project requires design innovations to carry out the intent of this chapter; or 
(c)  The granting of the modification will not be detrimental to the public welfare of safety or be injurious to other property in the surrounding area. 
(§ 1, Ord. 839, eff. July 16, 1980)  
Sec. 8-7.14. - Appeals. 
Appeals may be made from any determination of the Planning Commission in the same manner as prescribed for subdivision appeals in Section 8-2.1001 of the Yuba City Municipal Code. 
(§ 1, Ord. 839, eff. July 16, 1980)  
CHAPTER 8. - GENERAL PLAN  
Article 1. - General Plan Amendments 
 
Sec. 8-8.101. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to set forth the procedures by which the General Plan of the City of Yuba City may be amended. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1003, eff. August 6, 1986)  
Sec. 8-8.102. - Initiation. 
An amendment to the General Plan may be initiated by: 
(a)  The City Council; 
(b)  The Planning Commission; or 
(c)  A member of the public. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1003, eff. August 6, 1986)  
Sec. 8-8.103. - Application and fees. 
Applications for General Plan amendments which are initiated by other than the City Council or Planning Commission shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the Planning Director. The City Council shall establish by resolution, and may amend and revise from time to time, fees for processing the various applications authorized or required by this chapter. All fees shall be paid at the time an application is filed, and no processing shall commence until the fee is paid in full. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1003, eff. August 6, 1986; § 1, Ord. 1022, eff. May 11, 1987; § 1, Ord. 17-92, eff. September 3, 1992)  
Sec. 8-8.104. - Planning Commission action. 
(a)  The Planning Commission shall conduct an advertised public hearing on all General Plan amendments. 
(b)  At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall forward to the City Council its recommendation and findings relating to the proposed General Plan amendment. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1003, eff. August 6, 1986)  
Sec. 8-8.105. - City Council action. 
(a)  The City Council shall conduct an advertised public hearing on the recommendations of the Planning Commission. 
(b)  At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council may adopt such General Plan amendments as it deems necessary. All amendments shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council. 
(c)  Any substantial modification to the Planning Commission's recommendation by the City Council which was not previously considered by the Planning Commission must be referred to the Planning Commission for consideration and recommendations prior to adoption by the City Council. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1003, eff. August 6, 1986)  
Sec. 8-8.106. - Reapplication. 
If an amendment to the General Plan has been acted upon by the City Council, no further application which is the same or substantially the same may be filed by members of the public within a period of six months from the date of such action. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1003, eff. August 6, 1986)  
Sec. 8-8.107. - Annual amendment limitation. 
The City Council shall not amend the General Plan more than four times in any calendar year. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1003, eff. August 6, 1986)  
CHAPTER 9. - ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW 
 
Sec. 8-9.01. - Impact analysis. 
Projects under discretionary review by the City shall be subject to analysis of potential environmental impacts in accord with the California Environmental Quality Act and administrative procedures adopted pursuant thereto. For the purpose of such analysis the Planning Director is appointed Environmental Control Officer for the City of Yuba City. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1022, eff. May 11, 1987)  
Sec. 8-9.02. - Private projects. 
Private projects to be reviewed by the City, including tentative subdivision and parcel maps, use permits, variances, zone changes, text changes, condominium conversions, planned unit and General Plan amendments shall be subject to environmental analysis. Such analysis shall be accomplished by consideration of an initial study to be filled with all such applications unless the same project has previously been analyzed or declared categorically exempt from review. The initial study shall be provided on a form prescribed by the Planning Department. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1022, eff. May 11, 1987; § 1, Ord. 17-92, eff. September 3, 1992)  
Sec. 8-9.03. - Fees. 
The City Council shall establish by resolution, and may amend and revise from time to time, fees for processing the various applications authorized or required by this title. All fees shall be paid at the time an application is filed, and no processing shall commence until the fee is paid in full. 
(§ 1, Ord. 17-92, eff. September 3, 1992)  
CHAPTER 10. - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE 
 
Sec. 8-10.100. - Purpose. 
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the General Plan of the City of Yuba City and to mitigate the impacts caused by new and anticipated development within the Yuba City General Plan boundaries, certain public improvements, identified in the General Plan, must be constructed. The City Council has determined that a development impact fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for new developments' fair share of the acquisition and improvement construction costs and other costs necessary or convenient to ensure conformity to or implementation of the General Plan. In establishing the fee described in the following sections, the City Council has found the fee to be consistent with its General Plan and, pursuant to Government Code § 65913.2, has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the City's housing needs as established in the Housing Element as well as all other elements of the General Plan. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1100, eff. August 1, 1990)  
Sec. 8-10.101. - Development impact fee. 
(a)  A development impact fee is hereby established on issuance of all development permits for development in the City to pay for public improvements to implement the General Plan. The City Council shall, in a Council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact areas on which the major projects financing fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments and set forth time for payment. To the extent that the development impact fee includes components for financing projects already included in fees collected under other City ordinances, such other fees when paid, shall be a credit against the appropriate components of the development impact fee. To the extent that some or all of the projects financed or to be financed by the development impact fee are financed through a community facilities district, special assessment district or other financing mechanism, participation in such other financing mechanism shall be a credit against the appropriate component of the development impact fee. As described in the fee resolution, this development impact fee shall be paid by each developer, at the option of the developer, either prior to issuance of a building permit or prior to issuance of a certification of occupancy for the commercial or industrial project or the respective dwelling units in a residential project, or at such earlier time permitted by law, as set forth in, if applicable, Government Code § 66007. On an annual basis, the City Council shall review the fees to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the burden of developments and whether the described public facilities are still needed. It is the intent of the City Council not to increase the fee amounts prior to July 1, 1993. 
(b)  As used in this section, "development permit" means a zoning or rezoning of property, a conditional use permit, subdivision map, building permit, or other permit for construction or reconstruction but does not include a lot line adjustment, the merger of parcels or a building permit for remodeling or reconstruction if the use of the structure does not change. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1100, eff. August 1, 1990)  
Sec. 8-10.102. - Limited use of fees. 
The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to: 
(a)  Pay for the City's future construction of facilities described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 8-10.101 above, or to reimburse the City for those described or listed facilities constructed by the City with funds advanced by the City from other sources; or 
(b)  Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted by Section 8-10.103 to install such listed facilities which are oversized with supplemental size, length, or capacity. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1100, eff. August 1, 1990)  
Sec. 8-10.103. - Developer construction of facilities. 
Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct a public facility described in a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 8-10.101 which facility is determined by the City to have supplemental size, length or capacity over that needed for the impacts of that development, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the facilities network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer and a credit against the fee, which should otherwise be charged pursuant to this article on the development project, shall be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not include the portion of the improvement needed to provide services or mitigate the need for the facility or the burdens created by the development. This reimbursement provision is supplemental to the provisions relating to reimbursement in Title 6 of the Yuba City Municipal Code and the Subdivision Map Act. 
(§ 1, Ord. 1100, eff. August 1, 1990)  
Sec. 8-10.104. - Fee adjustments. 
A developer of any project subject to the fee described in Section 8-10.101 may apply to the City Council for a reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. Industrial projects, employing two or more low- or moderate-income persons will have a priority for consideration of a waiver or reduction of fees. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the City Clerk not later than ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction, or adjustment. The City Council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate hearing held within 60 days after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The decision of the City Council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment, or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. 
(Ord. 1100, eff. August 1, 1990)  
TITLE 9. - PARKS AND RECREATION  
CHAPTER 1. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 9-1.01. - Creation/membership. 
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall be composed of five members confirmed by the City Council. The City Council may choose to appoint one alternate member to the Commission, who would serve normally as a nonvoting member. In the absence of a regular member of the Commission, the alternate member shall take the absent individual's seat and have the right to vote. All members of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall reside within the City of Yuba City. The Parks and Recreation Director or his/her designee shall be an ex officio member and shall serve as Secretary of the Commission. 
(§ 1, Ord. 002-02, eff. March 7, 2002)  
Sec. 9-1.02. - Terms of office. 
The terms of members of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be four years. 
The anniversary date for all appointments shall be February 28 th of any year. The three current commissioners whose terms expire on December 31, 2018 will be extended to February 28, 2019. The two commissioners whose terms expire on December 31, 2020 will be extended to February 28, 2021. 
The terms of office set forth in this section shall not be deemed arbitrary. Members of the Parks and Recreation Commission serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed without cause. Council may so order and appoint a successor for the unexpired term of office of the removed member. Any Commissioner appointed to succeed a vacated seat on the Commission shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term of their predecessor. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as appointments for the unexpired term of office. 
Council may establish by resolution appropriate service requirements, criteria and attendance standards governing service on the Planning Commission. Selection shall reflect as nearly as possible the diverse demographic characteristics of the population of Yuba City. Commissioners are expected to attend all Commission meetings. 
(§ 1, Ord. 002-02, eff. March 7, 2002; Ord. No. 006-18 , § 1, 9-18-2018)  
Sec. 9-1.03. - Powers and duties. 
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, to the City Manager, and to the Parks and Recreation Director in all matters pertaining to parks and recreation. The Commission shall interpret the leisure time needs, facilities, and services to public officials and the general public in order that adequate support may be obtained. The Commission shall recommend general policies concerning all parks and recreation properties, facilities, plans, programs, and activities. It may evaluate suggestions, criticisms, and comments in light of such general policies. It may recommend a long-range program for the improvement, acquisition, and development of parks and recreation facilities and for the extension of services. 
(§ 1, Ord. 002-02, eff. March 7, 2002)  
Sec. 9-1.04. - City Tree Advisory Board. 
The City's Tree Advisory Board is established and shall consist of the five members of the Yuba City Parks and Recreation Commission. The duties of the City's Tree Advisory Board shall be as follows: 
(a)  To study the problems and determine the needs of the City in connection with its tree program; 
(b)  To recommend to the City Council the type and kind of trees to be planted upon City streets or parts of City streets, parks, or public places; 
(c)  To assist the properly constituted officials of the City, as well as the City Council and citizens of the City, in the dissemination of news and information regarding the protection, maintenance, removal, and planting of trees on public lands, and to make such recommendations from time to time to the City Council as to desirable legislation concerning the tree program and activities for the City; 
(d)  To act as advocates for the City's annual observance of Arbor Day, and undertake an ongoing program of public outreach and education in order to promote public understanding of the City's urban forest and public adherence to the standards and procedures established under the ordinance. 
(§ 1, Ord. 002-02, eff. March 7, 2002)  
Sec. 9-1.05. - Officers. 
(a)  The Commission shall choose one of its members to serve as chairperson and one of its members as vice chair. The chair and vice chair shall be elected each calendar year at the first meeting following January 1. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings, submit all motions to vote and in general do all things ordinarily required of a chairperson. 
(b)  The vice chair shall assume the duties of the chairperson in his/her absence. 
(c)  The secretary shall take and keep the minutes of all the meetings and provide information and assistance to the Commission. Copies of the minutes shall be submitted to the City Council for review. 
(§ 1, Ord. 002-02, eff. March 7, 2002)  
Sec. 9-1.06. - Procedures. 
The Commission shall hold regular meetings throughout the calendar year no less than quarterly. 
The Parks and Recreation Commission may adopt rules of procedure, determine the order of business for its meetings, time and place and conduct of its members. Three members of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(§ 1, Ord. 002-02, eff. March 7, 2002)  
Sec. 9-1.07. - Parks and Recreation Director. 
There is hereby created the position of Parks and Recreation Director for the City. He or she shall be responsible to the City Manager for community-wide facilities and programs and for activities conducted on all properties and shall be the administrative head of the Parks and Recreation Department. He or she shall formulate and administer a broad public leisure time program and encourage wide community participation in such program. His or her responsibilities shall be primarily administrative in character, involving planning, organizing, and directing departmental staff and activities, subject to review at all times by the City Manager. 
(§ 1, Ord. 002-02, eff. March 7, 2002)  
CHAPTER 2. - PARK AND RECREATION REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 9-2.01. - Application of rules and regulations. 
(a)  The park and recreation areas within the City shall be used and maintained for the benefit and entertainment of the public generally, subject, however, to the restrictions and limitations contained in this chapter and such other regulations as the Council may adopt hereafter by resolution. 
(b)  The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to and be in full force and effect at all park and recreation areas which are under the jurisdiction and control of the City. Such regula-tions shall govern the use of all such park and recreation areas, and the observance of such regulations shall be a condition under which the public may use the park and recreation areas. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.02. - Hours of use. 
(a)  [ Parks defined. ] For purposes of this chapter, the word "neighborhood parks" shall mean any City park except for Blackburn-Talley Sports Complex, Gauche Aquatic Park, and Sam Brannan Park. Blackburn-Talley Sports Complex, Gauche Aquatic Park and Sam Brannan Park are defined as "community parks" for purposes of this chapter. 
(b)  Neighborhood parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain, use or loiter in any neighborhood park at any time between one-half hour after sunset to sunrise the following morning, with the exception of City-approved recreational activities. 
(c)  Community parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain, use or loiter in any community park at any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and sunrise the following morning, with the exception of a City approved recreational activity. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998; § 1, Ord. 004-08, eff. April 17, 2008; § 1, Ord. 011-09, eff. December 3, 2009)  
Sec. 9-2.03. - Care of public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mark, graffiti, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace, or remove any City-owned real or personal property of any kind in any park or recreation area. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.04. - Care of trees, shrubbery, and lawns. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree, plant, wood, turf, or grass, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant, or attach any rope, wire, or other object to any tree or plant located in any park or recreation area. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.05. - Defacing trees and other objects. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any tree or to walk, stand, or sit upon any monument, vase, fountain, railing, fence, or other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes in any park or recreation area. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.06. - Restrooms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. Male persons shall not resort to any restroom facility set apart for women, and female persons shall not resort to any restroom facility set apart for men; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to children accompanied by an adult person. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.07. - Advertising material. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, circulate, give away, throw, or deposit any handbill, circular, dodger, pamphlet, paper, or advertisement or post or affix the same to any tree, fence, building, or other property in any park or recreation area. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.08. - Refuse, trash and litter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or other such refuse or trash in any park or recreation area except in proper receptacles provided for such purpose. Such refuse or trash so placed shall be only that generated in connection with normal activities in, and the use of, the park or recreation area. Where such receptacles are not provided, all refuse or trash shall be carried away from the park or recreation area by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.09. - Fires restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or kindle a fire or to hold any barbecue in any park or recreation area except in the stoves or pits provided by the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.10. - Hazardous games, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fly a model airplane (motor-driven), propel a rocket or missile of any type, hitting a golf ball, or participate in archery, handball, or any similar game of hazardous nature in any park or recreation area except at such places designated for such use by the City. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.11. - Vehicles prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park any motor vehicle in or upon any park or recreation area. As used in this section, "motor vehicle" shall include any type of motor driven vehicle, including, without limitation, house trailers, motorcycles, motorized two- or three-wheel vehicles, buses, and automobiles. Such motor vehicle shall be parked only in the places specifically provided or designated for such purpose. Bicyclists shall be permitted to wheel or push bicycles by hand on any grassy area, trail, or path reserved for pedestrian use. All nonmotorized vehicles shall be operated at all times with reasonable regard for the safety of others. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.12. - Loud or boisterous conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting, or indecent language, or engage in other loud or disturbing conduct by the use of any loudspeaker or other noise making device, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace and enjoyment in any park or recreation area. Any person who is loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting, or publicly offensive shall not be permitted to remain within any park or recreation area. 
Playing amplified music or a musical instrument may be allowed, if (1) the use meets the City-established noise and operating criteria within City parks and recreational areas and (2) a permit is obtained from Yuba City Leisure Services, located in City Hall at 1201 Civic Center Boulevard. The person responsible for the conduct of an activity shall sign the permit and the permit holder is totally responsible for the supervision and safety of all participants at the event. The permit must be kept at the facility or recreation area during use and shown to anyone requesting to see verification. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.13. - Vending and peddling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any goods, wares, merchandise, article, or thing whatsoever or station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing in any park or recreation area without first obtaining a business license or written permission from the City's Administrative Services Department. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.14. - Organized groups restricted. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any company, society, social organization, social club, or other organization of persons to hold or conduct any picnic, celebration, parade, service, exercise, or other similar recreational activity having 25 or more participants in any park or recreation area without obtaining a reservation for the park or recreation area from the Yuba City Leisure Services, and it shall be unlawful for any person to take part in any such activity held or conducted contrary to the provisions of this section. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.15. - Alcohol restrictions in neighborhood and community parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring, possess, or consume any alcoholic beverage within the confines of Yuba City's parks and recreation areas, with the exception of Sam Brannan Park and Gauche Aquatic Park. In Sam Brannan and Gauche Aquatic Parks, possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted only by permit obtained from Yuba City Leisure Services. The person responsible for the conduct of an activity must sign the permit and the permit holder is tally responsible for the supervision and safety of all participants at the event. City may revoke the approval or this permit at any time in the interest of public safety. Such revocation shall be at the sole discretion of any City emergency service work (police or fire). Any permit pursuant to this section allowing the consumption of alcohol at Sam Brannan Park or Gauche Aquatic Park shall be limited to only the consumption of beer and wine. The fenced-in softball facility at the Blackburn-Talley Sports Complex is subject to separate regulations per Section 9-2.16 of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998; § 2, Ord. 004-08, eff. April 17, 2008; § 2, Ord. 011-09, eff. December 3, 2009)  
Sec. 9-2.16. - Alcohol/food/beverage container restrictions at Blackburn-Talley Sports Complex. 
(a)  Alcohol restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring, possess, or consume any alcoholic beverage within the fenced-in softball complex area at Blackburn-Talley Park unless said alcoholic beverage was dispensed by the City-approved concessionaire. 
(b)  Food and beverage container restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or possess any type of glass, hard plastic or metal food or beverage containers within the fenced-in softball complex area at Blackburn-Talley Sports Complex. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.17. - Safety equipment when riding skateboards. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard, or permit a minor for whom he or she is responsible, to ride a skateboard, in a park or recreational facility unless the person, while riding the skateboard, is wearing a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.18. - Regulations and limitations regarding Yuba City Skate Park. 
The Yuba City Skate Park in Sam Brannan Park is provided for the benefit and entertainment of residents for skateboarding and inline skating. No skateboarding or inline skating shall be allowed within Sam Brannan Park outside of the designated Skate Park. No bicycles shall be allowed within the confines of the Yuba City Skate Park. The City reserves the right to remove any person from the facility who is acting in an inappropriate manner. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.19. - Camping in City parks and recreational areas. 
It shall be unlawful to camp or sleep overnight in City parks and recreational areas. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.20. - Dogs in City parks and recreational areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or has the charge, care, control, or custody of any dog to allow, cause, or permit such dog to be in or upon any park or recreational area belonging to the City, unless such dog is on a leash and is under the complete control of the person owning or at the time in possession of such dog. Such leash shall not be more than eight ft. in length. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility for any person who owns or has the charge, care, control or custody of any dog, while in a City park or recreational area, to clean up fecal matter from their pet before leaving the facility and to properly dispose of same. 
(c)  No dogs, other than trained guide dogs, shall be allowed within the fenced confines of the Blackburn-Talley Sports Complex softball facility. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.21. - Trespassing at locked City parks and recreational areas. 
It shall be unlawful to trespass upon a locked City park or recreational area, including, but not limited to, the Blackburn-Talley Sports Complex softball facility, and the municipal pool, tennis courts and skate park in Sam Brannan Park, when it is not in use nor available to the public for use. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998)  
Sec. 9-2.22. - Town Square Fountain. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wade, bathe, swim, enter in or otherwise trespass in the water area of the Town Square Fountain. 
(§ 2, Ord. 04-99, eff. June 3, 1999)  
Sec. 9-2.23. - Tobacco and e-cigarette use prohibition at all City parks and within 50 feet of any public entrance into any City owned or leased facility. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any tobacco product or an e-cigarette in all City parks and within fifty (50') of any public entrance into any City owned or leased facility. 
As used in this section, "tobacco product" means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco. 
As used in this section, "e-cigarette" means any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, which provides a vapor of nicotine or any other substances, and the use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term shall include any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, hookah pen or under any other product name or description. 
(§ 4, Ord. 004-08, eff. April 17, 2008; § 4, Ord. 011-09, eff. December 3, 2009) 
( Ord. No. 006-15 , § 1, 10-20-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 006-15 , § 1, adopted Oct. 20, 2015, retitled the catchline of § 9-2.23 from "Smoking prohibition at all City parks and within 50 feet of any public entrance into any City owned or leased facility" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 9-2.30. - Enforcement. 
The Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter insofar as they relate to the functions and duties of the department. The Police Chief shall be responsible for enforcing the penal provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 2, Ord. 01-98, eff. May 21, 1998; § 1, Ord. 04-99, eff. June 3, 1999; § 5, Ord. 004-08, eff. April 17, 2008; § 5, Ord. 011-09, eff. December 3, 2009)  
CHAPTER 3. - STREET TREES 
 
Sec. 9-3.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Department" shall mean the Recreation and Parks Department of the City. 
(b)  "Director" shall mean the Director of Recreation and Parks. 
(c)  "Maintain" or "maintenance," when used in reference to street trees, shall mean and include clipping, pruning, spraying, mulching, cultivating, propping, supporting, treating for disease or injury, or any other similar act, except watering unless specifically so stated, which promotes the life, growth, health, or beauty of street trees. 
(d)  "Planting easement" shall mean that portion of land made available as a public easement in order to plant and maintain street trees. 
(e)  "Planting season" shall mean that period of the year when trees are normally dormant, commonly known as the "bare root season," usually from about November to March. 
(f)  "Planting strip" shall mean that portion of the public right-of-way between the curb, or curb line, and the adjacent property line used to plant and maintain street trees. 
(g)  "Street tree plan" shall mean an official adopted plan for planting certain varieties of trees in public rights-of-way or planting easements within the City. 
(§ 1, Ord. 563, eff. December 18, 1968)  
Sec. 9-3.02. - Street tree plan. 
(a)  The Council hereby declares that it is in the best interests of the City to develop and establish a comprehensive plan for planting and maintaining street trees. 
(b)  The Recreation and Parks Department, in cooperation with the Planning Department, shall prepare or have prepared a street tree plan. Such plan shall be reviewed by the City Manager and shall be submitted to the Planning Commission which shall review said plan and submit its recommendations thereon to the Council. After making any revisions to the street tree plan which it may deem advisable, the Council shall adopt such plan by resolution. From time to time the Director shall recommend revisions thereto, and amendments to the street tree plan shall be made in the same manner as the original adoption. 
(c)  The street tree plan shall include the types, varieties, and locations of street trees to be planted. Such street tree plan shall include a map of the City which graphically portrays the varieties and locations of trees to be planted on designated streets. 
(d)  All new and replacement plantings shall be made in accordance with the street tree plan adopted by the Council. 
(§ 1, Ord. 563, eff. December 18, 1968)  
Sec. 9-3.03. - Responsibilities, duties, and authority of the Director. 
The Director shall have the authority and responsibility to do the following: 
(a)  Carry out the provisions of this chapter; 
(b)  Enter in or upon any part of a planting strip or planting easement or adjacent property as is reasonably necessary to plant, inspect, and maintain any street tree; 
(c)  Remove or replace any street tree located within a planting strip or planting easement in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and 
(d)  Supervise all work done under a permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(§ 1, Ord. 563, eff. December 18, 1968)  
Sec. 9-3.04. - Planting and maintaining. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, within the limits of funds provided in the City budget, the City shall supply, plant, maintain, and replace street trees in all planting strips and planting easements within the City. 
(b)  Fees shall be charged to subdividers to provide the cost of furnishing, locating, planting, and fertilizing street trees. 
(c)  Any person who wishes to plant or set out any tree in above-ground containers in the public right-of-way shall make written application to and obtain a permit from the Director. The permit shall state the number of trees to be planted or set out, the location, size, and variety of each tree, the spacing of each tree, and such other information as the Director may require. Approval shall be granted only when it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director that the planting of trees in the ground is either physically impossible or economically unfeasible and when such planting is in compliance with the approved plan. 
(d)  No maintenance of street trees shall be provided by the City on private property except in a planting strip or planting easement. 
(e)  The owner or occupant of the property, as the case may be, shall be responsible for watering and fertilizing street trees located in a planting strip or planting easement abutting such property. The City shall not be responsible for watering or fertilizing any such street trees. 
(f)  This section shall not prevent any person from installing and maintaining any overhead wires or underground pipes or conduits lawfully on, over, or under public streets, public rights-of-way or planting strips. The Director, when reviewing plans for planting, maintaining, replacing, or removing street trees, shall consider the effect upon existing overhead wires or underground pipes or conduits and shall avoid unnecessary disturbance to or relocation of such facilities. 
(§ 1, Ord. 563, eff. December 18, 1968)  
Sec. 9-3.05. - Removing. 
(a)  The Director may remove or cause the removal of any street trees or other plant materials planted in a planting strip or planting easement if such street trees or other plant materials are deemed by the Director to be unhealthy, hazardous, undesirable, or causing excessive damage to existing public improvements or street trees. 
(b)  The Director shall have the authority to require property owners to take such action as is necessary to control insects, scales, parasites, fungus, and other injurious pests or plant materials that would cause serious injury to street trees and other plant materials within the City. The Director shall notify the property owners in writing, describe the conditions, state the control necessary to correct the condition, and establish a reasonable time within which the corrective steps shall be taken. 
(c)  The Director shall have the authority to require property owners to remove any tree or other plant materials from private property if it is determined by the Director to be interfering seriously with the growth and health of any street tree. 
(d)  Any person who wishes to remove a tree from the planting strip or planting easement abutting his or her property shall make written application to and obtain a permit from the Director. The Director shall determine whether such tree is required to be retained in order to preserve the intent and purpose of the street tree plan and whether a replacement tree is required. In making his or her determination, the Director shall consider the inconvenience or hardship which retention of the tree would cause the property owner and consider also the condition, age, desirability of variety, and location of the tree. If the Director finds that the tree may be removed without violating the intent and spirit of the street tree plan, he or she may authorize the property owner to remove such tree at his or her own expense and liability. If a permit is granted for removal of a street tree, all removal work shall be completed within 60 calendar days from the date of the issuance of the permit and shall be under the general supervision of, and in accordance with, rules established by the Director. All tree stumps shall be removed completely. All removal permits shall be void after the expiration of 60 calendar days from the date of issuance unless extended by the Director. When a replacement tree is required, the property owner shall supply and plant the tree at his or her own expense. 
(§ 1, Ord. 563, eff. December 18, 1968)  
Sec. 9-3.06. - Protection. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to plant a tree or other plant material, other than lawn or similar planting material, in a planting strip or planting easement without first obtaining permission from the Director. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to trim, prune, spray, or cut any street tree in a planting strip or planting easement without first obtaining permission form the Director. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, or cause any person to interfere, with any work being done under the provisions of this chapter by any employee of the City or by any person doing work for the City or under a permit granted by the City. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, or cause any person to interfere, with or damage any overhead wires or underground pipes or conduits while trimming, pruning, spraying, cutting, or removing any street tree in a planting strip or planting easement. The owner of such facilities shall be notified when such work may interfere with or cause damage to the facilities. The cost of repair of the damage to overhead wires, underground pipes, or conduits shall be the responsibility of the person doing or causing the work to be done. The City and its officers and employees shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection. 
(§ 1, Ord. 563, eff. December 18, 1968)  
Sec. 9-3.07. - Duty to trim trees. 
Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, it is hereby made the duty of every person owning or occupying any land or lots of land within the City to keep all private trees extending over any street or alley trimmed up to a height of not less than 14 ft., except that a height of not less than seven ft. shall be permitted over the sidewalk area, and also to keep such space clear of debris. 
The Director may remove overhead limbs from any tree, regardless of the location of such tree, if in his or her opinion such removals are necessary in the interests of public safety. In the event such trees are on private property, the Director shall notify the property owner, or his or her authorized agent, of such intent to remove limbs by written notice at least seven calendar days prior to such removal except in the case of manifest public danger and immediate necessity. 
(§ 1, Ord. 563, eff. December 18, 1968)  
Sec. 9-3.08. - Cooperation with other departments and agencies. 
(a)  The Public Works Department shall notify the Recreation and Parks Department of any applications for new curbs, gutters, sidewalks, or driveway installations, or other improvements, which might require the removal of or cause injury to any street tree or interfere with the fulfillment of the street tree plan. 
(b)  Any public utility maintaining any overhead wires or underground pipes or conduits shall obtain a permit from the Director before performing any maintenance to such wires, pipes, or conduits which would cause injury to any street tree. Such permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. Such public utility shall furnish the Director with an advance schedule of its activities pertaining to the maintenance of such wires, pipes, or conduits. Such public utility, in no way, shall injure, deface, prune, or scar any street tree until its plans and procedures have been approved by the Director. 
(c)  The Director shall be permitted to inspect any and all maintenance or operational work performed by any public utility which might affect street trees. When, in the opinion of the Director, the performance of such maintenance or operational work would cause excessive or unnecessary injury to any street tree, the Director shall have the authority to stop such work and arrange with such public utility another method of maintenance or operational work satisfactory to the City. 
(d)  The provisions of subsection (b) and subsection (c) of this section shall not apply to emergency public utility maintenance work which is performed during nonworking hours. 
(§ 1, Ord. 563, eff. December 18, 1968)  
Sec. 9-3.09. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or destroy by any means any tree planted or maintained by the City in a planting strip or planting easement, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Damaging, cutting, or carving the bark of any tree; 
(b)  Causing or permitting any wire charged with electricity to be attached to any tree; 
(c)  Allowing any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance harmful to trees to come in contact with the roots, leaves, bark, or any other part of any tree; 
(d)  Constructing a concrete sidewalk or driveway or otherwise filling up the ground around any tree so as to shut off air or water from its roots; 
(e)  Piling building materials, equipment, or other substance around any tree; 
(f)  Posting any sign, poster, notice, or other object on any tree, tree stake, or guard, or fastening any guy wire, cable, rope, nails, screws, or other device to any tree, tree stake, or guard; or 
(g)  Causing or encouraging any fire or burning near or around any tree. 
(§ 1, Ord. 563, eff. December 18, 1968)  
Sec. 9-3.10. - Public nuisances. 
The following, whether in a planting strip, a planting easement, or on public or private property, are declared to be public nuisances: 
(a)  Any dead, diseased, infested, or dying tree so near to any street as to constitute a danger to any street tree or street or portion thereof; 
(b)  Any tree or other plant material, or part thereof, which is unsafe and constitutes a hazard to the life, health, safety, or property of the public or constitutes a center of infection for disease or insects which may endanger the health or life of other trees or shrubs; 
(c)  Any tree or other plant material which is of a type or species apt to destroy, impair, or otherwise interfere with any street improvements, sidewalks, curbs, approved street trees or other official street trees, gutters, sewers, or other public improvements, including utility mains, pipes, or lines or their appurtenances; 
(d)  Any vines or climbing plants growing into or over street trees, public hydrants, poles, or electroliers; 
(e)  Any tree that is infested, infected, or in danger of becoming infested or infected with objectionable insects, scales, parasites, fungus, or growth injurious to trees; 
(f)  Any thorny shrubs, plants, or foliage of any type which would tend to catch the clothing of a pedestrian using the street or sidewalk; 
(g)  Any shrub, hedge or other plant material more than 30 in. in height measured from the top of the curb grade in any planting strip. 
(h)  Any shrubs, hedges or other plant material located in any planting strip with dense foliage that prevents a motorist from observing children playing in the sidewalk or yard area when the motorist is utilizing an adjacent driveway. 
(§ 1, Ord. 563, eff. December 18, 1968; § 1, Ord. 900, eff. May 17, 1982)  
Sec. 9-3.11. - Abatement of nuisances. 
The owner, occupant, or person in charge or control of the property where any such nuisance exists shall be responsible for abating such nuisance. 
(§ 1, Ord. 563, eff. December 18, 1968)  
Sec. 9-3.12. - Liability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to impose any liability upon the City, any member of the Council, or any of its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner or occupant of any private property from the duty to keep his or her private property, sidewalks, and the planting strips abutting such private property in a safe condition so as not to be hazardous to public use. 
(§ 1, Ord. 563, eff. December 18, 1968)  
CHAPTER 4. - PARK ACQUISITION AND DEVELOPMENT FEES 
 
Sec. 9-4.01. - Purpose. 
The Council hereby declares that the fees required to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are assessed pursuant to the taxing powers of the City and solely for the purposes of producing revenue. 
The continued increase in the development of dwelling units in the City with the attendant increase in the population of the City has created an urgent need for the planning, acquisition, improvement, and expansion of public parks, playgrounds, and recreation facilities to serve the increasing population of the City and the means of providing additional revenue with which to finance such public facilities. 
(§ I, Ord. 665, eff. August 15, 1973)  
Sec. 9-4.02. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Bedroom" shall mean any room within a residential dwelling unit which room is designed to be used for sleeping purposes and contains a closet of sufficient size to hold clothing. One living room with an entry closet shall not be considered a "bedroom" in each residential dwelling unit other than a studio or efficiency apartment. 
(b)  "Construct" shall mean the putting together, assembling, erecting, or altering of construction materials, components, or modules into a structure, or a portion of a structure, and shall include reconstructing, enlarging, or altering any structure. "Construct" shall also include the moving and locating of a building, or portion thereof, onto a lot or parcel of land and shall also include the improvement of land as a mobile home lot. 
(c)  "One-family dwelling" shall mean a detached building of permanent character, placed in a permanent location, which building is planned, designed, or used as a residence for one family only living independently of other families or persons. 
(d)  "Two-family dwelling" shall mean a building of permanent location, which building is planned, designed, or used for residential purposes for two families living independently of each other in independent dwelling units. 
(e)  "Multiple dwelling" shall mean a building of permanent character, placed in a permanent location, which building is planned, designed, or used for residential purposes for three or more families living independently of each other in independent dwelling units. 
(f)  "Family" shall mean one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, club, or fraternity or sorority house. 
(g)  "Mobile home" shall mean a vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, designed or used for residential purposes for carrying persons and property on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
(h)  "Mobile home lot" shall mean any area or portion of a mobile home park designated, designed, or used for the occupancy of one mobile home on a temporary, semipermanent, or permanent basis. 
(i)  "Mobile home park" shall mean any area or tract of land, established by permit pursuant to the provisions of Health and Safety Code div. 13, pt. 2.1, containing one or more mobile home lots. "Mobile home park" shall not include a "recreational trailer park," "temporary trailer park," or "travel trailer park" as defined in Health and Safety Code div. 13, pt. 2.1. 
(j)  "Person" shall mean any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture club, society, or individual. 
(k)  "Residential dwelling unit" shall mean a building, or a portion of a building, planned, designed, or used as a residence for one family only living independently of other families or persons and having its own bathroom and housekeeping facilities included in such unit (for example, a one-family dwelling, each unit of a multiple dwelling, and each apartment in an apartment house). 
(§ II, Ord. 665, eff. August 15, 1973)  
Sec. 9-4.03. - Fees. 
(a)  Imposed. A residential development fee is hereby imposed on the privilege of constructing in the City any mobile home lot or residential dwelling unit, and every person to whom a permit to construct any residential dwelling unit in the City is issued, and every person to whom a permit to construct and install electrical and plumbing equipment to service a mobile home lot in a mobile home park in the City is issued, shall pay to the City such tax at the following rates: 
(b)  Schedule. 
(1)  New construction. 
(i)  $75 per each dwelling unit, plus $25 per each bedroom in such dwelling unit; 
(ii)  $125 per each mobile home park lot; and 
(2)  Alterations. $25 per each additional bedroom resulting from the enlargement, expansion, remodeling, or alteration of an existing dwelling unit. 
(§ III, Ord. 665, eff. August 15, 1973)  
Sec. 9-4.04. - Payment of fees. 
The residential development fee required to be paid by the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable at the time a building permit is issued to construct the development, and the amount of fee imposed for the construction of any mobile home lot shall be due and payable at the time a building permit or other appropriate permit is issued to build such mobile home lot. 
(§ IV, Ord. 665, eff. August 15, 1973)  
Sec. 9-4.05. - Refunds. 
Any fee paid to the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for any residential dwelling unit or mobile home lot which is not constructed shall be refunded upon the application of the applicant and a showing to the satisfaction of the Building Official that the building or unit has not been constructed or construction commenced and that the building permit issued for the building or unit has been canceled or surrendered or otherwise does not authorize the construction of the building or unit. 
(§ V, Ord. 665, eff. August 15, 1973)  
Sec. 9-4.06. - Place of payment. 
The residential development fee shall be paid to the Finance Director or his or her authorized agent at the office of the Finance Department. 
(§ VI, Ord. 665, eff. August 15, 1973)  
Sec. 9-4.07. - Exemptions. 
The fees imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  The construction or reconstruction of a residential dwelling unit which was damaged or destroyed by earthquake, fire, flood, or other cause over which the owner had no control (provided that compliance with any Building Code or other ordinance requirement of the City or of any other applicable law shall not be deemed a cause over which the owner has no control), but only if the number of bedrooms in the dwelling unit is increased, then the fee imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall apply to such increased number of bedrooms; 
(b)  The enlargement, expansion, remodeling, and/or alteration of a residential dwelling unit but only if the number of bedrooms therein is not increased. If the number of bedrooms in the residential dwelling unit is increased, then the fee imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall apply to such increased number of bedrooms; and 
(c)  The construction of a dwelling unit or units on all lots within those subdivisions for which a park and recreation development fee was paid pursuant to the provisions of Section 8-2.513 of this Code and on which building permits were issued prior to August 15, 1973; provided, however, in the event a building permit was issued on any such lot prior to August 15, 1973, and construction thereon was not pursued within the time provided for in the Uniform Building Code, or, if once commenced, thereafter was suspended for the period provided for in the Uniform Building Code, resulting in an expiration of such building permit and thereafter requiring the issuance of a new building permit for construction on such lot, such construction on such lot shall not be exempt hereunder but will be subject to the park acquisition and development fee imposed by this chapter to which an appropriate credit will be allowed as provided in subsection (c) of Section 9-4.09 of this chapter. 
(§ VII, Ord. 665, eff. August 15, 1973)  
Sec. 9-4.08. - Use of fees for the acquisition, improvement, and expansion of public park, playground, and recreational facilities. 
All of the residential development fees collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be placed in a special account which is hereby created and established for such purpose. 
Fees collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be used and expended solely for the development, improvement, and/or expansion of existing public park, playground, and recreational facilities; and for the development of any new public park, playground, and recreational facilities constructed or installed within or upon public property owned by the City or upon property in which the City has a leasehold interest or where the City is given a right to use the property for public playground or recreational purposes; and for the acquisition of properties for public park, playground, or recreational facilities. 
(§ VIII, Ord. 665, eff. August 15, 1973)  
Sec. 9-4.09. - Credits. 
(a)  Credit for the dedication of land. The Council may accept the dedication of land for public park and recreation purposes in lieu of the payment of all or some portion of the residential development fee that is due. Land to be dedicated shall be certified by the Planning Commission as meeting the requirements of the Park and Recreation Element of the General Plan of the City. The amount of land to be dedicated, the amount of credit to be given, and the terms and conditions, if any, shall be determined by the Council. 
(b)  Credit for major recreational facilities. When a person's master plan of development allocates space for a major recreational facility to serve three or more residential dwelling units, such as, but not limited to, a swimming pool, tennis court, recreational building or center, recreational facility area, developed open space, or combination of any of the above, such dwelling units may be credited with some portion of the fee otherwise required by the provisions of this chapter but not to exceed 45% of such fee. The size, quality, and design of such facility which will entitle such dwelling units to a credit on the fee otherwise required and the amount of such credit shall be as set forth by resolution of the Council in implementation of the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Credit for the payment of the subdivision acreage fee. A dwelling unit or units for which a building permit was not issued as of August 15, 1973, and for which a unit or units are to be constructed on a lot located within a subdivision for which an acreage fee was paid pursuant to the provisions of Section 8-2.513 of this Code shall be entitled to a pro rata credit on the park acquisition and development fee imposed by this chapter, which credit shall be determined in the following manner: The total acreage fee paid for such subdivision shall be divided by the total lots within such subdivision, and the resulting quotient shall be credited against the fee otherwise required by the provisions of this chapter to the dwelling unit or units to be constructed on that lot. 
(§ IX, Ord. 665, eff. August 15, 1973) 
