CODE OF ORDINANCES OF ALAMOSA, COLORADO 
____________ 
Published 1988 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
  
> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF ALAMOSA, COLORADO 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Farris J. Bervig 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ronald Seybold 
May Pro Tem 
____________ 
Linda Eavenson Foster 
Quentin R. Garcia 
Charles J. Griego 
Leonard R. Smith 
Lynn L. Weldon 
Councilors 
____________ 
Greg L. Sparks 
City Manager 
____________ 
Richard J. Jacobs 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Frances V. Haugen 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Alamosa, Colorado of a general and permanent nature. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1964 Code, as supplemented through 6-4-86, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1964 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 2 is numbered 2-1 and the third section of Chapter 3 is 3-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 4-1 and 4-2 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-1.1, 4-1.2 and 4-1.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 5 and 6, it will be designated as Chapter 5.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Fred MacDonald, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Richard J. Jacobs, City Attorney, Jean Buchanan, former City Clerk, Frances Haugen, City Clerk, and the other members of the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
	Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 7-1988 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Alamosa, Colorado; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; and Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code. 
Be It Ordained by the City Council of Alamosa: 
Section 1. The Code entitled the "Code of Ordinances of Alamosa, Colorado," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 21, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 6, 1988, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a prior ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. The following codes were adopted by reference and incorporated in the Code of the City of Alamosa, Colorado. One (1) copy of this Code is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(1)  The Uniform Building Code, 1985 Edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted and amended in Code Section 4-21, et seq.; 
(2)  Model Energy Efficiency Construction and Renovation Standards for Nonresidential Buildings, 1977 Edition, as published by the State of Colorado, as adopted in Code Section 4-25; 
(3)  The Uniform Plumbing Code, 1982 Edition, including appendices, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, as adopted and amended in Code Section 4-27, et seq.; 
(4)  Energy Conservation Performance Code for New Construction and Renovation of Residential Buildings, 1977 Edition, as published by the State of Colorado, as adopted by Code Section 4-25; 
(5)  The Uniform Mechanical Code, 1982 Edition, including Appendices A, B, and C, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted and amended by Code Section 4-29; 
(6)  The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1982 Edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted in Code Section 4-26; 
(7)  The Uniform Fire Code, 1982 Edition, Articles 1 through 87, and appendices, and the Uniform Fire Code Standards, 1982 Edition, as published by the Western Fire Chief Association and the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted and amended in Code Section 7-1; 
(8)  The Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities, 1977 Edition, Articles I through XXVI, as published by the State of Colorado, Department of Highways, as adopted and amended in Code Section 19-21, et seq. 
Section 5. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code, or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). Each act or violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 6. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 7. Ordinances adopted after April 6, 1988, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
INTRODUCED, READ AND ORDERED PUBLISHED this 17th day of August, 1988, and a public hearing hereon fixed for September 7th, 1988 at 7:00 p.m. 
PASSED, ADOPTED, SIGNED AND APPROVED after public hearing this 7th day of September, 1988. 
	CITY OF ALAMOSA, 
	By /s/ _____
Farris Bervig, Mayor 
ATTEST: 	
/s/ _____
Frances Haugen, City Clerk 	
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances of Alamosa, Colorado," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1964, § 1-1) 
Charter reference— Adoption of codes by reference, Art. I, § 17; ordinance codification, Art. I, § 19. 
State Law reference— Adopting Code of Ordinances, C.R.S. 31-16-201 et seq.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charter. Whenever the word Charter is used in this Code, it shall mean the Charter of the City of Alamosa printed as Part I of this volume. 
City. The word city shall be construed to mean the City of Alamosa. 
City boards, committees, commissions and departments. Whenever reference is made to a board, committee, commission, office or a department, the same shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Alamosa, Colorado." 
City clerk shall mean the City Clerk of the City of Alamosa. 
City manager shall mean the City Manager of the City of Alamosa. 
Code. Whenever the word Code is used it shall mean the Code of the City of Alamosa. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall be counted unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday. When the period prescribed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall not be included in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, C.R.S. Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 6(a). 
Council or city council shall mean the City Council of the City of Alamosa. 
Councilors shall mean the members of the City Council of the City of Alamosa. 
County. The word county shall mean the County of Alamosa. 
C.R.S. Whenever the abbreviation C.R.S. is used, it shall mean the latest revision or edition of the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Highway. The term highway shall include any street, alley, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Mayor shall mean the Mayor of the City of Alamosa. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The word oath shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed. 
Or, and. And may be read or, and or may be read and if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word owner, applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. This term means and shall include and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. This term means and includes every species of property except real property. 
Sidewalk. The word sidewalk shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
State. The word state shall be construed to mean the State of Colorado. 
Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
(Code 1964, § 1-2)  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1964, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
All references to chapters, articles, divisions or sections are to the chapters, articles, divisions and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-5. - References and editor's notes. 
The references and editor's notes appearing throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to assist the user of the Code.  
Sec. 1-6. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money to the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinances providing for the levy of taxes or for adopting an annual budget; 
(8)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor; 
(9)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or amending personnel rules or regulations; 
(12)  Ordinances prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, such as ordinances establishing speed limits or designating one-way streets, no parking areas, truck routes, stop intersections where traffic to be controlled by signals, etc.; 
(13)  Any ordinance establishing or amending the zoning ordinance or land use regulations or the zoning map or rezoning property; 
(14)  Any ordinance calling municipal elections or prescribing the manner of conducting the election in accordance with state law; 
(15)  Any ordinance prescribing any fee or payment of money to the city; 
(16)  Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification, benefits or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith; 
(17)  Any ordinance which is temporary although general in effect; 
(18)  Any ordinance which is special although permanent in effect; 
(19)  Any ordinance containing any administrative provisions; 
(20)  Ordinance number 11, 1982 authorizing the city to enter into an intergovernmental agreement with certain entities for a comprehensive community recreation program; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office.  
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of an ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed.  
Sec. 1-9. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code.  
Sec. 1-10. - Additions and amendments deemed incorporated in Code. 
Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated herein, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.  
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: 
"Section _____ of the Code of Ordinances of Alamosa, Colorado is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "The Code of Ordinances of Alamosa, Colorado is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows: …." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be.  
Sec. 1-12. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.  
Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-14. - Copies of Code on file. 
At least three (3) copies of this Code shall be kept in the office of the city clerk at all times, and may be inspected by any interested person at any time during regular office hours, but may not be removed from the city clerk's office except upon proper order of a court of law. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, C.R.S. 31-16-206.  
Sec. 1-15. - Sale of Code copies. 
The city clerk shall maintain a reasonable supply of copies of this Code to be available for purchase by the public upon the payment of a fee to be set by the city clerk. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, C.R.S. 31-16-206.  
Sec. 1-16. - Codes adopted by reference. 
At least three (3) copies of each code adopted by reference as they were adopted shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk available for public inspection. One (1) copy of each such code may be kept in the office of the chief enforcement officer thereof rather than in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference— Uniform Building Code adopted, § 4-21; adoption of the Uniform Mechanical Code, § 4-29; adoption of the Uniform Plumbing Code, § 4-27; International Property Maintenance Code adopted, § 4-26; state model energy efficiency standards adopted, § 4-25; Uniform Fire Code adopted, § 7-1; Model Traffic Code adopted, § 19-21. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, C.R.S. 31-16-206.  
Sec. 1-17. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor either in the Code or ordinance, or in the schedule of fines duly adopted by the court, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance by shall be punished by a fine or, except as set forth below concerning offenses that carry the possibility of jail, imprisonment, or both, at the discretion of the municipal court in accordance with state law establishing penalties for adults, and juveniles. A sentence for any offense under this Code, whether treated as a jailable or non-jailable offense, may include an order for restitution. 
Unless distinct and separate violations can be otherwise established, each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense. A violation for only part of a day shall be deemed a violation for that day. The term of imprisonment for any violation of municipal ordinance for which incarceration is a possibility shall not exceed three hundred sixty-four (364) days. 
(Code 1964, § 1-4; Ord. No. 7-1997, § 1, 5-7-97; Ord. No. 11-2001, § 1, 12-19-01; Ord. No. 1-2018 , § 1, 2-7-18) 
State Law reference— Limitation on penalties, C.R.S. 13-10-113, 13-16-101.  
Sec. 1-18. - Decriminalization of certain municipal offenses. 
(a)  Traffic code. When an act or omission is charged as a violation of a provision of the municipal code, and the act or omission proscribed in said code also would constitute a criminal violation of the state traffic code, such act or omission shall be deemed to be a jailable offense in Alamosa Municipal Court. All other traffic violations are non-jailable offenses. The municipal code violation shall not be subject to the same sentencing guidelines as set forth in state statute for violation of the corresponding state traffic code provision, and the municipal court shall impose such sentence as it deems appropriate, consistent with the jurisdictional limits of the municipal court and the provisions of section 1-17 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Alamosa, irrespective of any sentencing guidelines applicable to the corresponding state statute or code. 
(b)  Other violations not jailable; option of the prosecutor. Except for the particular offenses set forth in subsection (c), below, any violation of a municipal ordinance regarding an act or omission which is not covered by the state traffic code as a criminal offense shall be treated as a non-jailable offense, unless and until a defendant has three (3) or more convictions of the same or related municipal code provision within two (2) years. If the offense is for a fourth or more violation of the same or related municipal code provision within two (2) years (where violations shall be counted as one (1) violation for conviction on one (1) or more counts related to a single episode) the offense shall be treated as a jailable offense unless the prosecutor upon written motion to the court elects to treat the offense as a non-jailable offense. If a motion to proceed as a non-jailable offense is allowed, the court shall not appoint counsel. If counsel has already been appointed, the court shall revoke the appointment. A person complained of for such non-jailable offense shall be adjudicated responsible upon such finding by the court and shall not be sentenced to any term of incarceration. Non-jailable offenses shall be subject to the procedures in municipal court as delineated in subsection (e) below. 
(c)  Certain provisions carry jail possibility on first offense. The following ordinances as set forth in the Alamosa Code of Ordinances are exempt from treatment as non-jailable offenses set forth in subsection (b), above, and shall be treated as jailable offenses (references prefaced with "MTC" are to the cited provision of the Model Traffic Code adopted by the City of Alamosa through Code § 19-21 et seq.): 
3-72: 	Poisoning of animal 
11-22: 	Resisting/obstructing 
11:24: 	Impersonating a police officer 
11-25: 	False reporting 
11-26: 	Violation of a restraining order 
11-41: 	Disturbing a religious meeting 
11-42: 	Disturbing a lawful assemblage 
11-46: 	Interference with an educational institution 
11-47: 	Rioting prohibited 
11-61: 	Assault 
11-63: 	Reckless endangerment 
11-117: 	Carrying weapons with intent to assault 
11-119: 	Unlawful possession of deadly weapons 
MTC 1101: 	Speeding forty (40) mph over speed limit 
MTC 1105(1): 	Speed contest 
MTC 1401: 	Reckless driving 
MTC 1402(2): 	Careless driving causing bodily injury 
MTC 1413: 	Eluding or attempting to elude a police officer 
 
(d)  Jailable offenses, option of the prosecutor. Notwithstanding the classification of ordinance violations as non-jailable set forth in subsection (b) above, the municipal prosecutor may file a written motion to the court requesting that the court treat the violation of a municipal ordinance as a jailable offense, subject to possible incarceration. The written motion shall state the reasons for such request, and shall be made within seven (7) days of a defendant's first appearance before the court. Upon granting of any such motion to proceed criminally, the court shall appoint counsel for the defendant if such appointment is warranted. A sentence for a jailable offense hereunder may include an order of restitution. 
(e)  Non-jailable violations. Non-jailable violations are subject to the following procedures applicable to administration and prosecution of alleged municipal code violations generally, subject, however, to the following delineation of additional or limiting procedures: 
(1)  The right of law enforcement to detain a suspect for non-criminal traffic infraction or for a non-jailable offense, as defined in the municipal code, is limited to identification and citation; arrest shall not be an alternative. 
(2)  No jail penalty may be imposed for a violation of a provision of the municipal code which is treated as a non-jailable offense. The conviction of a violation of the municipal code as a non-jailable offense shall not serve as the basis for revocation of parole or of a probation surrender. 
(3)  The court shall not issue a warrant for failure to pay money, failure to appear to pay money, or failure to appear at any post-sentencing court appearance wherein the defendant was required to appear if he or she failed to pay a monetary amount. The court may issue an arrest warrant or incarcerate a defendant related to his or her failure to pay a monetary amount only through the procedures described in C.R.S. § 18-1.3-702, as that statute may be amended from time to time. 
(4)  No accused shall have the right to trial by jury for an alleged violation of a provision of the municipal code which is defined to be a non-jailable offense. 
(5)  A sentence for a non-jailable offense hereunder may include an order of restitution. 
(Ord. No. 04-2006, § 1, 7-5-06; Ord. No. 11, 2014, § 1, 9-17-14 ; Ord. No. 1-2018 , § 2, 2-7-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11, 2014, § 1, adopted September 17, 2014 , amended § 1-18 to read as set out herein. Previously § 1-18 was titled decriminalization of municipal offenses; limitations; consequences.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Designation of members of boards and commissions as officers, art. II, § 1; qualifications for appointment, art. II, § 5; personnel board, art. XIII, § 3; planning commission, art. XIV, § 1; parks and recreation advisory board, art. XVI, § 2; library board, art. XVII, § 1; additional advisory boards, art. XXII, § 1. 
Cross reference— Quantity of animals restricted, § 3-5; disaster emergency council created, § 6-1; elections, Ch. 5; emergency management, Ch. 6; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10; personnel, Ch. 15; taxation, Ch. 18; utilities, Ch. 20; board of adjustment, § 21-51 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - City seal. 
The corporate seal of the city shall consist of the words "City of Alamosa, State of Colorado," arranged between two (2) concentric circles, with the word "Seal" in the center, all of which shall be engraved upon metallic disc which shall be used to impress the same upon all documents requiring the seal of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 2-1)  
Secs. 2-2—2-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Form of government, art. I, § 3; city council, art. III; elections, art VIII; initiative and referendum, art. XI; recall of elected officers, art. XII. 
Cross reference— Elections, Ch. 5; emergency management, Ch. 6; nominating petition for nomination of candidates for city council, § 5-3; amendment procedure for the zoning ordinance, § 21-71 et seq.; flammable liquid storage tanks prohibited in public streets, etc., except by special permission of city council, § 11-36(b). 
 
Sec. 2-16. - To retain final responsibility. 
The council shall be the body of final responsibility in all matters affecting the city, and shall have all powers and shall be subject to responsibilities and limitations which may now or hereafter be granted or imposed by law. 
(Code 1964, § 2-14)  
Sec. 2-17. - Rules and order of business. 
The following are the rules and order of business of the city council: 
(1)  Rule 1: Meetings. Two (2) regular meetings of the city council shall be held during each month, such meetings to be held on the first and third Wednesdays of each month at the city hall at the hour of 7:00 p.m., provided that the city council may by resolution at any time change the time and place of any such meeting. The city council may by resolution cancel any regular meeting at which it knows beforehand that a quorum will not be present. The city council may set special meetings by motion at any meeting, and the mayor or any three (3) members of the city council may call special meetings by written notice to each of the members of the city council, such notice to be e-mailed, with read receipt requested, served in person, or left at the usual place of business of each member, if served during business hours, or at the residence of each member if not served during business hours, at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the time set for such meeting. Before calling such special meeting, the person(s) calling the meeting shall attempt to coordinate scheduling with all council members. Any regular or special meeting may be adjourned by majority vote of those present to any other time or place. 
(2)  Rule 2: Quorum. At all meetings of the city council a majority of the whole number of members elected shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Absent members not excused by the councilors may be fined. 
(3)  Rule 3: Suspension of rules. The rules of procedure and order of business shall be strictly adhered to by the city council, unless they shall be temporarily suspended by a majority vote of the members present, but the failure to observe any of the requirements of this section shall not be held to invalidate any acts, orders, ordinances or resolutions of the city council that otherwise might be lawful. 
(4)  Rule 4: Mayor. The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the city council. 
(5)  Repealed. 
(6)  Rule 6: Ordinances. All ordinances shall be presented in writing and shall be introduced, published, passed and recorded as is now or may hereafter be required by law. 
(7)  Rule 7: Petitions. All petitions, memorials and remonstrances to the council, shall be in writing, and shall be addressed "To the Honorable Mayor and City Council of the City of Alamosa, State of Colorado." 
(8)  Rule 8: Bills. All bills shall be itemized, dated and verified and shall be approved by the director of finance before being passed by the city council. 
(9)  Rule 9: Yeas and nays. Each member present shall vote upon every question put by the chair, unless excused by council. The yeas and nays may be called for by any member, in which case the names of the members, with their votes, shall be recorded on the minutes. 
(10)  Rule 10: Appointment to office. Council appointments to office shall be by ballot, and a majority of all the members elected to the council shall be necessary. The names of those who voted and the vote for each candidate shall be recorded. 
(Code 1964, § 2-6; Ord. No. 4-2001, § 1, 4-4-01; Ord. No. 8-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17) 
Charter reference— City council shall establish regular or special meetings, dates, etc., by ordinance, art. III, § 9; mayor shall preside at meetings, mayor pro-tempore, art. II, § 1.  
Sec. 2-18. - Consent calendar established for council; procedures. 
(a)  When the city manager determines that any item of business requires action by the council, but is of a routine and noncontroversial nature, the city manager may cause such item to be presented at a regular meeting of the council as part of a consent calendar. 
(b)  The consent calendar shall be introduced by a motion, "To approve the consent calendar," and shall be considered by the council as a single item. 
(c)  There shall be no debate or discussion by any member of the council regarding any item on the consent calendar, beyond asking questions for simple clarification. 
(d)  All items on the consent calendar which require public hearing shall be open for hearing simultaneously and the mayor shall announce, or direct the city clerk to announce, the titles of all such items. 
(e)  On objection by any member of the city council to inclusion of any item on the consent calendar, that item shall be removed from the consent calendar forthwith. Such objection may be recorded at any time prior to the taking of a vote on the motion to approve the consent calendar. All such items shall be considered individually, in the order in which they were objected to, immediately following consideration of the consent calendar. 
(f)  Approval of the motion to approve the consent calendar shall be fully equivalent to approval, adoption or enactment of each motion, resolution, ordinance or other item of business thereon, exactly as if each had been acted upon individually. 
(Code 1964, § 2-6.1; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § A1, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 2-19. - Mayor pro tem, appointment. 
The city council shall at the time of the appointment of other city officers, appoint one (1) of their own number mayor pro tem, who shall be entitled to act as mayor in case the mayor is absent from the city or is, for any reason, temporarily unable to perform the duties of office. 
(Code 1964, § 2-29.1; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § A2, 10-3-18) 
Charter reference— Similar provision, art. III, § 1.  
Secs. 2-20—2-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— City clerk, art. III, § 5; bonding of employees, art. III, § 8; city manager, art. IV; director of finance, art. V, part A, §§ 1, 2; municipal judge, art. VI, § 2; city attorney, art. VII; personnel director, art. XIII, §§ 1, 2; public works director, art. XV, § 1; parks and recreation director, art. XVI, § 1; fire chief, art. XVIII; chief of police, art. XIX, § 1; department of aviation, art. XXI, § 1; discharge of employees, art. XXII, § 5; creation of departments, art. III, § 22; creation of divisions, art. IV, § 5; department of municipal public utilities, art. X; department of personnel, art. XIII; department of parks and recreation, art. XVI; fire department, art. XVIII; police department, art. XIX. 
Cross reference— Municipal court, Ch. 13; personnel, Ch. 15; animal control enforcement personnel, § 3-8; gas inspectors appointed, § 4-46; fire department, § 7-16 et seq.; municipal judge, § 13-1. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-36. - City attorney and municipal judge duties as prescribed. 
The city attorney and the municipal judge shall be appointed by the city council, and shall perform such duties as are imposed by law or ordinance, or assigned by the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 2-15) 
Cross reference— Municipal judge, § 13-1 et seq.; powers and duties of the city attorney generally, § 2-51.  
Sec. 2-37. - Ordinance enforcement officers. 
The city may employ and authorize persons other than police officers to enforce the provisions of the Code except: 
(1)  The provisions of Chapter 11 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Alamosa, Colorado; and 
(2)  Model Traffic Code of Colorado Municipalities, as adopted in Alamosa, Colorado, except this limitation shall not apply to Parts 8 or 12 thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 2-33.1; Ord. No. 9-1997, § 1, 6-18-97; Ord. No. 12-2005, § 1, 7-20-05)  
Sec. 2-38. - Prohibited gifts to city officials. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Board or commission member shall mean any person duly appointed by the council to any board or commission of the city as authorized in the City Charter or Code of Ordinances of the City of Alamosa. 
City official shall mean a councilmember, an employee or a board or commission member. 
Councilmember shall mean a member of the city council. 
Employee shall mean each compensated person in the service of the city who is designated as an employee in the city's personnel rules and regulations, but shall not include any person providing services for the city who is considered for federal income tax purposes to be an independent contractor. 
Gift shall mean the transfer of a thing of value by one (1) person to another person without the person transferring the thing of value receiving in return lawful compensation or consideration of equal or greater value from the person receiving the thing of value. However, a "gift" shall not mean anything of value given to a person by a local, state or the federal government as authorized by law. 
Person shall mean any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, limited liability company, partnership, labor organization, association, political party, committee, or other legal entity. 
Professional lobbyist means any individual who engages himself or herself or is engaged by any other person for pay or for any consideration for lobbying. "Professional lobbyist" does not include any volunteer lobbyist, any state official or employee acting in his or her official capacity, except those designated as lobbyists as provided by law, any elected public official acting in his or her official capacity, or any individual who appears as counsel or advisor in an adjudicatory proceeding. 
Thing of value shall mean any tangible or intangible item having a market value, including, without limitation, money, real property, personal property, services, loans of money or property, favors, gratuities, rewards, awards, grants, scholarships, discounts, promises of future employment, honoraria, event tickets, travel, lodging, meals, and the forbearance and forgiveness of debt. 
(b)  Prohibited gifts. 
(1)  Unless permitted under subsection (c) of this section 2-38, a city official shall not solicit or accept any gift from any person either directly or indirectly through the city official's spouse or dependent child, which gift the city official knows or which a reasonable person in the city official's position should know under the circumstances, is either: 
a.  A gift that would tend to improperly influence that city official to depart from the faithful and impartial discharge of his or her public duties; or 
b.  A gift being solicited or given for the primary purpose of rewarding the city official for an official action he or she has taken. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section to the contrary, and excepting campaign contributions as defined by law, no professional lobbyist, personally or on behalf of any other person or entity, shall knowingly offer, give, or arrange to give, to any city official, or to any city official's spouse or dependent child, any gift or thing of value, of any kind or nature, nor knowingly pay for any meal, beverage, or other item to be consumed by such city official, whether or not such gift or meal, beverage or other item to be consumed is offered, given or paid for in the course of such lobbyist's business or in connection with a personal or social event; provided, however, that a professional lobbyist shall not be prohibited from offering or giving to a city official who is a member of the professional lobbyist's immediate family any such gift, thing of value, meal, beverage or other item. 
(c)  Permitted gifts. The gift prohibitions of subsection (b) of this section 2-38 shall not apply to city officials with respect to the following permitted gifts: 
(1)  Campaign contributions as authorized by law; 
(2)  A non-monetary award, publicly presented, in recognition of public service; 
(3)  Gifts similarly available to the general public; 
(4)  Educational scholarships and grants available to members of the general public similarly situated; 
(5)  Grants and services provided for medical, respite or hospice care or other social welfare needs available to members of the general public similarly situated; 
(6)  An occasional, unsolicited gift having a fair market value of sixty-five dollars ($65.00) or less; 
(7)  Unsolicited informational material, publications or subscriptions related to the city official's performance or his or her official duties; 
(8)  An unsolicited token or award of appreciation in the form of a plaque, trophy, desk item, wall memento, or similar item; 
(9)  Payment of or reimbursement for actual and necessary expenditures for registration, travel, lodging and meals for attendance at a convention, training seminar, or other meeting at which the city official is scheduled to participate as a representative of the city or to attend as part of his or her official duties; 
(10)  An occasional, unsolicited opportunity to participate in a business meeting or social function where a meal is served and/or entertainment is provided if the city official's attendance would not be considered extraordinary when viewed in light of the position held by the city official; 
(11)  Payment received by a councilmember for a speech, appearance or publication required to be reported by the councilmember pursuant to C.R.S. 24-6-203; 
(12)  Gifts received by a councilmember or a board or commission member arising from his or her employment and that is unrelated to his or her official city duties; and 
(13)  Gifts received by an employee from the city as authorized in the city's personnel rules and regulations, and any gifts received by an employee arising from his or her non-city employment and that is unrelated to his or her official city duties. 
(d)  Violations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any city official or professional lobbyist to violate any provision of this chapter. Proof of a violation must be established beyond a reasonable doubt as shown by the evidence presented at trial. 
(2)  Any city official determined to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine, imprisonment, or both, consistent with state law. The minimum fine imposed shall be in the amount of twice the fair market value of the prohibited gift received, up to the maximum jurisdictional limit of the municipal court as set by state law. If the city official fails to pay the fine within thirty (30) days of the entry of the final judgment, the city may pursue any legal means available to it for the collection of the judgment. 
(Ord. No. 11, 2007, § 1, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 1-2018 , § 3, 2-7-18; Ord. No. 6-2019 , § 1, 3-20-19)  
Secs. 2-39—2-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY ATTORNEY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— City attorney, art. VII. 
 
Sec. 2-51. - City attorney. 
In addition to those duties listed in the Charter, art. VII, the city attorney is authorized to make all necessary affidavits, execute all bonds and other instruments in writing necessary to the proper conduct of any action, suit or proceeding to which the city may be a party, and to take and prosecute appeals in all cases in which the interests of the city demand such action. The city attorney shall draft all contracts and other instruments of writing necessary to the conduct of regular city business. The city attorney shall attend such meetings of the city council, and its committees, as they may direct and the city attorney shall have the right to be heard upon all questions or motions before the city council amending, repealing or in any manner affecting any ordinances in force, or to be enacted by the city council, when the legality of any such proposed action shall be called into question. The city attorney shall be subject to the direction of the city council in the prosecution of all duties as city attorney. 
(Code 1964, § 2-33; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § A3, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 2-52. - Bond required. 
In addition to taking the oath of office, the city attorney shall, before assuming the duties of office, give bond to the city, with good and sufficient sureties, to be approved by the city council, conditioned that the city attorney will faithfully and honestly discharge the duties of office as required by the ordinances of the city, and that at the end of said term of office the city attorney will surrender all monies, books, papers or other property belonging to the city, in good order, which bond shall be at once filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1964, § 2-33; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § A4, 10-3-18) 
Cross reference— City attorney shall perform such duties as are assigned to him, § 2-36.  
Secs. 2-53—2-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— City clerk, art. III, § 5. 
 
Sec. 2-66. - Clerk. 
In addition to the duties prescribed in the Charter, art. III, § 1, the city clerk shall have custody of the seal of the city and of all laws, ordinances, papers and records of the city and of such other papers and documents as may be delivered into his or her custody, and shall not permit any of such papers or records to be removed from the clerk's office without the written consent of the mayor. The city clerk shall have all ordinances duly published, requiring and preserving proof of the same, and shall properly file and preserve the same. The city clerk shall countersign all contracts and instruments of, and concerning the business of the city. The city clerk shall have such powers and perform such duties as are now or may hereafter be prescribed by law or ordinance, and shall perform such other duties as the city council shall direct. 
(Code 1964, § 2-31; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § A5, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 2-67. - Deputy city clerk, appointment. 
The city clerk shall have the power to appoint one (1) or more deputy city clerks to assist the city clerk in his or her duties, being under the direction of the city clerk. 
(Code 1964, § 2-30.2; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § A6, 10-3-18)  
Secs. 2-68—2-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CITY MANAGER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— City manager, art. IV, § 1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-81. - Chief administrative officer, powers and duties as prescribed. 
In addition to the duties prescribed in the Charter, art. IV, the city manager shall be responsible solely to the city council for all affairs placed in the city manager's charge. The city manager shall have all the rights and authority, and be subject to all responsibilities and have the duties which may now or hereafter be granted or imposed by law, or by the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 2-16; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § A7, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 2-82. - Supervisory control. 
All departments of the city, save and except the city attorney, municipal judge and municipal library shall be under the direct control and supervision of the city manager, who shall have the exclusive power to appoint and remove all officers and employees of such city departments, except the city attorney, municipal judge and library employees. All appointments, employments, promotions, demotions and dismissals of officers and employees shall be made by the city manager and not by the city council as provided by Charter, art. IV, § 2(a), but upon the same terms and conditions and subject to the same limitations and procedures as therein set forth. 
(Code 1964, § 2-17)  
Sec. 2-83. - Authority for promoting efficiency. 
The city manager is hereby granted the authority to establish such methods of handling details of administration as will in his or her opinion best promote efficiency in the municipal government. 
(Code 1964, § 2-18; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § A8, 10-3-18)  
Secs. 2-84—2-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— Finance director, art. V, Part A. 
Cross reference— Financial matters, § 2-117; taxation, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 2-101. - Created. 
(a)  The director of finance shall give a bond to the city with good and sufficient sureties, to be approved by a vote of the city council, in the sum approved by the city council and conditioned for the performance of said duties so long as the director shall serve and that when the director shall vacate such office, will turn to over and deliver successors all monies, books, papers and property or things belonging to such city and remaining in his or her charge as director of finance. The bond shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The director of finance shall receive all monies belonging to the city and shall use the generally accepted accounting standards in keeping the books and such books and accounts shall always be subject to the inspection of the mayor or any member of the city council. 
(c)  The director of finance shall be required to keep all funds belonging to the city on deposit in the name of the city in depositories or investment corporations according to the city's current investment policy or as expressly provided by law. 
(d)  The director of finance shall have such other and further powers, duties and liabilities as are now or may be hereafter prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(e)  If at any time during the term of office of the director of finance, the surety on such bond shall from any cause become impaired and the director of finance shall be notified by the city council to give additional security and make such bond good and sufficient, it shall be the duty of the director of finance to furnish the same forthwith, and failure or neglect to do so shall be sufficient cause for his or her removal from office in the manner prescribed for the removal of officers by ordinance. 
(f)  The director of finance shall keep the account of each fund separate and distinct from each other, charging each fund with all payments and crediting it with all monies received on account thereof. 
(g)  The director of finance shall at the close of each fiscal year conduct a full and complete audit. 
(h)  The director of finance shall do and perform such other duties as may be required by ordinance, resolution or order of the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 2-32; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § A9, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 2-102. - Director of finance, appointment. 
The office of director of finance shall be separate and distinct from the office of city clerk, and the position of director of finance shall be filled by a person other than the city clerk. 
(Code 1964, § 2-30) 
Charter reference— City clerk to be finance officer unless otherwise determined by ordinance, art. V, Part A, § 1.  
Sec. 2-103—2-116. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL MATTERS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Finance administration, art. V; fiscal year, art. V, Part B, § 1. 
Cross reference— Director of finance, § 2-101 et seq.; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10; taxation, Ch. 18; utilities, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Local Government Uniform Accounting Law, C.R.S. 29-1-501 et seq.; Local Government Audit Law, C.R.S. 29-1-601 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-117. - Service charge on checks or bank drafts returned to city unpaid. 
There is hereby imposed a service charge in the amount to be determined by resolution of the city council and until changed by resolution in the amount of twelve dollars ($12.00) upon each payment made by any person by check or other bank draft to the city or any department thereof which is returned to the city unpaid by the drawee. Such service charge shall be added to the amount of the account, penalty, fee, charge or other obligation for which the check or draft was tendered as payment. 
(Code 1964, § 2-23.1)  
Secs. 2-118—2-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference— Planning and zoning, art. XIV; planning commission created, art. XIV, § 1; planning commission, power to prepare master plan, art. XIV, § 1. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; subdivisions, Ch. 17; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 20; zoning, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Planning and zoning, C.R.S. 31-23-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-131. - Adopted. 
The regulations adopted by ordinance, known as the "Comprehensive Plan of the City of Alamosa, are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1964, § 2-42)  
ARTICLE VI. - PURCHASING AND CONTRACTING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-132. - Procurement application. 
This article shall apply to the procurement of all materials, supplies and equipment required or used by all departments and agencies of the city, including businesses and enterprises operated by the city, whether used in the construction of city improvements or otherwise, irrespective of the source of the funds, excepting only donations, the procurement of legal and litigation services, auditing and accounting services, computer services, musical, dramatic and other fine arts performances and services or activities subject to contracts between the city and other governmental bodies. When any procurement involves the expenditure of federal or state funds, the procurement shall be conducted in accordance with any mandatory federal or state laws or regulations. This article does not create or confer any right or entitlement upon any person to bid on or receive an award of any city contract. Although services are exempted from the bidding process, in article V, Pt. D, section 6 of the Charter of the City of Alamosa, Colorado, when the procurement of particular services are submitted to the bidding process, this article shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-133. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in public purchasing by the city, to maximize the purchasing value of public funds, to codify and standardize the city's purchasing procedures for the orderly and efficient administration thereof, to provide safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity and to foster effective, broad-based competition within the free enterprise system. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-134. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Authorized purchaser shall mean any department head or such department head's designee making purchases pursuant to section 2-182(a)(1) or 2-182(a)(3) of this Code. 
Brand name shall mean a specification, limited to one (1) or more items, by manufacturers' names or catalog numbers. 
Change order shall mean any written modification to an existing contract authorizing changes within the scope of work, additions or deletions to the work or an adjustment to any other provision of the contract. 
Confidential information shall mean information which is available to an employee only because of the employee's status as an employee of the city and which is not a matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request. 
Construction shall mean the process of building, improving, altering or demolishing improvements. Construction shall not include the operation, repair or maintenance of improvements. 
Contract shall mean any agreement enforceable by law between the city and one (1) or more outside parties, regardless of form or title, for the procurement of materials, services or construction. 
Cost data shall mean factual information concerning the cost of labor, material, overhead and other cost elements which are expected to be incurred or which have been actually incurred by the contractor in performing the contract. 
Improvements shall mean any structure, building, street, utility or other valuable addition to real property amounting to more than mere repairs or partial replacement and intended to enhance its value or utility or to adapt it for new or further purposes. 
Invitation for bids shall mean all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting bids. 
Legal services shall mean the advice, representation, document preparation or related services of an attorney, as special counsel, provided to the city upon the request of the city council. 
Litigation services shall mean professional or other services procured by the city council for the purpose of evaluating, preparing, providing or presenting evidence at the trial of any lawsuit to which the city is a party. Litigation services shall not include legal services. 
Maintenance shall mean acts of repair, replacement or other acts necessary to keep any improvements or personal property in proper condition and good working order, to prevent decline in, failure or cessation of the existing condition of the improvement or personal property or to restore any improvement to its original condition after partial failure or destruction. This term shall not include improvements. 
Materials shall mean all personal property, including but not limited to supplies, equipment, parts, printing and insurance; excluding, however, leases of a permanent interest in real property, securities and financial paper and water and water rights, whether represented by shares of stock in ditch and irrigation companies, or otherwise. 
Price data shall mean factual information concerning prices for items substantially similar to those being procured. "Prices" as used in this definition shall refer to offered or proposed selling prices, historical selling prices and current selling prices. 
Procurement shall mean the purchasing, renting, leasing or other acquisition of any materials, services, professional services or construction. It shall also include all functions that pertain to obtaining any material, service or construction, including the description of requirements, the selection and solicitation of sources and the preparation and award of contract. Procurement shall not include the buying, purchasing, renting or leasing of real property. 
Professional services shall mean the furnishing of labor, time, effort or expertise by a contractor with specialized knowledge in a field, including but not limited to architecture, engineering, medicine, finance, accounting (including auditing), appraisal and land surveying. 
Public notice shall mean any publication reasonably calculated to inform responsible bidders or offerors. Public notice shall occur for a reasonable time and may be disseminated through any means of mass communication, including but not limited to newspapers, other written publications, posting, television, radio, other broadcasting media and electronic billboards. 
Purchasing agent shall include not only the city's agent who is designated by ordinance or charter to fill said role, but also shall include the substitute or assistant purchasing agent who may be designated, from to time, by the purchasing agent or by the city manager or city council, where permitted. 
Request for proposals shall mean all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals. 
Responsible bidder or offeror shall mean a person who meets the criteria specified in section 2-181 of this article and who has the capability in all respects to perform fully the contract requirements including, but not limited to the knowledge, experience, integrity, reliability, capacity, facilities, equipment, insurance and credit which will ensure good-faith, competent, effective, and efficient performance. 
Responsive bidder shall mean a person whose bid or offer conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids or request for proposals. 
Services shall mean the performance of maintenance or the furnishing of labor, time or effort which does not involve the delivery of a specific end product other than a report or other item which is merely incidental to the performance of the service. "Services" shall not include services rendered under an employment agreement nor shall it include professional services as that term is defined in this Section. 
Specification shall mean any description of the physical or functional characteristics of or the nature of the material, service or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing or preparing a material, service or construction item for delivery or a procedure for determining whether the requirements are satisfied. 
Using agency shall mean any department, division, board or commission of the city requiring supplies, professional services, services or construction procured pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92; Ord. No. 23-2018 , § 1, 8-1-18)  
Sec. 2-135. - Authority and duties of purchasing agent. 
(a)  The purchasing agent shall serve as the public purchasing official for the city, and shall be responsible for the procurement of all materials, services, professional services and construction for the city which are governed by the terms of this article. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided in this article, the purchasing agent may establish purchasing procedures consistent with this article upon the written approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-136. - Procurement contrary to this article. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any city officer or employee to order a procurement contrary to the provisions of this article. Any procurement or contract so made shall be void and wholly without effect and shall not be binding upon the city in any matter. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Secs. 2-137—2-157. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 2-158. - Intent. 
All specifications, including but not limited to design, performance and brand name specifications, shall be drafted so as to provide a clear and concise description of the material, service or construction desired. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-159. - Preparation. 
Before any procurement, the purchasing agent shall cause to be prepared written specifications detailing the city's requirements for the materials, service or construction. The purchasing agent may request other departments or agencies of the city to prepare specifications or procurements to be made primarily for such department or agency. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-160. - Approval. 
(a)  Specifications, prepared primarily for a procurement for a specific department or agency of the city shall be approved by both the purchasing agent and the head of the using agency before being submitted for bid. 
(b)  If the purchasing agent and head of the using agency cannot agree, the matter shall be referred to the city manager for final approval. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-161. - Brand name specification. 
(a)  A brand name specification may be used when the purchasing agent has determined that sufficient sources for competition exist for the procurement of the material and that the use of the brand name specification is not intended to limit or restrict competition. 
(b)  A brand name specification may also be used to describe the standard of quality, performance and other salient characteristics of a material in lieu of a description of its physical or functional characteristics. In such cases, the solicitation shall contain explanatory language that the use of a brand name is for the purpose of describing the standard desired and that the substitution of equivalent materials is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Secs. 2-162—2-177. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONTRACT FORMATION AND AWARD 
 
Sec. 2-178. - Methods of source selection. 
All procurements subject to the terms of this article shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding pursuant to section 2-179, except as provided in: 
(1)  Section 2-180 concerning awards by competitive proposals; and 
(2)  Section 2-182 concerning awards authorized by negotiation or prior competitive bid. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-179. - Competitive sealed bidding. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of section 2-184(e) of this chapter, procurements accomplished pursuant to this section shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder after competitive sealed bidding. 
(b)  An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include specifications and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. 
(c)  Public notice shall be given and shall include the bid title, place, date and time of bid opening. 
(d)  All bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid and such other relevant information as the purchasing agent deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder, shall be recorded. Thereafter, the record of bids and each bid shall be available for public inspection in the office of the purchasing agent in the same manner as are other public records. In the event of good cause as determined by the purchasing agent bid openings may be postponed. 
(e)  Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in subparagraph (g) of this section. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria and/or processes for determining acceptability, such as inspection, provision of sample materials, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for a particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price shall be objectively measurable, such as discounts, transportation costs and total or life cycle costs. The invitation for bids shall set forth all evaluation criteria to be used. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation that are not set forth in the invitation for bids. 
(f)  Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, may be authorized when deemed appropriate by the purchasing agent. 
(1)  Mistakes discovered before bid opening may be corrected or withdrawn in writing by the bidder. Any such corrections or notices of withdrawal must be received in the office designated in the invitation for bids prior to the time set for bid opening. 
(2)  After bid opening, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  A low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted by the purchasing agent to correct its bid if the mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document and the intended correct bid is similarly evident. 
b.  A low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted by the purchasing agent to withdraw its bid: 
(i)  if the mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident, or 
(ii)  if the mistake is not clearly evident on the face of the bid but the bidder submits evidence to the purchasing agent which clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made non-negligently by the bidder, its agents, subcontractors, and employees, in which case the bidder must show the nature of the mistake and the bid price actually intended but inadvertently misstated. 
(3)  No changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interests of the city or fair competition shall be permitted. 
(4)  All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes shall be supported by a written determination made by the purchasing agent. 
(g)  The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by written notice to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. If the lowest responsive and responsible bid exceeds budgeted funds and either time constraints or economic considerations preclude resolicitation of work of a reduced scope, the purchasing agent is authorized to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price with the lowest responsive and responsible bidder or to modify the scope of work, so as to bring the bid within the amount of available funds. 
(h)  When it is considered impractical to initially prepare a specification to support an award based on price, an invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those bidders whose offers have been determined to be technically acceptable under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92; Ord. No. 11-1995, § 2, 8-16-95)  
Sec. 2-180. - Competitive sealed proposals. 
(a)  Procurements for the following are eligible for award by competitive sealed proposals: 
(1)  For materials and services when the purchasing agent determines in writing that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city; and 
(2)  For professional services. 
(b)  Procurement accomplished pursuant to this section shall be solicited through a request for proposals. 
(c)  Public notice shall be given and shall include the proposal title, place, date and time of proposal opening. 
(d)  Proposals shall be opened so as to avoid disclosure of contents to competing offerors during the process of negotiation. A register of proposals shall be maintained containing the name of each offeror and shall be open for public inspection after the award of the contract in the office of the purchasing agent in the same manner as are other public records. 
(e)  The request for proposals shall state evaluation factors and their relative importance. 
(f)  After proposal opening, interviews may be conducted with the highest ranked responsible offeror or offerors for the purpose of clarification and to assure full understanding of, and responsiveness to, solicitation requirements. Offerors selected by interview shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals. Revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award in order to reflect clarifications in the proposal's scope of work or contract amount. In conducting interviews, there shall be no disclosure by the city or any officer, employee or committee thereof, of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. 
(g)  The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by written notice to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. 
(h)  The purchasing agent is authorized to negotiate the final price and precise scope of work with the selected offeror. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-181. - Responsibility of bidders and offerors. 
(a)  In determining whether a bidder or offeror is responsible, the following shall be considered: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder or offeror to perform the contract or provide the services required; 
(2)  Whether the bidder or offeror can perform the contract or provide the service promptly and within the time specified without delay or interference; 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder or offeror; 
(4)  The quality of the bidder's or offeror's performance of previous contracts or services; 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder or offeror with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder or offeror to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the materials and services to the particular use required; 
(8)  The ability of the bidder or offeror to provide convenient, cost effective, future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; 
(9)  Any other circumstances which will affect the bidder's or offeror's performance of the contract. 
(b)  In addition to the authority for rejection found in sections 2-179, 2-180, 2-181, 2-184, 2-185, and 2-187, of this article, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to reject all bids or proposals or any portions thereof when the interests of the city and the public will be served thereby. All such decisions shall be supported by a written determination made by the purchasing agent. 
(c)  The purchasing agent shall also have authority to reject any, all, or any portion of all bids or proposals, for cause. The causes for such rejections include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Conviction of a criminal offense incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract; 
(2)  Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, materially, and directly may affect responsibility; 
(3)  Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of submission of bids or proposals; 
(4)  Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character which is regarded by the purchasing agent to be so serious as to justify rejection of any further bids: 
a.  Failure to perform in accordance with a contract with the city, or 
b.  Recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one (1) or more contracts with any party; 
(5)  Any other cause the purchasing agent determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility, including suspension or debarment by another party for any cause listed in this section; and 
(6)  For violation of the ethical standards set forth in section 2-229 through and including section 2-234 of this chapter. 
(7)  For the purpose of this section the conduct of an individual, a partner of a partnership, a joint venturer in a joint venture, an officer or director of a corporation, the entity itself, or any person acting on behalf of the entity, is attributable to the entity, and to the person. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-182. - Exemptions to use of competitive bid or proposal. 
(a)  Minor purchases. 
(1)  The purchasing agent or any authorized purchaser shall have the power to negotiate without formal competition for the purchase of any materials, professional services, services or construction not exceeding a cost of forty thousand dollars ($40,000). 
(2)  Such negotiated purchases shall be made in the open market, but wherever practical or advantageous, the purchasing agent or authorized purchaser shall obtain quotes from at least three (3) suppliers for purchases over five thousand dollars ($5,000). Negotiated purchases of materials, services or construction shall be awarded to the person supplying the lowest responsible and responsive quote. 
(3)  In using informal quotes or direct open market purchases, the purchasing agent and any authorized purchaser shall follow the local solicitation and preference provisions of section 2-184(e) of the Code. 
(4)  No contract will be divided so as to constitute a minor purchase under this subsection (a). 
(b)  Emergency purchases. 
(1)  In the case of any apparent emergency requiring the immediate purchase of materials, professional services, services or construction, the city manager shall have the power to authorize the purchasing agent to secure necessary items in the open market regardless of the amount of the expenditure. 
(2)  In no event shall the contract price exceed commercially reasonable prices. 
(3)  A full written report of the circumstances of all emergency purchases over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be made by the city manager to the city council. The report shall be received by the city council in an open meeting, and such report shall be open to public inspection. 
(c)  Construction change orders. One (1) or more change orders to an existing construction contract which do not exceed a cumulative cost of fifteen (15) percent of the original contract awarded pursuant to an invitation for bids may be executed without competition. 
(d)  Miscellaneous exemptions. 
(1)  A contract for materials, professional services or services may be awarded without competition if the purchasing agent determines and documents in writing that one (1) or more of the following conditions exists: 
a.  There exists only one (1) responsible source; 
b.  Although there exists more than one (1) responsible source, a competitive process cannot reasonably be used or, if used will result in a substantially higher cost to the city, will otherwise injure the city's financial interests or will substantially impede the city's administrative functions or the delivery of services to the public; 
c.  A particular material or service is required to maintain interchangeability or compatibility as a part of an existing integrated system; 
d.  A particular material, professional service or service is required in order to standardize or maintain standardization for the purpose of reducing financial investment or simplifying administration; 
e.  The material is perishable; 
f.  The material qualifies as an object of fine art; 
g.  A particular material is required to match materials in use, so as to produce visual harmony; 
h.  A particular material is required to enable use by a specific individual; 
i.  A particular material is prescribed by a professional advisor; 
j.  The material, professional service or service is the subject of a change order. 
(2)  The purchasing agent shall submit each determination made under this subsection (d) to the city manager, who shall approve or reject the procurement. 
(3)  The city manager shall submit all procurements under this subsection (d) which exceed a cost of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to the city council in an open meeting for final approval. 
(4)  Any procurement approved under this section by the city manager or the city council may be used as the basis for a negotiated purchase of additional quantities of the same materials or services at any time within a period of two (2) years from the date of approval; provided, however, that the purchasing agent may expressly limit subsequent procurements to a specific number of purchases or a period of less than two (2) years. 
(e)  Materials, certain services and construction competitively bid within twenty-four (24) months. In any case where the city has, within the preceding twenty-four (24) months, pursuant to an invitation for bids or proposals, awarded a contract for the procurement of any materials or for the procurement of services, professional services or construction bid on a unit price basis, the purchasing agent may negotiate with the successful bidder for the purchase of additional quantities of the materials or units of services or construction. No such procurement shall be made at a price higher than the previous award. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92; Ord. No. 23-2018 , §§ 2—4, 8-1-18)  
Sec. 2-183. - Bid and performance bonds. 
(a)  Bid bonds. When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, bid bonds or other equivalent security may be required and the invitation for bids or request for proposals shall describe the requirements. Unsuccessful bidders or offerors shall be entitled to the return of any cash deposit. Unless a specific extension is granted in writing, a successful bidder or offeror shall forfeit any bid bond or equivalent security required by the purchasing agent upon its failure to enter into a contract within fifteen (15) days after the award. 
(b)  Performance bonds. Each project included in the city's annual capital improvement plan contemplating an expense of greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall identify whether the project shall require a performance bond. In considering whether to require a performance bond, the city shall consider the nature and complexity of the project, the consequences of failure of any contractor to complete the project, and any other factors the city deems relevant. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the city to require additional bonds or security. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92; Ord. No. 5-2018 , § 1, 3-7-18)  
Sec. 2-184. - Other procedural prerequisites for award of contracts. 
(a)  In the case of a contract for procurement primarily for the use of a specific department or agency of the city, the head of such using agency or designee thereof shall also approve an award before written notice of the award is sent. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall not award any contract or finalize any procurement until the financial officer has determined that appropriations for the using agency include a sufficient unencumbered balance in excess of all unpaid obligations to defray the cost of such procurement, excepting only: 
(1)  Cases of emergency under section 2-182(b); and 
(2)  Cases where revenue to pay the bidder or offeror will be raised through the performance of the contract. 
(3)  Cases for which a request for non-budgeted expenditure has been approved. 
(c)  No contract for the acquisition of property or the construction of improvements or other expenditures which is to be financed by bonds or other obligations shall be effective until the proceeds of the bonds or obligations have been received by the financial officer. Improvements to be paid for by special assessments are excepted from this requirement. 
(d)  In any case where two (2) or more bids are received for the same total amount of unit price and are otherwise eligible for award, the successful bidder shall be determined by any method which will, in the judgment of the purchasing agent, discourage the submission of tied bids. 
(e)  The purchasing agent of the city shall solicit Alamosa firms and San Luis Valley firms to submit bids to the city through local advertising and other suitable methods. When any of the following considerations apply to any procurement, the purchasing agent shall give a preference to bidders based on the relation between the bidder's location and the city; need for the supplier to be available to provide service, need for follow-up training, service, or other support, when repairs or replacements done by the original bidder will be done under a warranty provided by the original bidder; need for additional parts where delivery is a consideration. The purchasing agent shall give preferences according to the following schedule: A preference of up to seven (7) percent for those bidders with the pertinent portion of its operations (i.e. "are located") located within the county and a preference of up to three (3) percent to those bidders who are located elsewhere in the San Luis Valley. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92; Ord. No. 11-1995, § 1, 8-16-95; Ord. No. 9-2015, § 1, 9-2-15 )  
Sec. 2-185. - Prequalification of bidders and offerors. 
(a)  Any person desiring to receive invitations for bids or requests for proposals from the city may submit to the purchasing agent such information as the purchasing agent may require to determine that person's acceptability as a bidder or offeror. The purchasing agent may maintain one (1) or more lists compiled from such submittals and may utilize the same in lieu of public notice for soliciting competitive sealed bids or competitive sealed proposals; provided, however, that the purchasing agent may use such list in lieu of public notice only if public notice of the prequalification procedure and intended use of the list has been given within the preceding twenty-four (24) months. 
(b)  The criteria listed in section 2-181(c) for rejection of bids shall also apply as bases for suspending a person for cause from consideration for award of contract and such person shall not be named on the list of acceptable bidders or offerors to the city. 
(c)  Decision to suspend. 
(1)  The purchasing agent shall issue a written decision to suspend a person from consideration as a bidder or offeror to the city. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken, and shall be provided to the suspended person by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail; 
(2)  A decision under this section shall be final and conclusive, unless the suspended person takes an appeal to the city council within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision, or if a particular bid award would be affected, prior to award of the bid in question. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-186. - Cooperative procurement plans. 
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative procurement plans when the best interests of the city would be served thereby. In such a case, competitive sealed bids or sealed proposals received by any other governmental agency shall be the equivalent of bids or proposals received by the city and may be the basis for any procurement by the city. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-187. - Solicitations or award in violation of law. 
(a)  If, prior to the bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, the purchasing agent determines that a solicitation is in violation of federal, state or municipal law, then the solicitation shall be canceled or revised to comply with applicable law. 
(b)  If, after the bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, the purchasing agent determines that a solicitation or a proposed award of a contract is in violation of federal, state or municipal law, then the solicitation or proposed award shall be canceled. 
(c)  If, after an award, the purchasing agent, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that a solicitation or award of a contract was in violation of applicable law: 
(1)  If the person awarded the contract has not acted in violation of sections 2-229 through 2-233 of this article, the contract may be ratified and affirmed if it is determined by the purchasing agent that doing so is in the best interests of the city, or the contract may be terminated and the person awarded the contract shall be compensated for the actual costs reasonably incurred under the contract, prior to the termination; 
(2)  If the person awarded the contract has acted in violation of sections 2-229 through 2-233 of this article, the contract may be declared null and void, if such action is in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Secs. 2-188—2-207. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 2-208. - Multi-year contracts. 
(a)  No contract for services or professional services, including all renewals, shall be made by the city for a period longer than two (2) years, unless authorized by the Charter of the City of Alamosa or by ordinance, which ordinance shall not be passed as an emergency ordinance. 
(b)  Multi-year contracts shall be expressly contingent upon the annual budgeting and appropriation of sufficient funds on an annual basis or by nonlapsing appropriation. 
(c)  When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support the continuation of the city's performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall be canceled. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-209. - Multiple source award. 
A multiple source award may be made when an award to two (2) or more bidders or offerors for similar supplies or services is necessary for adequate delivery, service or product compatibility. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-210. - Right to inspect plan. 
The city may inspect the plant, place of business or work site of any contractor or subcontractor to the extent such plant, place of business, or work site is pertinent to the performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by the city. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-211. - Right to audit records. 
(a)  The city may, at reasonable times and places, audit the books and records of any contractor who has submitted cost or pricing data to the extent such books, documents, papers and records are pertinent to cost or pricing data. 
(b)  The city shall be entitled to audit the books and records of any contractor or subcontractor when a negotiated contract is not a firm, fixed-price contract. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Secs. 2-212—2-227. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RESOLUTION OF CONTROVERSIES 
 
Sec. 2-228. - Bid protests. 
(a)  Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract or bid must protest in writing to the city manager as a prerequisite to seeking additional relief. A protest shall be submitted within ten (10) calendar days after such aggrieved person knows or reasonably should have known of the facts giving rise thereto. A protest with respect to an invitation for bids shall be submitted in writing prior to the opening of bids unless the aggrieved person did not know and reasonably should not have known of the facts giving rise to such protests prior to bid opening. This protest procedure shall not apply to a suspension from consideration as set forth below. 
(b)  In the event of a timely protest under subsection (c) of this section, the city shall not proceed further with a solicitation or award of the contract until all administrative remedies have been exhausted or until the city council makes a determination that the award of a contract without delay is necessary to protect substantial interests of the city. 
(c)  The city manager shall review the protest, conduct any investigation he or she deems necessary and issue a written decision within twenty (20) days. The city manager's decision shall be final if the procurement is for fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or less. The city manager's decision may be appealed to city council if the procurement is for more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). Any such appeal must be made in writing within seven (7) calendar days of the city manager's written decision. The city council shall review the appeal, conduct any investigation it deems necessary, and issue a written decision within sixty (60) days. The city council decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § A10, 10-3-18)  
DIVISION 6. - ETHICS IN PUBLIC CONTRACTING 
 
Sec. 2-229. - Kickbacks. 
It shall be unlawful for any payment, gratuity, or offer of employment to be made by or on behalf of a subcontractor under a contract to the prime contractor, or higher tier subcontractor, for any person associated with the prime contractor or higher tier subcontractor, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-230. - Prohibition against contingent fees. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to be retained, or to retain a person, to solicit or secure a city contract or other procurement upon an agreement or understanding for a commission, percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee except for retention of bona fide employees for bona fide established commercial selling agencies for the purpose of securing business. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-231. - Contemporaneous employment prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any city employee who is participating directly or indirectly in the procurement process to become or to be, while such a city employee, the employee of any person contracting with the governmental body by whom the employee is employed. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-232. - Waiver for contemporaneous employment prohibition. 
The city manager may grant a waiver from the contemporaneous employment provision in section 2-231 upon making a written determination that: 
(1)  The contemporaneous employment of the city employee has been publicly disclosed; 
(2)  The city employee will be able to perform procurement functions without actual or apparent bias or favoritism; and 
(3)  The waiver will be in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-233. - Use of confidential information. 
It shall be unlawful for any employee or former employee knowingly to use confidential information for actual or anticipated personal gain, or for the actual or anticipated personal gain of any other person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 2-234. - Recovery of value transferred or received in breach of ethical standards. 
(a)  General provision. The value of anything transferred or received in breach of the provisions of sections 2-229 through 2-233 by a city employee or a nonemployee may be recovered from both city employee and nonemployee. 
(b)  Recovery of kickbacks by the city. Upon a showing that a subcontractor made a kickback to a prime contractor or a higher tier subcontractor in connection with the award of a subcontract or order thereunder, it shall be conclusively presumed that the amount thereof was included in the price of the subcontract or order and ultimately borne by the city and will be recoverable hereunder from the recipient. In addition, that amount may also be recovered from the subcontractor making such kickbacks. Recovery from one offending party shall not preclude a recovery from other offending parties. 
(Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 8-5-92)  
ARTICLE VII. - ADVISORY COMMITTEES 
 
Sec. 2-235. - Authority to establish advisory committees. 
Pursuant to Article XXII, Section 1, of the Charter of the City of Alamosa, the city council is hereby authorized to establish such standing and ad-hoc advisory committees as it deems necessary to obtain citizen input on matters of public interest. The city council shall by resolution establish such advisory committees as it deems necessary and shall specify each such committee established as either a standing committee or an ad-hoc committee as further defined below, and within any such resolution shall define the subject matter, responsibilities, and composition of each such advisory committee established. 
(Ord. No. 11-2008, § 4, 11-5-08)  
Sec. 2-236. - Standing advisory committees. 
The city council may establish standing advisory committees to provide input concerning matters of a recurring nature. Any such standing advisory committee shall be established in accordance with the provisions of Article XXII, Section 1 of the Charter of the City of Alamosa concerning compensation, term, and governance of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 11-2008, § 4, 11-5-08)  
Sec. 2-237. - Ad-hoc advisory committees. 
The city council may establish ad-hoc advisory committees to provide input concerning matters of a particular nature where the work of the committee is not expected to extend past the resolution of a specific issue, and a standing committee is not deemed appropriate. The resolution establishing an ad-hoc advisory committee may specify a term or task to be completed, and may establish the composition of the committee without regard to the provisions of Article XXII of the Charter concerning terms of members. Such ad-hoc advisory committees shall conform in all other respects to the provisions of Article XXII, Section 1 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 11-2008, § 4, 11-5-08)  
Chapter 3 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, adopted April 19, 2017, repealed ch. 3, §§ 3-1—3-13, 3-31, 3-32, 3-46—3-51, 3-66—3-79, 3-96—3-98, and 3-116—3-120, and reenacted a new ch. 3 as set out herein. Former ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1964; Ord. No. 2-1988, adopted March 16, 1988; Ord. No. 7-1994, adopted June 15, 1994; Ord. No. 18-1995, adopted October 4, 1995; Ord. No. 10-1997, adopted June 18, 1997; Ord. No. 16-1999, adopted September 1, 1999; Ord. No. 6-2002, adopted March 6, 2002; Ord. No. 15-2008, adopted December 3, 2008; Ord. No. 5-2011, adopted March 16, 2011; and Ord. No. 06-2011, adopted May 4, 2011. 
Cross reference— Damage to public or private trees by animals prohibited, § 11-97; animal control in mobile home parks, § 12-34; nuisances, Ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; zoning, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Estrays, C.R.S. 35-44-101 et seq.; cruelty, C.R.S. 18-9-201 et seq.; rabies control, C.R.S. 25-4-601 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal shall mean any live vertebrate creature, whether domestic or wild. 
Animal control officer shall mean any person commissioned by the state, county or municipal government to perform duties under the laws, regulations or ordinances of the state, county or municipality pertaining to animals. 
Animal shelter shall mean any facility operated by a humane society, governmental agency or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law. Any such facility shall provide proper and humane care for animals held in it. 
At large shall mean the time when an animal is off or away from the premises of the owner, possessor or keeper thereof (hereafter in this definition "owner"), and not under the control of such owner or such owner's agent or a member of such owner's immediate family by a leash or lead capable of restraining the animal. Animals tethered to a stationary object within range of a public street, sidewalk, alley or common path are deemed to be at large. 
Dwelling unit shall mean one (1) or more rooms designed for or occupied as a unit by one (1) family for living and cooking purposes. 
Ear tipping shall mean straight-line cutting of the tip of the left ear of a cat while the cat is anesthetized. 
Feral cat shall mean a free-roaming cat that is partially socialized or unsocialized to humans and tends to resist contact with humans. 
Humane destruction shall mean euthanasia administered by a qualified veterinarian or veterinary technician. 
Nuisance shall mean any animal which: 
(1)  Molests passersby or passing vehicles; 
(2)  Attacks other animals; 
(3)  Is at large in violation of section 3-31 of this Code; 
(4)  Damages private or public property; 
(5)  Barks, whines, howls, or makes any other noise in a loud and persistent or habitual fashion so as to disturb any person or neighborhood; 
(6)  Is diseased. 
Owner shall mean any person, partnership or corporation in possession of, harboring, or who shall allow any animal to remain about their premises for a period of three (3) consecutive days or more, excluding sponsors of feral cats as addressed in this article. The person named on the registration record of any animal as the owner shall be deemed, prima facie, the owner thereof, but the term owner shall also include, but shall not be limited to, the occupant of the premises where the animal is usually kept, if such premises are other than the premises of the owner as shown on the registration record; or any person having control or purporting to have control over any animal which is running at large. The parent or guardian of an owner under eighteen (18) years of age shall be deemed the owner, as defined in this section. 
Potbelly pig shall mean a miniature porcine which shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches in height at the shoulder and one hundred fifteen (115) pounds in weight, and shall include, but not be limited to, the North American potbelly pig, the Vietnamese potbelly pig, and the Chinese potbelly pig. 
Restraint shall mean securing an animal by a leash or lead so that it is under the physical control of a responsible person, or tethered to a stationary object not within range of a public street, sidewalk, alley or common path, or keeping an animal within a fence or other enclosure which restrains the animal to a particular premises. 
Stray cat shall mean a free-roaming domesticated cat that does not have a tag, electronic ID, or other means of identifying its owner. 
Trap shall mean any device used to contain or capture an animal. There are two (2) types of traps: 
(1)  Humane trap is a device designed to capture or contain an animal without causing any injury to the animal; 
(2)  Inhumane trap is a device designed to capture or contain an animal which causes injury to the animal as the result of the trap's operation. 
Trap, neuter and return (TNR) shall mean a non-lethal approach to feral cat population control where feral cats are humanely trapped, sterilized, vaccinated, ear-tipped, and then returned to the location where they were originally trapped 
Veterinary hospital shall mean any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals. 
Vicious animal includes, but is not limited to, dogs and means: 
(1)  Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to, or otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or 
(2)  Any animal which, without provocation, attacks or bites, or has attacked or bitten, a human being or domestic animal; or 
(3)  Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of animal fighting or any animal trained for animal fighting. 
Wild animal shall mean any live ferret, fox, leopard, lion, lynx, monkey (nonhuman primate), panther, poisonous snake, raccoon, skunk, tiger or any other warm-blooded animal which can normally be found in the wild state. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § B1, 10-3-18) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 3-2. - Declaration of city as wild bird refuge. 
The area within the limits of the city is hereby made and constituted a bird sanctuary for the refuge of wild birds, and all persons are urged to protect the wild birds and encourage their propagation and refuge within such sanctuary. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-3. - Abuse of wild birds prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person at any time within the city to frighten, shoot at, wound, kill, capture, ensnare, net, trap or in any other manner to molest or injure any wild bird, or in any manner, to molest or injure the nest, eggs or young of any such birds, provided that this section shall not be construed to apply to English or European house sparrows or to starlings, and provided further that the chief of police shall have authority to grant a permit for the killing or the capture of pigeons or other birds when it is shown that the same are or have become a nuisance or health hazard in any particular location. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-4. - Keeping of bees prohibited. 
The keeping of hives within the city is a menace to the public health and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and is hereby declared a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-5. - Quantity of animals, prohibition on keeping livestock other than rabbits and poultry under specific conditions, feral cat colonies. 
(a)  Except as set forth below concerning the keeping of rabbits and poultry and feral cat colonies, it shall be unlawful to keep any animal in quantities of more than four (4) adult animals per dwelling unit, regardless of whether the animal is an indoor or an outdoor pet. 
(b)  No person shall keep within the city limits any livestock, whether as a pet or otherwise, including, but not limited to, horses, mules, burros, cows, sheep, goats, swine (excepting potbelly pigs) or any other animal typically raised for consumption such as rabbits or poultry, except as allowed below: 
(1)  Livestock may be kept in agricultural zones. 
(2)  Rabbits and poultry, with the exception of roosters, pea fowl, and guinea fowl, may be kept in Established Neighborhoods (EN), Estate Residential (RE), Low-Density Residential (RL), Medium-Density Residential (RM), and Campus (CA) zones, but, except in Campus zones, only on those lots that have only one (1) single-family dwelling unit on them. Other than in Campus zones, not more than eight (8) mature animals may be kept on any one (1) lot, and it is the property owner's responsibility to ensure that the animals are confined to their property. All animals must be kept indoors or under adequate outdoor shelter. No butchering of these animals may be conducted in the public view. 
(3)  Any person may keep rabbits or poultry (except for mature roosters, pea fowl, and guinea fowl, which may not be kept for any purpose whatsoever) in the Commercial Business (CB) zone solely for purposes of sale as livestock so long as the following conditions are met: 
a.  All animals are kept indoors or under adequate outdoor shelter; 
b.  Animals are kept and offered for sale for a limited period of time not to exceed seven (7) consecutive weeks and no more than twenty-six (26) weeks in any given year; 
c.  The person has a valid retail sales tax license and is otherwise in compliance with the licensing and taxation provisions of the Code of Ordinances Alamosa, Colorado; 
d.  Any person keeping rabbits or poultry for sale shall possess all necessary federal and state licenses relating to the keeping and sale of such livestock. 
(4)  A person with a disability may keep a trained service animal used by the person with a disability as a service animal to assist with specific needs or perform work as recognized in the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(c)  Feral cat colonies: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to feed stray or feral cats unless such person participates in the trap, neuter and return ("TNR") program designed to reduce the population of feral cats within the city, and managed by the city as set forth below. 
(2)  Persons may make application to the Alamosa Police Department to serve as a sponsor of a TNR program. The police department shall have discretion to refuse the application on the grounds that it would not be in the public interest for any reason including, but not limited to, reasons based on the location of the colony or the character, reputation, or suitability of the applicant. TNR program sponsors shall have the following responsibilities: 
a.  Register each feral cat colony they are managing with the Alamosa Police Department, including the general location, number of cats in the colony, and number of caretakers working with the colony; 
b.  Trap and spay, neuter, vaccinate, and ear tip (so that spayed, neutered, and vaccinated cats can be readily identified) feral cats that are members of the colony, working with the city's TNR program. The sponsor shall keep records sufficient to identify each vaccinated cat and the date of vaccination so that the vaccination schedule for such cat may be appropriately monitored. 
c.  Record and report to the Alamosa Police Department, on an annual basis, the total number of members and the number of sterilized members of each feral cat colony for which they have implemented a TNR program; 
d.  Record and report to the Alamosa Police Department, on an annual basis, the number of kittens born into each feral cat colony for which they have implemented a TNR program; 
e.  Take all reasonable steps to (1) remove kittens from the colony after they have been weaned, (2) place the kittens in homes or foster homes for the purpose of subsequent permanent placement, and (3) capture and spay the mother cat. 
f.  Monitor each member of the colony for rabies or other disease, and take appropriate steps to address any such disease. 
g.  Address complaints received by the Alamosa Police Department regarding any feral cat colony they sponsor, and remediate any problems with the colony, including by working with local animal welfare groups to increase the pace of any TNR program, and/or to find foster homes, permanent homes, or no-kill shelters to which nuisance animals may be relocated. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to continue to feed stray or feral cats in a registered feral cat colony where such feeding causes a nuisance to neighbors or creates a condition contrary to the health, safety, and welfare of the community. Any member cat of a feral cat colony that has become a nuisance, or the entire colony if it has become a nuisance, may be impounded and disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17; Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1, 6-27-18) 
Cross reference— Zoning, Ch. 21.  
Sec. 3-6. - Confiscation of unauthorized traps. 
(a)  The use of unauthorized or inhumane traps within the city shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Unauthorized or inhumane traps which are reported or discovered to be in use within the city shall be confiscated and destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-7. - Unprovoked biting of humans. 
(a)  If any animal is involved in the unprovoked biting of a human being for the first time, the animal may be barred from this city or humanely destroyed as directed by the municipal court. 
(b)  If any animal is involved in the unprovoked biting of a human being for the second time, the animal shall be barred from this city or humanely destroyed as directed by the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-8. - Enforcement personnel. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the animal control officer and such other persons or agencies as may be designated by the city council. 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-36 et seq.; personnel, Ch. 15.  
Sec. 3-9. - Interference with enforcement; right of entry. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with an animal control officer or a police officer, or to fail to obey the lawful order of an animal control officer or police officer. 
(b)  The animal control officers and police officers are hereby authorized to enter upon any premises within the municipality for the purpose of impounding animals which the officer is authorized under this chapter to impound or for any other purpose authorized in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-10. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Abandon means and includes the leaving of an animal by its owner or other person responsible for its care or custody without making effective provisions for its proper care; 
(2)  Mistreatment means and includes every act or omission which causes, or unreasonably permits the continuation of, unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering; 
(3)  Neglect means and includes failure to provide food, water, protection from the elements, opportunity for exercise or other care normal, usual and proper for an animal's health and wellbeing. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person, except as authorized by law, to knowingly or with criminal negligence overdrive, overload, overwork, torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance, unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate, needlessly kill, carry in or upon any vehicle in a cruel manner or otherwise mistreat or neglect any animal, or cause it to be done, or, having the charge and custody of any animal, to fail to provide it with proper food, drink, or protection from the weather, or abandon it. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to amend or in any manner change the authority of the wildlife commission, as established in C.R.S. title 33, or to prohibit any conduct therein authorized or permitted. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17; Ord. No. 1-2018 , § 4, 2-7-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, C.R.S. 18-9-201, 18-9-202; authority to adopt ordinances on cruelty to animals, C.R.S. 31-15-401.  
Sec. 3-11. - Riding or driving animals on sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive any animal upon any sidewalk or levee within the city. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17) 
Cross reference— Sidewalks, § 16-21.  
Sec. 3-12. - Riding or driving animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive any animal through any street, alley or other public place in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person or in such a manner as to create terror in the mind of any person. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-13. - Violations; fines; penalties. 
(a)  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter not involving the biting of a person, except section 3-69, shall be deemed a public nuisance. A violation of section 3-69, whether or not involving the biting of a person, shall be deemed an aggravated public nuisance as provided in said section 3-69. 
(b)  The violation of the provisions of this chapter involving the biting of a person shall be deemed an aggravated public nuisance. 
(c)  The owner of an animal found to be a public nuisance shall be assessed a fine not less than that designated, from time to time by resolutions adopted by the city council, which fines may not exceed the general penalty authorized for violations of this Code, and which shall be minimum and mandatory, and the court shall neither suspend, abate, nor defer all or any portion of such fines. 
(d)  The owner of an animal found to be an aggravated nuisance shall be assessed a fine not less than that designated, from time to time by resolution adopted by city council, which fines may not exceed the general penalty authorized for violations of this code, and which shall be minimum and mandatory, and the court shall neither suspend, abate, nor defer all or any portion of such fines. 
(e)  In lieu of any of the above fines, the owner may elect to euthanize the animal which caused the violation at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, Ch. 14.  
Secs. 3-14—3-30. - Reserved.  
Sec. 3-31. - Running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor or keeper of any animal to permit it to run at large within the city. If an animal is found to be running at large within the city, the owner, possessor or keeper shall be presumed to have violated this article, except that this subsection shall not apply during the controlled environment of a city-operated or a city-approved obedience school, nor to ear-tipped feral cats, nor to domestic cats with tags or electronic ID identifying the owner and providing the owner's telephone number, so long as such cats are not causing a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-32. - Male potbelly pigs to be neutered; breeding prohibited. 
Every male potbelly pig four (4) months of age or older shall be neutered. It shall be unlawful to breed potbelly pigs within the city limits of the City of Alamosa. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Secs. 3-33—3-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING OF DOGS AND POTBELLY PIGS 
 
Sec. 3-46. - Required; application. 
(a)  Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of any dog or potbelly pig over three (3) months of age within the city must obtain a license as provided in this article. 
(b)  Application for a license must be made within thirty (30) days after obtaining a dog or potbelly pig over three (3) months of age, within thirty (30) days after such dog or potbelly pig is brought into the city or within thirty (30) days after such dog or potbelly pig reaches three (3) months of age, except that this requirement will not apply to a nonresident keeping a dog or potbelly pig within the city for no longer than sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-47. - Contents of application. 
Written application for licenses shall be made to the police department. Such application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner; 
(2)  The call-name, breed, age, color and sex of the dog or potbelly pig; 
(3)  The appropriate fee; 
(4)  A valid rabies vaccination certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian which shall include the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated dog or potbelly pig; 
b.  The date of vaccination; 
c.  The date of expiration of the vaccination; 
d.  The type of rabies vaccine used; 
e.  The year and number of the rabies tag; 
f.  The breed, age, color and sex of the vaccinated dog or potbelly pig; and 
g.  The signature of the veterinarian administering the vaccine. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-48. - License tags; duplicate tags; transfer. 
(a)  Upon acceptance of the license application and fee, the police department shall issue a durable tag stamped with an identifying number and year of issuance. Tags should be designed so that they may be conveniently fastened or riveted to the animal's collar or harness. 
(b)  Dogs and potbelly pigs must wear license tags on collars or harnesses at all times, provided that, dogs which have been properly tattooed in the right groin area with an identification number approved by the city clerk at the time the required license tag is issued, shall not be required to wear a license tag on a collar only when such dogs are restrained on the owner's premises. 
(c)  A duplicate license may be obtained upon payment of a one dollar ($1.00) replacement fee. 
(d)  No person may use any license for any animal other than the animal for which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-49. - Records. 
The police department shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers of all tags and tattoos issued and shall make this record available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-50. - Licensing period; expiration. 
(a)  The licensing period shall begin with the calendar year and shall run for one (1) year. Application for a license may be made thirty (30) days prior to, and up to thirty (30) days after, the start of the calendar year, except that for those animals which are acquired or brought into the city or reach the age of three (3) months the application for license shall be made within thirty (30) days after such event. 
(b)  If not revoked, licenses for the keeping of dogs and potbelly pigs shall be for a period of up to one (1) year expiring on the thirty-first day of December of the year of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-51. - License fees. 
(a)  A license shall be issued after payment of the applicable fee: 
(1)  Each dog or potbelly pig, under one (1) year of age, per year ..... $2.00 
(2)  Each neutered/spayed dog or potbelly pig, per year ..... 2.00 
(3)  All other dogs or potbelly pigs, each, per year ..... 10.00 
(b)  Seeing-eye dogs, hearing dogs or governmental police dogs shall be licensed without fee. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Secs. 3-52—3-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONTROL, CARE AND TREATMENT 
 
Sec. 3-66. - Required. 
No person shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his or her animals or of any animals within his or her care and custody, thereby allowing them to become a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § B2, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 3-67. - Disturbance of peace and quiet. 
No owner, possessor, or keeper of an animal within the city shall permit such animal to disturb the peace and quiet of any person or neighborhood by barking, whining, howling or making any other noise in a loud, persistent or habitual fashion. If any animal does so disturb the peace and quiet, the owner, possessor, or keeper shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article, provided that no such owner, possessor, or keeper shall be charged in municipal court with a violation of this subsection unless he/she or a member of his/her household over the age of eighteen (18) years has received a written warning from the city of a previous complaint once within the preceding twelve (12) months. It shall not be necessary for the purposes of this section to identify and describe the particular animal which is making such noise, but shall only be necessary to show who has possession, care, custody or control of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-68. - Dogs in heat. 
Every female dog in heat shall be confined in a building or secured enclosure in such a manner that such female dog cannot come into contact with another animal, except for planned breeding. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-69. - Vicious animals. 
(a)  The owner of a vicious animal shall not suffer or permit the animal to go unconfined. A vicious animal is unconfined within the provisions of this chapter if the animal is not securely confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the owner of the animal, with such pen or structure having at least those structural qualifications as follows: 
(1)  The pen or structure must have secured sides and a secured top attached to the sides; 
(2)  If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than two (2) feet; 
(3)  All such pens or structures shall be adequately lighted and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  The owner of a vicious animal shall not suffer or permit the animal to go beyond the premises of the owner unless the animal is securely muzzled and restrained by a chain or leash and under the physical restraint of a person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any human or animal. 
(c)  The owner of a vicious animal shall display in a prominent place on the owner's premises a clearly visible warning sign indicating that there is a vicious animal on the premises. A similar sign is required to be posted on the pen or structure in which the animal is kept. 
(d)  Owners of vicious animals must, upon licensing of such animal, provide proof to the city clerk of liability insurance for the benefit of the public at large in the amount of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), insuring the owner against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by such owner's vicious animal. 
(e)  No person shall possess or harbor or maintain care or custody of any animal for the purpose of animal fighting, or train, torment, badger, bait or use any animal for the purpose of causing or encouraging the animal to attack human beings or domestic animals. 
(f)  A violation of this section shall be deemed an aggravated public nuisance and, upon conviction thereof, the violator shall be fined as provided in section 3-13. 
(g)  Upon an animal first being found or declared to be vicious by the municipal court, in addition to any other penalties provided in this chapter, said court may enter an order either barring said vicious animal from the city or ordering the humane destruction of the same. 
(h)  Upon the violation of this section 3-69 for a second time with respect to any animal, the court shall order the humane destruction of said animal in a humane way and shall add to any fine imposed hereunder the reasonable costs of said destruction which shall be assessed as court costs. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § B3, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 3-70. - Treatment of animals; cruelty; abandonment. 
(a)  No owner shall fail to provide his/her animals with sufficiently good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and humane care and treatment. 
(b)  No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse or kill an animal, nor cause, instigate or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between animals and humans. 
(c)  No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-71. - Vehicular accidents with animals. 
Any person who, as the operator of a vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner. If the owner cannot be ascertained and located, the operator shall at once report the accident to the animal control officer or the local police department. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-72. - Poisoning prohibited. 
No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether fixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal, provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose for exterminating rats on such person's own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § B4, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 3-73. - Removal of dead animals required. 
If any animal shall die in the possession of any person in this city, it shall be the duty of such owner to cause the animal to be appropriately disposed of. Such disposal may include burial on property within the city limits only if all parts of the dead animal are covered by at least four (4) feet of earth. In case the owner of any such animal shall neglect or refuse to properly dispose of the animal within ten (10) hours after its death, the police department shall cause the dead animal to be removed at the expense of the owner. Whenever the owner of any dead animal cannot be found or ascertained, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer to dispose of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-74. - Trapping of animals. 
No person shall set, or cause to be set, an unauthorized or inhumane trap within the city, except that rodent snap-traps baited with vegetable or dairy products may be used on private property. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-75. - Removal of animal waste required. 
The owner or person having control or purporting to have control over any animal shall remove any feces deposited by the animal on public walks, recreation areas or private property. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § B5, 10-3-18) 
Cross reference— Sidewalks, § 16-21 et seq.  
Secs. 3-76, 3-77. - Reserved.  
Sec. 3-78. - Wild animals as pets or for display. 
(a)  No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal as a pet. 
(b)  No person shall keep or permit to be kept on such person's premises any wild or vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions or circuses. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § B6, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 3-79. - Maltreatment of performing animals prohibited. 
(a)  No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a manner which will cause or is likely to cause physical injury or suffering. 
(b)  All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Secs. 3-80—3-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL 
 
Sec. 3-96. - Vaccination required. 
All dogs and potbelly pigs three (3) months of age or older shall be vaccinated against rabies. All dogs and potbelly pigs vaccinated at three (3) months of age or older shall be revaccinated at one (1) year of age and thereafter at intervals recommended in the current Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines . If any dog or potbelly pig is found within the city without a current rabies vaccination tag or current license tag affixed to its collar or harness, the owner of such dog or potbelly pig shall be presumed to have violated the provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-97. - Reporting animal bites. 
(a)  Any person having knowledge that an animal, other than a rodent, rabbit, bird or reptile, has bitten a human being shall immediately report the incident to the animal control office or police department. 
(b)  If any animal is suspected of having rabies or if any animal has bitten a person and such animal has not had a current vaccination, such animal shall be confined for a period of at least ten (10) days by a leash, chain or cage at the animal shelter or a veterinary hospital of the owner's choice, all at the expense of the owner of the animal. During the ten-day observation period, no rabies vaccine shall be administered to the animal. 
(c)  No animal held for observation on suspicion of rabies shall be released until the observation period is over, except that if the owner shows proof of current rabies vaccination, the animal may be released into quarantine at the owner's residence, at the discretion of the animal control officer. 
(d)  If any animal has been bitten by another animal suspected of having rabies, the owner of such animal so exposed to rabies shall report such fact to the animal control officer, local humane society officer or police department. If either animal has not been vaccinated against rabies, the animal control officer shall have the power, in such officer's discretion, to have such animal removed from the owner's premises to a veterinary hospital, and there placed under observation for a period of up to six (6) months at the expense of the owner, provided that the owner may elect in lieu thereof to have such animal humanely destroyed. 
(e)  If a standard incubation period has not been established by the state department of health for the particular species of animal, it shall be summarily destroyed and if involved with another animal or human, a necropsy shall be performed by a certified laboratory to determine rabies contamination. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § B7, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 3-98. - Animals with rabies. 
If rabies has been ascertained in any animal, such animal shall be summarily humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Secs. 3-99—3-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 3-116. - Conditions and authority. 
Unrestrained dogs and potbelly pigs, maltreated animals and nuisance animals, including any animal running at large in violation of section 3-31 of this Code, may be taken by police officers, animal control officers or humane officers and impounded in an animal shelter, or other appropriate location, and there confined in a humane manner. Unless causing a nuisance, stray cats and feral cats shall be neutered, ear-tipped, vaccinated, and returned to the location where they were taken. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-117. - Notice. 
Immediately upon impoundment, the animal control officer or humane society officer shall notify the owner of such impounded animal, if the owner can be identified, that such animal has been impounded. Such notice shall be by telephone if possible, otherwise by mail, and a description of the animal shall be posted at city hall and at the animal shelter. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-118. - Unclaimed animals. 
Unclaimed animals shall be kept for not less than five (5) days. If the city does not have access to facilities to house the animal, and no owner can reasonably be identified, the city shall have the option to dispose of the animal in whatever manner deemed appropriate. The city shall first endeavor to work with local animal welfare groups to find foster homes, permanent homes or a no kill shelter to which the animal can be relocated. Humane destruction shall be the least preferred alternative. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-119. - Release of animals. 
(a)  An owner reclaiming an impounded animal for the first time within a twelve-month period shall pay a fee of ten dollars ($10.00), plus a daily boarding fee as established by the operator of the animal shelter, subject to approval of the city manager. 
(b)  An owner reclaiming an impounded animal for each subsequent time within a twelve-month period shall pay a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00), plus a daily boarding fee as established by the operator of the animal shelter, subject to approval by the city manager. 
(c)  An owner reclaiming an impounded dog or potbelly pig which is not validly licensed must license the dog or potbelly pig and present evidence thereof to the person in charge of the animal shelter. If the dog or potbelly pig does not have a current rabies tag, the owner shall present a current rabies vaccination certificate for such dog or potbelly pig duly issued by a licensed veterinarian, or, in lieu thereof, the owner may place a cash deposit of fifty dollars ($50.00) with the city to be refunded to the owner upon presenting, within five (5) days thereafter, proof of vaccination and license. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Sec. 3-120. - Animal holding periods; disposition of unclaimed animals. 
(a)  Any pet animal not reclaimed by its owner shall be held, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, by the city for a minimum of five (5) days before it may become available for adoption or otherwise disposed of at the discretion of the animal control officer. For purposes of this section "days" means days during which the shelter at which the animal is being held is open to the public. 
(b)  No unclaimed dog, cat, or potbelly pig shall be released for adoption without being sterilized, 
(c)  Pet animals which, in the opinion of a veterinarian, are experiencing extreme pain or suffering may be disposed of immediately by the city through euthanasia after the animal control officer, or her designee, has made reasonable efforts to contact the owner. For pet animals with identification, reasonable efforts to contact the owner shall continue for a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 4-19-17)  
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Adoption of codes by reference, art. III, § 17. 
Cross reference— Comprehensive plan adopted, § 2-131; Uniform Fire Code adopted, § 7-1; burning material in city restricted, § 7-2; city building inspector is administrator of flood ordinance, § 8-31; specific standards for flood hazard reduction, § 8-52; requirements for building conditions, utilities, refuse disposal and nuisance control in agricultural labor camps, § 10-45; mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks, Ch. 12; conditions constituting nuisances, § 14-1; removal of weeds, noxious vegetation, trash and rubbish required, § 14-51; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10; nuisances, Ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; utilities, Ch. 20; zoning, Ch. 21; outdoor sign regulations, § 21-226 et seq. 
State Law reference— Adoption of codes by reference, C.R.S. 31-16-201. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - City fire zones. 
For the purpose of this Code or any code adopted by reference in this chapter whenever reference is made to any fire zones created by this section, the entire city is hereby declared to be, and is hereby established as, a fire district. The fire district shall be known and designated as fire zones 1, 2, and 3 as follows: 
(1)  Fire zone 1 shall include all property in commercial business and residential high-density under the city zoning ordinance and plat; 
(2)  Fire zone 2 shall include all property in industrial light and industrial heavy district under the city zoning ordinance and plat; and 
(3)  Fire zone shall include all property in residence low-density and residence medium-density under the city zoning ordinance and plat. 
(Code 1964, § 5-1.1(e)) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; subdivisions, Ch. 17; zoning, Ch. 21.  
Sec. 4-2. - Occupation of streets by buildings—Removal of debris. 
No person, whether building contractor, owner or otherwise, during the construction or repair of any building or other work, shall be allowed to use or occupy more than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the width of any street, alley or other public place with building materials, implements, machinery or other things, and so soon as such building or other work is completed, or work thereon permanently ceases, or when it becomes no longer necessary to occupy the street or alley or other public places in the manner aforesaid, such building contractor, owner, or other person in charge of such premises shall, without expense to the city, remove all such materials, deposits or earth, rubbish or other things from the street or alley or other public place, leaving the same clean, to the proper grade and conditions as formerly. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, on conviction thereof be fined, and each day's refusal or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1964, § 17-45; Ord. No. 11-2001, § 2, 12-19-01) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference— Obstructing highway or other public way, C.R.S. 18-9-107.  
Sec. 4-3. - Same—Support of scaffolds. 
All scaffolds erected for use in the construction of stone, brick or other buildings shall be well and safely supported, and of sufficient width and properly secured so as to ensure the safety of persons working thereon, or passing under or by the same, against the falling thereof or of such materials as may be used, placed or deposited thereon. Any person who shall erect, use or cause to be erected or used any scaffold contrary to the provisions of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be fined and each day's refusal or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1964, § 17-46; Ord. No. 11-2001, § 3, 12-19-01)  
Sec. 4-4. - Duties and liabilities of city with regards to enforcement of uniform codes, construction standards, building numbering and ordinances relating to licensing of contractors and subcontractors. 
The adoption of the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Mechanical Code, Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, other ordinances establishing building construction standards, those ordinances requiring building numbering and those ordinances relating to the licensing of contractors and subcontractors, as codified in this chapter neither created nor were intended to create and shall not create any duty to any person, firm, corporation or other entity with regard to the enforcement or nonenforcement of such Code provisions. No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall have any civil liability remedy against the city, or its officers, employees or agents, for any damage arising out of or in any way connected with the adoption, enforcement or nonenforcement of such Code provisions. Nothing in these Code provisions shall be construed to create any liability or to waive any of the immunities, limitations on liability or other provisions of the Governmental Immunity Act, C.R.S. section 24-10-101 et seq., or to waive any immunities or limitations on liability otherwise available to the city or to its officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. 13-1989, § 1, 11-1-89) 
Editor's note— Being not specifically amendatory of the Code, the provisions of Ord. No. 13-1989, adopted Nov. 1, 1989, have been codified by the editor as § 4-4.  
Secs. 4-5—4-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Adoption of codes by reference, art. III, § 17. 
Cross reference— Duties and liabilities of city with regards to enforcement of construction standards, § 4-4. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt codes by reference, C.R.S. 31-16-201 et seq.; safety, industrial, commercial and public buildings and equipment, C.R.S. 9-1-101. 
 
Sec. 4-21. - Building codes—Adopted; penalty. 
(a)  Pursuant to parts 1 and 2 of article 16 of title 31, C.R.S., there is hereby adopted by reference the following uniform codes promulgated and published by the International Code Council. The uniform codes identified below are adopted as if set out at length, except as specifically modified and/or amended as shown herein. A copy of the adopted uniform codes shall be maintained in the office of the Building Inspector of the City of Alamosa, and may be inspected during regular business hours. By way of description, and without limiting the subject matter of the adopted codes, the uniform codes are adopted to regulate the initial construction or subsequent enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, operational equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of all buildings or structures in the City of Alamosa, Colorado. The uniform codes adopted with modifications shown are the following: 
International Residential Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, with the following modifications: 
(1)  Reference City of Alamosa in Section R101.1. 
(2)  Table R301.2(1) is completed as follows: 
Ground snow load: 	30 
Wind speed 	115/51 
Topographic effects 	No 
Special wind region 	No 
Wind-borne debris zone 	No 
Seismic design category 	C 
Weathering 	Severe 
Frost line depth 	32 inches 
Termite 	slight-moderate 
Winter design temp 	-16° F 
Ice barrier underlayment 	Yes 
Flood hazards 	1999 
Air freezing index 	3,000 
Mean annual temp 	45° F 
 
(3)  Section R313 (automatic fire sprinkler systems, townhouses and single and two family dwellings) is deleted. 
(4)  Chapters 24-43 (gas, plumbing, and electrical) are not adopted, as they fall under the jurisdiction of state inspectors and are subject to state codes. 
(5)  Only appendices E and J are adopted. 
International Building Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, with the following modifications: 
(1)  Reference City of Alamosa in Section 101.1 
(2)  Delete sections 101.4.1 and 101.4.4 ( International Fuel Gas Code and International Plumbing Code ) because subject to State Jurisdiction. 
(3)  Delete sections 105.1.1 and 105.1.2 
(4)  Delete references to Electrical, Gas, and Plumbing in Section 105.2, as subject to State jurisdiction. 
(5)  Amend Section 109.3 to read as follows: The applicant for a permit shall provide the Building Official with plans of sufficient detail that the Building Official may appropriately determine building valuation costs based on the City's adopted fee schedule in conjunction with the International Code Council's Building Valuation Data, or other appropriate metric. 
International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council with title of Section 103 to be modified as follows: "Department of Building Safety"; Section 103.1 be changed to read "General. The department of building safety is hereby created and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official" and all further references to the code official to be changed to read "building official". 
International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition, published by the International Code Council with all references to code official changed to read "building official" and excluding the following sections 101.4.4; 402.2.7. 
(b)  The violation of any provision of these codes shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the jurisdictional limits of the municipal court applicable at the time of such violation. An act or omission in violation of any provision of these codes shall constitute a separate offense for each day in which such violation initially occurs or continues. 
(Code 1964, § 5-1; Ord. No. 12-1987, § A, 12-16-87; Ord. No. 6-1993, §§ 1, 2, 11-17-93; Ord. No. 13-2003, § 1, 11-19-03; Ord. No. 10-2007, §§ 1—4, 8-1-07; Ord. No. 14, 2011, § 1, 12-7-11; Ord. No. 24-2018 , §§ 1, 2, 9-5-18) 
Cross reference— Copies to be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, § 1-16.  
Sec. 4-22. - Schedule of fees. 
The fees for each permit shall be as set by city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 13-2003, § 2, 11-19-03; Ord. No. 14, 2011, § 2, 12-7-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6-1993, § 3, adopted Nov. 17, 1993, repealed Ord. No. 12-1987, adopted Dec. 16, 1987, from which former § 4-22 derived. Former § 4-22 pertained to amendments to the 1985 Edition of Uniform Building Code. 
Subsequently, Ord. No. 13-2003, § 2, adopted Nov. 19, 2003, enacted a new § 4-22, as set forth herein.  
Secs. 4-23—4-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-2003, § 3, adopted Nov. 19, 2003, repealed former §§ 4-23—4-25, which pertained, respectively, to the residential rehabilitation program, violation of code, and adoption of model energy efficient construction, renovation, and conservation standards, and derived from §§ 5-1.1(d), 5-1.3, and 5-1.4 of the 1964 Code.  
Sec. 4-26. - Code for the abatement of dangerous building. 
The abatement of dangerous or unsafe structures and equipment shall be governed by the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted in section 14-1 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 5-1.5; Ord. No. 12-2002, § 1, 5-15-02; Ord. No. 18-2010, § 4, 12-1-10) 
Cross reference— Copies to be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, § 1-16.  
Secs. 4-27—4-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-2003, § 3, adopted Nov. 19, 2003, repealed former §§ 4-27—4-29, which pertained, respectively, to the adoption of the plumbing code, amendments to the plumbing code, and adoption of the mechanical code, and derived from §§ 5-2, 5-2.0, and 5-2.8 of the 1964 Code.  
Secs. 4-30—4-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING NUMBERING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Duties and liabilities of city with regards to ordinances requiring building numbering, § 4-4; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; subdivisions, Ch. 17; zoning, Ch. 21. 
 
Sec. 4-61. - Housing numbering required. 
All the buildings in the city shall be numbered in accordance with sections 4-62 through 4-65. It is hereby made the duty of all the owners or occupants of all buildings situated in the city to number them in the manner provided in this article. 
(Code 1964, § 18-5)  
Sec. 4-62. - On north-south thoroughfares. 
All the avenues or streets running north and south shall be numbered consecutively from the north to the south, beginning at the north side of the city on First Street with one hundred (100) and there shall be assigned one hundred (100) numbers to each and every block. The odd numbers shall be assigned to the west side of the avenues or streets and the even numbers on the east side thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 18-6)  
Sec. 4-63. - On east-west thoroughfares. 
All the streets and avenues running east and west shall be numbered consecutively from the east side of the city, same being the boundary line of section ten (10), and shall be numbered from east to west, beginning with one hundred (100). There shall be one hundred (100) numbers assigned to each block. The odd numbers shall be on the north side of the streets or avenues, and the even numbers on the south side thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 18-7)  
Sec. 4-64. - Numbers per footage; numbering diagram. 
While one hundred (100) numbers are allotted to each block, only one (1) number shall be used for each frontage of twenty-five (25) feet, and the city clerk shall cause to be prepared a statement, or diagram, showing the numbers of all houses in the city. The city clerk shall assign to each house its proper number, and upon application shall deliver to the owner or occupant thereof a certificate designating such number. 
(Code 1964, § 18-8)  
Sec. 4-65. - Size of figures. 
Each of the figures shall not be less than three (3) inches in length, being marked so as to be distinctly and easily read. The numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous place on or above the front door of the buildings to which the same are attached. 
(Code 1964, § 18-9)  
Sec. 4-66. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person being the owner or occupant of any building now erected or hereafter erected in the city, thirty (30) days after being notified by the city clerk of the number so allotted to the building as provided in this article, to neglect or refuse to number such building owned or occupied by such owner in conformity with the provisions of this article or to number any such building with any number other than that allotted to the same. 
(Code 1964, § 18-10; Ord. No. 11-2001, § 4, 12-19-01; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § C1, 10-3-18)  
Secs. 4-67—4-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LICENSES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Duties and liabilities of city with regards to enforcement of ordinances relating to licensing of contractors and subcontractors, § 4-4; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Contractor means any person who for a fixed or determinable sum of money or other compensation, other than wages, undertakes, or agrees to undertake, for another, the construction, alteration or repair of any building or structure affixed to real property, or any part thereof. However, such term shall not include and this article shall not apply to persons installing, repairing or altering plumbing or any electrical wiring, fixtures or appliances. 
General contractor means any contractor, who undertakes or agrees to undertake any such construction, alteration or repair which requires the services of a person or persons engaged in two (2) or more different trades. 
Limited contractor means any contractor who undertakes or agrees to undertake any such construction, alteration or repair which requires the services of a person or persons engaged in one (1) trade only. 
Person means and includes any person, company, firm, association, or corporation, whether acting on his, her or its own behalf or while in the employ of another person, company, firm, association, or corporation, who is a contractor, as defined in this section. 
Trade means an occupation requiring special mechanical and technical knowledge and skill, including masonry, carpentry, plastering, painting and papering, glazing, roofing, and all other occupations carried on in the construction, alteration or repair of buildings or structures requiring knowledge and skill for the performance thereof. 
Wages means compensation paid for services measured solely by the time spent in performance of such service multiplied by the rate of compensation per unit of time. 
(Code 1964, § 5-3; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § C2, 10-3-18) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Secs. 4-82—4-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONTRACTORS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10. 
 
Sec. 4-96. - License and insurance required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of contractor, either general or limited within the city, unless a contractor's license shall be applied for and there shall be issued to such person a contractor's license for the current year, as provided in this division. 
(b)  Before any license shall be issued to engage in the construction business to perform construction work, an applicant shall file with the building official a certificate of commercial liability insurance of not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per occurrence and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) aggregate. Products and completed operations are not required to be part of this policy. 
(Code 1964, § 5-4; Ord. No. 14, 2011, § 3, 12-7-11)  
Sec. 4-97. - Application, investigation of applicant's record, fees, expiration. 
(a)  Contractor's licenses shall be granted by the building official at the expiration of not more than ten (10) days after presentation to the building official of an application therefor, and upon payment to the building official of a license fee, such fee to be set by city council by resolution. 
(b)  Licenses thus issued shall expire on the thirty-first day of December, next following date of issuance. 
(c)  During the ten-day period between the date of the application and issuance of such license, the building official shall investigate whether the applicant has previously been convicted of a violation of any city ordinances relating to buildings and structures and use of lands and real estate. If previously convicted of any such violation the application shall be rejected. 
(d)  Each license shall contain a statement of whether it be a general or limited contractor's license, and, if limited, the trade to which its exercise is limited. 
(Code 1964, § 5-5; Ord. No. 14, 2011, § 3, 12-7-11)  
Sec. 4-98. - Revocation, suspension, rejection; hearing on complaint. 
Any license issued pursuant hereto may be revoked, suspended or refused any person who intentionally and openly violates the federal, state and municipal laws, rules and ordinances pertaining to the building trades, provided that no license shall be revoked or suspended for the reason contained in this section except by action of the city council upon a verified complaint filed with the council by a party directly affected by such violation setting forth the violations, and unless such complaint or a part thereof shall in the opinion of a majority of the council present at a meeting thereof, be sustained by evidence presented at a hearing before the council. The applicant shall be given notice of such hearing and a copy of such complaint at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing, and shall be permitted to be present and be represented by counsel at such hearing and present evidence thereat in his or her own behalf. 
(Code 1964, § 5-6; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § C3, 10-3-18)  
Secs. 4-99—4-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PLUMBERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Plumbers, C.R.S. 12-58-101; city may license plumbers, C.R.S. 12-58-115; state license valid in city without obtaining city license, C.R.S. 12-58-115. 
 
Sec. 4-131. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to conduct or carry on or engage in the business, trade or calling of plumbing or to install plumbing in connection with the dealing in or selling of plumbing material and supplies, in the city, without first having obtained a contractor's license as required in the building code adopted in section 4-21. 
(Code 1964, § 5-2.0(1))  
Sec. 4-132. - Qualifications. 
To be qualified to secure a plumbing license, an applicant for such license must be a master plumber, currently licensed by this state, or have in charge and responsible for all plumbing work a supervisor who is a master plumber currently licensed by this state. The right of the licensee to do business under the license so issued shall be dependent upon such licensee's retention of his or her state license, or where applicable, the retention of his or her employment with a duly licensed master plumber as a supervisor. No one (1) individual may be designated as supervisor for more than one (1) business license. Each individual or individuals, who is or are to act as a supervisor shall be designated as such on each application for license. 
(Code 1964, § 5-2.0(2); Ord. No. 27-2018 , § C4, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 4-133. - Suspension and reinstatement. 
Whenever a designated state licensed supervisor terminates his or her employment with a licensee or otherwise becomes inactive, the licensee shall immediately notify the building inspector. In such event the business license shall be deemed to be suspended. Should the designated state licensed supervisor be replaced, or should his or her retention be renewed, such facts shall be made known to the building inspector. If the proposed replacement meets the qualifications imposed by this section, the business license shall again be deemed in full force and effect, without imposition of additional license fee for the same calendar year. 
(Code 1964, § 5-2.0(3); Ord. No. 27-2018 , § C5, 10-3-18)  
Secs. 4-134—4-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-2002, §§ 1—6, adopted August 7, 2002, enacted provisions intended for use as §§ 4-150—4-155. To preserve the style of the Code, at the discretion of the editor, these new provisions have been included herein as §§ 4-151—4-156. 
 
Sec. 4-151. - Definitions. 
When used in this article: 
The committee shall mean the historic preservation advisory committee, as established in this article. 
Landmark shall mean a property registered in the City of Alamosa Historic Registry under the provisions of this article. 
The historic registry shall mean the official records kept by the City of Alamosa of properties designated as being historic properties under the provisions of this article. 
The terms alter, alteration or altered, with respect to landmarks, shall mean a change or modification in the appearance, structure, or location of such landmark so as to render it ineligible for continued listing in the historic registry. 
The historic preservation officer shall mean the public works director for the City of Alamosa, or that person within the public works department designated as such by the public works director, who shall be a person having sufficient knowledge and experience to deal with matters covered by this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-2002, § 1, 8-7-02)  
Sec. 4-152. - Historic preservation advisory committee established. 
A historic preservation advisory committee is hereby established and shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the city council. Members shall be qualified electors of the city. To the extent possible at least two (2) members shall be persons with special interest or professionals in a preservation related discipline, such as design, landscape architecture, architecture history, archeology history, planning, cultural geology, culture anthropology. 
The initial board shall have two (2) positions, having a two (2) year term and three (3) positions having a four (4) year term, with renewal being four (4) years each. 
The committee shall determine its officers, promulgate its operating rules, regulations, and keep a record of all proceedings. A majority of members constituting the committee at any given time shall constitute a quorum at its meetings. Committee shall act in an advisory capacity and shall make recommendations in accordance with the city's historic preservation ordinance. 
The committees shall have regular meetings once a quarter. If additional meetings are needed to meet the intent of the historic preservation ordinance, those meetings shall be coordinated with the city's historic preservation officer. 
(Ord. No. 17-2002, § 2, 8-7-02; Ord. No. 07-2007, § 1, 5-16-07; Ord. No. 5-2008 , § 1, 10-1-08; Ord. No. 11-2008, § 1, 11-5-08)  
Sec. 4-153. - Duties of committee. 
The committee's responsibilities include, but are not limited, to: 
(1)  Establishing nomination procedures; receiving and processing nominations of historic properties and districts for the purpose of making recommendations to the historic preservation officer for certification of nominated properties or districts to the historic registry; reviewing and evaluating altered landmarks or historic districts for the purpose of recommending to the historic preservation officer decertification of landmarks or historic districts from the historic registry. 
(2)  Providing information regarding preservation, renovation and rehabilitation of landmarks, including nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(3)  Identifying and prioritizing historic sites and districts within the City of Alamosa. 
(4)  Advising city council on preserving Alamosa's historic character. 
(5)  Pursuing incentives and programs to assist in the preservation of landmarks, ostensibly historic sites, and historic districts. 
(6)  Promoting preservation related public education programs, such as walking tours, brochures, a marker program for landmarks, historic sites and districts, lectures and conferences. 
(Ord. No. 17-2002, § 3, 8-7-02)  
Sec. 4-154. - Designation of historic sites and districts. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety, welfare by protecting, enhancing, and perpetuating buildings, sites and areas of the city reminiscent of past eras, event, and persons important in local, state, or national history, or providing examples of architectural styles of the past, and facilitating and enhancing the availability of incentives for property owners who participate in historic preservation. 
(b)  Designation. Pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section, city council may by ordinance or resolution: 
(1)  Designate as an historic site an individual structure or other feature, or an integrated group of structure and features on a single lot or site having a special character and historical, architectural or aesthetic interest or value; 
(2)  Designate as an historic district an area containing a number of structures having a special character and historical, architectural or aesthetic interest or value. 
(c)  Nomination. Property may be nominated for historic designation by the property owner, the committee, or any interested citizen by filing an application with the public works department on forms provided by the city. Nominations for designation of an historic site must contain the approval of the owner of record; nominations for designation of an historic area must contain the approval of at least seventy-five (75) percent of the owners of record within the proposed area. Multiple owners of one (1) property shall be deemed one (1) owner. 
(d)  Committee review. The committee shall review the nomination for conformance with purposes and criteria stated in this article. The committee shall, within sixty (60) days after the filing of a completed nomination, report its findings and conclusions in writing to the historic preservation officer, who shall, within fifteen (15) days of receiving the committee's report, approve or deny the nomination. The decision shall be issued in writing and mailed to the nominator and property owner. The committee's recommendation for approval or denial shall be put into effect by the historic preservation officer unless the officer determines that the committee has misapplied the applicable criteria, in which case the officer shall delineate and explain in writing all such misapplication. 
(e)  Council action . If a nomination is approved by the historic preservation officer, city council shall, no later than forty-five (45) days after the issuance of the historic preservation officer's decision, or upon the later conclusion of an appeal, formally declare the designation by resolution or ordinance, which shall include a legal description of the site, area, or district, and a description of characteristics of the site, area, or district which justify its designation. 
(f)  Appeals. Any interested party, within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of the decision by the historic preservation officer, may appeal the decision. All such appeals shall be initiated by a written notice of appeal filed with the city clerk within the appeal period. Such writing shall specify every basis for the appeal. City council shall consider such appeal at a public meeting or hearing, at the discretion of city council. A hearing shall be held only after at least ten (10) days' notice to the property owner and nominator, and after published notice at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Review by public meeting shall be a review of only the record. Following city council's review on appeal, it shall proceed to designate the historic structure or district or to decertify the same by ordinance, or it shall issue a written decision stating the reasons for denying certification or for declining to decertify the property or district. Appeals shall be concluded by city council within forty-five (45) days of the notice of appeal. 
(g)  Eligibility for inclusion in the local registry . Any property, area, or district within the City of Alamosa which has been designated as a National Historic Property, or which has been designated as Colorado Historic Property, upon sufficient verification of such designation to the Historic Preservation Committee, may be eligible for inclusion in the Alamosa Historic Registry. 
(Ord. No. 17-2002, § 4, 8-7-02; Ord. No. 14-2005, §§ 1—4, 7-20-05)  
Sec. 4-155. - Criteria for designation of historic sites and districts. 
(a)  Landmarks. Any property designated as an historic landmark must be at least fifty (50) years old and meet one (1) or more of the criteria set forth in this section. An historic landmark may be exempted from the age requirement if it is found to be of exceptional importance in one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  The historic landmark or district shall: 
a.  Exemplify specific elements of an architectural style or period; 
b.  Reflect the historic work of an architect or builder who is recognized for expertise nationally, statewide, regionally or locally; 
c.  Demonstrate superior craftsmanship or high artistic value; 
d.  Represent an innovation in construction, materials, or design; 
e.  Exemplify an architectural style particularly associated with the Alamosa area; 
f.  Represent a built environment of a group of people in an era of history; 
g.  Contain patterns or groupings of elements representing at least one (1) of the above criteria; 
h.  Be the site of an historic event that had an articulable effect upon society; 
i.  Exemplify cultural, political, economic or social heritage of the community; 
j.  Be associated with a notable person or the work of a notable person. 
k.  Enhance sense of identity of the community; 
l.  Be an established and familiar natural setting or visual feature of the community. 
(2)  After satisfying subsection (1) above, the nominated property or district shall be evaluated for physical integrity on the basis of following criteria, but do not need to meet all of the criteria: 
a.  Shows character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the community, region, state, or nation; 
b.  Retains original design features, materials, and/or character; 
c.  Original location or same historic context after having been moved; 
d.  Has been accurately reconstructed or restored based on documentation. 
(b)  Districts. A district is a geographically definable area including a concentration, linkage or continuity of subsurface sites, buildings, structures, and/or objects. The district is defined by patterns of either physical elements or social activities. Properties that do not contribute to the significance of the historic district may be included within the boundaries, as long as the noncontributing elements do not noticeably detract from the district's sense of time, place and historical development. Noncontributing elements will be evaluated for their magnitude of impact by considering their size, scale, design, location and/or information potential. District boundaries are defined by visual changes, historical documentation of different associations or patterns of development, or evidence of changes in the site type or site density as established through testing or survey. Properties which are deemed to contribute to the significance of the historic district shall be subject to the same requirements for historic landmark designation as provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 17-2002, § 5, 8-7-02)  
Sec. 4-156. - Criteria to review apparent or proposed alterations. 
(a)  The committee shall review permits for any proposed work on a designated historic landmark or district. The committee shall use the criteria set forth in this section to determine if the proposed work would detrimentally alter, destroy or adversely affect any architectural or landscape feature which contributes to its original historical designation. The committee must find a proposed development is visually compatible with designated historic structures located on the property in terms of design, finish, material, scale, mass and height. When the subject site is a historic district, the committee must also find that the proposed development is visually compatible with the development on adjacent properties. For purposes of this section, the term "compatible" means consistent with, harmonious with, an/or enhances the mixture of complimentary architectural styles either of the architecture of an individual structure or the character of the surrounding structures. 
(b)  The committee shall use the following criteria to determine compatibility: 
(1)  The effect upon the general historical and architectural character of the structure and property; 
(2)  The architectural style, arrangement, texture and material used on the existing and proposed structures and their relation and compatibility with other structures; 
(3)  The size of the structure, its setbacks, its site, location, and the appropriateness thereof, when compared to existing structure and the site; 
(4)  The compatibility of accessory structures and fences with the main structure on the site, and with other structures; 
(5)  The effects of the proposed work in creating, changing, destroying, or otherwise impacting the exterior architectural features of the structure upon which such work is done; 
(6)  The condition of the existing improvements and whether they are a hazard to public health and safety; 
(7)  The effects of the proposed work upon the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and protection of the property; 
(8)  Compliance with the secretary of interior's current standards for rehabilitation. 
(c)  Revocation after alteration. City council shall revoke a designation if it determines that the site or area, as a whole, no longer meets the purposes set forth herein. The process for determining whether an ostensible or reported change to historically designated properties constitutes an alteration as defined in this article shall be initiated by a written application for review of a landmark or historic district, which may be initiated by the city, the committee, or any interested person. After instigation of a review, the process shall follow the same steps and time-lines as set forth in this section for applications for historic designation, and shall be subject to appeal as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 17-2002, § 6, 8-7-02; Ord. No. 14-2005, § 3, 7-20-05)  
Secs. 4-157—4-169. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - GROWING OF MARIJUANA FOR PERSONAL USE 
 
Sec. 4-170. - Scope. 
This article applies to the growing, cultivating, and processing of marijuana on any lot, parcel, or tract of land by any person, including, but not limited to, patients, primary caregivers, or persons for personal use. 
(Ord. No. 12-2017 , § 1, 6-7-17)  
Sec. 4-171. - Definitions. 
The definitions contained in Article XVIII, Sections 14 and 16 of the Colorado Constitution, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code (C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101 et seq .) and the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code (C.R.S. § 12-43.4-101 et seq .), as amended from time to time, are incorporated into this article by reference, including, but not limited to, definitions of marijuana and medical marijuana. All other applicable definitions are as stated herein. 
(1)  Accessory structure means: A subordinate structure detached from but located on the same lot as the primary residence, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the primary residence. 
(2)  Accessory use means: A use incidental to and subordinate to a primary residence. 
(3)  Medical marijuana patient means: A patient, as defined in Article XVIII, Section 14(1)(d) of the Colorado Constitution, who holds a valid and current registry identification card, as defined in Article XVIII, Section 14(1)(g) of the Colorado Constitution, and any person who is a medical marijuana patient under this section shall be registered with the state licensing authority pursuant to C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106(8.5). 
(4)  Primary care giver shall have the same meaning as set forth in Article XVIII, Section 14(1)(f) of the Colorado Constitution, and any person who is a primary care giver under this section shall be registered with the state licensing authority pursuant to C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106(8.6). 
(5)  Primary residence means: A residence, including the lot, the home, and any accessory structures located on the lot, where a person, by custom and practice, makes his or her principle domicile and address and to which the person intends to return following any temporary absence, such as a vacation. Residence is evidenced by actual daily physical presence, use and occupancy of the primary residence and use of the residential address for domestic purposes, such as, but not limited to, slumber, preparation and partaking of meals, regular mail delivery, vehicle registration, or credit, water and utility billing. A person shall have only one (1) primary residence. 
(6)  Primary use means: The main use of a structure or land, as distinguished from an accessory use. 
(Ord. No. 12-2017 , § 1, 6-7-17)  
Sec. 4-172. - Growing, cultivating, and processing of marijuana. 
(a)  Accessory use to primary residence. Marijuana may only be grown, cultivated, or processed as an accessory use at the primary residence of the person conducting such activity, and only for such person's own use, or by a primary caregiver on behalf of a patient. 
(b)  Location of growing, cultivating, and processing of marijuana. 
(1)  Marijuana may only be grown, cultivated, or processed in a primary residence where residential use is the primary use of the structure or in an accessory structure to the primary residence on the same property. 
(2)  If grown indoors, including indoors in any accessory structure, the space used for the growing, cultivating, or processing of marijuana shall be limited to a total area of one hundred (100) square feet and a total volume of one thousand (1,000) cubic feet. The area shall be measured to the projected outer dripline of the plants when considered as a unit, and calculated based upon the most reasonably appropriate and easily calculated geometric shape encompassing that dripline (typically a rectangle, right triangle, or circle). The volume shall be calculated as the area calculated as set forth above, multiplied by the height of the tallest plant. 
(3)  Marijuana shall not be grown, cultivated, or processed within any multi-family dwelling. 
(4)  Any area used for the growing, cultivating, and processing of marijuana shall be fully enclosed and locked, ensuring accessibility only by the person growing, cultivating or processing the marijuana for medical or personal use and to prevent access by children, visitors, casual passersby, or anyone not authorized to possess marijuana. 
(5)  Any area used for the growing, cultivating, or processing of marijuana shall comply with all applicable building and fire codes, as amended and adopted, including plumbing, electrical and mechanical. 
(6)  Nonresidential buildings or structures that are not accessory to a primary residence shall not be used for the growing, cultivating, or processing of marijuana. 
(7)  It is unlawful to use a kitchen, bathroom or primary bedrooms for the indoor cultivation of marijuana. 
(c)  Compliance with building codes. It is unlawful to cultivate marijuana in any structure without complying with applicable building and fire codes, including plumbing and electrical, and all applicable zoning codes, including, but not limited to, lot coverage, setback and height requirements. 
(Ord. No. 12-2017 , § 1, 6-7-17)  
Sec. 4-173. - Marijuana plant limits. 
At any given time, no more than twelve (12) marijuana plants, in any stage of maturity, may be possessed, grown, cultivated or processed at a primary residence, including the lot, home, and any accessory structure, regardless of how many adults reside at the residence, unless being grown by one (1) or more medical marijuana patients or primary care givers residing at the residence, in which case the number of plants, at any stage of maturity, may not exceed twenty-four (24). 
(Ord. No. 12-2017 , § 1, 6-7-17)  
Sec. 4-174. - Lighting restrictions and prohibition on use of compressed flammable gas products or flammable liquids. 
It is unlawful to use any grow lighting system for the indoor cultivation of marijuana other than light-emitting diodes (LEDs), compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) or fluorescent lighting. All high-intensity discharge (HID) lighting, including, but not limited, to mercury-vapor lamps, metal-halide (MH) lamps, ceramic MH lamps, sodium-vapor lamps, high-pressure sodium (HPS) lamps and xenon short-arc lamps, are prohibited. 
No compressed flammable gas (e.g. butane) or flammable liquid may be used in the growing, cultivating, or processing of marijuana. For purposes of this paragraph, "flammable liquid" means a liquid that has a flash point below one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit, and includes all forms of alcohol and ethanol. 
(Ord. No. 12-2017 , § 1, 6-7-17)  
Sec. 4-175. - Cannot be perceptible. 
The growing, cultivating, or processing of marijuana shall not be perceptible from the exterior of the structure in which such activities occur, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Common visual observation. 
(2)  Light pollution, glare, or brightness that disturbs the peace of another. 
(3)  Undue vehicular or foot traffic, including unusually heavy parking in front of the primary residence. 
(4)  The smell or odor of marijuana growing, cultivating, or processing at a primary residence shall not be detectable by a person with a normal sense of smell from any adjoining lot, parcel, tract, public right-of-way, or building unit. 
(Ord. No. 12-2017 , § 1, 6-7-17)  
Sec. 4-176. - Ventilation requirements. 
Any indoor marijuana cultivation area shall include a ventilation and filtration system designed to ensure that odors from the cultivation are not detectable beyond the property line for detached single-family residential dwelling, and designed to prevent mold and moisture and otherwise protect the health and safety of persons residing in the residence. This shall include, at a minimum, a system meeting the requirements of the current, adopted edition of the International Residential Code. 
(Ord. No. 12-2017 , § 1, 6-7-17)  
Sec. 4-177. - Penalty for violations—Declaration of nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article. Any person found to have violated a provision of this article shall be fined in accordance with the city's schedule of fines, but in no event shall any fine for violation of section 4-175 be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and for violation of any of sections 4-172, 4-173, 4-174, and 4-176 be less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). In addition, violation of this article shall constitute a nuisance, and may be abated by the city in the same manner dangerous buildings are abated. 
(Ord. No. 12-2017 , § 1, 6-7-17)  
Sec. 4-178. - Additional remedies. 
The remedies provided in this article shall be cumulative and in addition to any other federal, state or local remedy, which may be available. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to preclude prosecution under any other applicable statue, ordinance, rule, order or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 12-2017 , § 1, 6-7-17; Ord. No. 1-2018 , § 5, 2-7-18)  
Chapter 5 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to establish wards, art. III, § 24; elections, art. VIII. 
Constitutional law reference— Home rule cities may regulate and control municipal elections, art. XX, § 6, Colo. Const. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; city council, § 2-16 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal election laws, C.R.S. 31-10-101 et seq.; registration and qualifications of municipal electors, C.R.S. 31-10-201; electronic voting systems, C.R.S. 31-10-801 et seq.; election campaign regulations, C.R.S. 1-45-101 et seq.; city may adopt more stringent provisions, C.R.S. 1-45-120; limitation on contributions, C.R.S. 1-45-111, 1-45-112, 1-45-116; reports to be open to public inspection, C.R.S. 1-45-108(3). 
 
PART 1. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Election wards. 
There are hereby created and established for the city four (4) wards numbered and described in accordance with the most recently recorded ward map in the office of the Alamosa County Clerk and Recorder. 
(Code 1964, § 2-24) 
Charter reference— Wards, art. III, § 24.  
Sec. 5-2. - Election precincts. 
(a)  The municipal election precincts are hereby established for the city in accordance with the most recently recorded precinct map in the office of the Alamosa County Clerk and Recorder. 
(b)  The city council has determined and hereby finds and determines that it is not feasible or practical that the municipal election precincts consist of one (1) or more whole general election precincts. However, the council does find and deem that the foregoing precincts are expedient for the convenience of the electors of the city. 
(c)  The polling place for each precinct shall be established by the city council by resolution prior to the next municipal election. 
(Code 1964, § 2-24.1) 
State Law reference— Election precincts, C.R.S. 31-10-502.  
Sec. 5-3. - Nominating petition—Form. 
There is hereby adopted and approved the following form of petition, which shall be used for the nomination of candidates for the city council: 
PETITION FOR NOMINATION 
OF CANDIDATE FOR CITY COUNCILMEN 
TO THE HONORABLE CITY CLERK 
CITY OF ALAMOSA, COLORADO 
We, the undersigned duly qualified electors and voters of (Ward ___________ in) the City of Alamosa, Colorado, do hereby nominate ___________ representing the ___________ party as a candidate for the office of city councillor (from said Ward) (at large), which office is to be filled at the next ensuing municipal election of the City of Alamosa to be held on the ________ day of November, 19___. 
NAME       ADDRESS 
(Code 1964, § 2-25) 
Cross reference— City council, § 2-16 et seq. 
State Law reference— Nomination of municipal officers, C.R.S. 31-10-302.  
Sec. 5-4. - Same—Nomination acceptance, to be appended. 
Every such petition, before the same is filed with the city clerk on behalf of any candidate, shall have endorsed thereon, or appended thereto in writing, the acceptance of such candidate of such nomination by acknowledgment before any officer authorized to take acknowledgments, and such acceptance of nomination shall contain the full name and residence address of such candidate. 
(Code 1964, § 2-26) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 31-10-302(6).  
Sec. 5-5. - Write-in candidate must file prior to five days before election. 
No write-in vote for any municipal office shall be counted unless the candidate files an affidavit of intent with the city clerk prior to five (5) days before the election. 
(Code 1964, § 2-26.1(a)) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt rules regarding write-in candidates, C.R.S. 31-10-306.  
Sec. 5-6. - Cancellation. 
(a)  If the only matter before the voters is the election of persons to office, and if, at the close of business on the Friday before the election, there are not more candidates than offices to be filled at such election, including candidates filing affidavits of intent, the city clerk shall certify such facts to the city council, and it shall hold a meeting and may cancel the election and by resolution declare the candidates elected. 
(b)  Upon such declaration, the candidates shall be deemed elected. 
(c)  Notice of such cancellation shall be published, if possible, in order to inform the electors of the city, and notice of such cancellation shall be posted at each polling place and in not less than one (1) other public place. 
(Code 1964, § 2-26.1(b)—(d))  
Sec. 5-7. - Oath. 
Before assuming the duties of their offices by the respective officers provided for in this chapter, they shall take and subscribe an oath for affirmation to be endorsed on their respective certificates of election to support the constitution of the United States, this state and faithfully comply with the ordinances of the city, and well and truthfully perform the duties of their respective offices impartially and to the best of their skill and ability, which certificate and oath shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1964, § 2-27) 
Charter reference— Oath of office, art. II, § 7. 
Constitutional law reference— Oath, art. XII, §§ 8, 9. 
State Law reference— Oath of office, C.R.S. 31-4-401.  
Sec. 5-8. - Date new councillors take office. 
Newly elected members of the city council shall take office at the first meeting of the city council following the certification of their election by the city clerk. 
(Code 1964, § 2-27.1)  
Sec. 5-9. - Use of Uniform Election Code of 1992. 
(a)  The City of Alamosa is hereby authorized and enabled to utilize the requirements and procedures of the Uniform Election Code of 1992, Articles 1 to 13 of Title I, C.R.S., in lieu of the Municipal Election Code of 1965, and as an alternative thereto. 
(b)  The city may determine on an election-by-election basis whether to utilize the Uniform Election Code of 1992, as herein authorized, or whether to utilize the Municipal Code of 1965; said determination, except for the 1993 election, may be made by resolution or ordinance duly passed by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2-1993, §§ 1, 2, 7-21-93) 
Editor's note— Nonamendatory Ord. No. 2-1993, §§ 1, 2, has been included herein as a new 5-9 at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 5-10—5-18. - Reserved. 
State Law reference— Authority of a municipality to utilize the Uniform Election Code of 1992 as an alternative to other election procedures, C.R.S. 31-10-102.7.  
PART 2. - FAIR CAMPAIGN PRACTICES; CANDIDATE AND COMMITTEE FUNDS AND DISCLOSURES 
 
Sec. 5-19. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Part is to provide for transparency in the expenditure of monies spent on campaigns and not to regulate speech. Making an endorsement supporting or opposing a candidate or ballot measure, or solicitation of such an endorsement by a candidate, committee, or other person, is not regulated by this ordinance. However, the expenditures for publishing endorsements, and any contributions for support or opposition to a candidate or ballot measure other than the endorsement itself, are regulated by this ordinance in the same way as other contributions and expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-1-19)  
Sec. 5-20. - Definitions. 
Unless the specific language or the context indicates that a different meaning is intended, the following definitions apply to this part: 
Ballot question: A matter placed on the ballot in an election required or permitted by the Charter, including a matter related to the recall of an elected official, but not including a matter related to the election of a candidate, and not including an annexation matter. 
Candidate: A person who seeks election to city council or the office of mayor. 
Candidate committee: A person, including the candidate, or persons with the common purpose of receiving contributions or making expenditures under the authority of a candidate. A contribution to a candidate shall be deemed a contribution to the candidate's candidate committee. A candidate shall have only one candidate committee. A candidate committee shall be considered open and active until affirmatively closed by the candidate or by the candidate committee. 
Committee: A candidate committee, issue committee, or political committee. 
Conduit: A person who transmits contributions from more than one person, directly to a candidate committee. "Conduit" does not include the contributor's immediate family members, the candidate or campaign treasurer of the candidate committee receiving the contribution, a volunteer fundraiser hosting an event for a candidate committee, or a professional fundraiser if the fundraiser is compensated at the usual and customary rate. 
Contribution: 
(a)  The payment, loan, pledge, gift, or advance of money, or guarantee of a loan, made to any candidate committee, issue committee, or political committee; any payment made to a third party for the benefit of any candidate committee, issue committee, or political committee; the fair market value of any gift or loan of property made to any candidate committee, issue committee, or political committee; and anything of value given, directly or indirectly, to a candidate for the purpose of promoting the candidate's nomination, retention, recall, or election. 
(b)  Contribution does not include services provided without compensation by individuals volunteering their time on behalf of a candidate, a candidate committee, a political committee, or an issue committee. The term does not include a transfer by a membership organization of a portion of a member's dues to a political committee sponsored by such membership organization, or payments by a corporation or labor organization for the costs of establishing, administering, and soliciting funds from its own employees or members for a political committee. 
Elected official: The mayor or a member of city council. 
Election cycle: For all regular elections held the first Tuesday in November of odd numbered years, the period commencing thirty-five (35) days after the first Tuesday in November of each odd numbered year and ending thirty-four (34) days after the first Tuesday in November of the following odd numbered year. For any special election not held on the first Tuesday of November in any odd numbered year, the election cycle for that election shall be the period between the date city council calls the special election and the date that is thirty-five (35) days after the election. 
Expenditure: Any purchase, payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit, or gift of money by any person for the purpose of expressly advocating the election or defeat of a candidate or supporting or opposing a ballot question. An expenditure is made when the actual spending occurs or when there is a contractual agreement requiring such spending and the amount is determined. Expenditure does not include: 
(a)  Any news articles, editorial endorsements, opinion or commentary writings, or letters to the editor printed in a newspaper, magazine or other periodical not owned or controlled by a candidate or political party; 
(b)  Any editorial endorsements or opinions aired by a broadcast facility not owned or controlled by a candidate or political party; 
(c)  Spending by persons, other than political committees, in the regular course and scope of their business or payments by a membership organization for any communication solely to members and their families; 
(d)  Any transfer by a membership organization of a portion of a member's dues to a political committee sponsored by such membership organization; or 
(e)  Payments made by a corporation or labor organization for the costs of establishing, administering, or soliciting funds from its own employees or members for a political committee. 
Independent expenditure: means an expenditure that is not controlled by or coordinated with any candidate or agent of such candidate. Expenditures that are controlled by or coordinated with a candidate or candidate's agent are deemed to be both contributions by the maker of the expenditures, and expenditures by the candidate committee. 
Issue committee: Any person, other than a natural person, or any group of two (2) or more persons, including natural persons: a) that has a major purpose of supporting or opposing any ballot question, AND b) that has accepted or made contributions or expenditures in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to support or oppose any ballot question. The term does not include political committees or candidate committees. An issue committee shall be considered open and active until affirmatively closed by the committee. 
Natural person: A human being, as distinguished from a corporation or other entity created by law. 
Political committee: Any person, other than a natural person, or any group of two (2) or more persons, including natural persons that have accepted or made contributions or expenditures in excess of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to support or oppose the nomination or election of one or more candidates. The term does not include political parties, issue committees, or candidate committees. The following are treated as a single political committee: 
(a)  All political committees established, financed, maintained, or controlled by a single corporation or its subsidiaries; 
(b)  All political committees established, financed, maintained, or controlled by a single labor organization, except that, any political committee established, financed, maintained, or controlled by a local unit of the labor organization which has the authority to make a decision independently of the state and national units as to which candidates to support or oppose shall be deemed separate from the political committee of the state and national unit; 
(c)  All political committees established, financed, maintained, or controlled by the same political party; and 
(d)  All political committees established, financed, maintained, or controlled by substantially the same group of persons. A political committee shall be considered open and active until affirmatively closed by the committee. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-1-19)  
Sec. 5-21. - Candidate and committee funds reporting and disclosures; conduits. 
(a)  All cash contributions to any committee shall be deposited in a financial institution in a separate account, the title of which shall include the name of the committee. Any expenditure greater than one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be made by check, draft, debit card, credit card, or by any other instrument or electronic method of payment, but not with legal tender. 
(b)  Each candidate and candidate committee shall file disclosure statements if its expenditures or receipts exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) during the election cycle. 
(c)  Each candidate and candidate committee shall file disclosure statements if it receives contributions in excess of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) during the election cycle. 
(d)  Each political committee shall file disclosure statements if its expenditures or receipts exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) during the election cycle. Dues transferred by a membership organization to a political committee shall be counted for as pro rata contributions from its members. 
(e)  Each political committee shall file disclosure statements if it receives contributions in excess of two hundred fifty dollars (250.00) during the election cycle. 
(f)  Each issue committee shall file disclosure statements once it has accepted contributions or has made expenditures that exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) during the election cycle. 
(g)  For regular elections held in November of an odd numbered year, candidate and committee disclosure statements, if any be due, shall be filed on the following reporting dates, or the first business day thereafter if the date falls on a weekend or city holiday: May 1, June 1, July 1, August 1, September 1, October 1, October 15, the Friday prior the election, and thirty-five (35) days after the election. For an election held at any time other than on the first Tuesday of November of an odd numbered year, disclosure statements shall be filed on the first day of the month that is ninety (90) days, sixty (60) days, and thirty (30) days before the election and on the Friday before the election, and thirty-five (35) days after the election. 
(h)  Any committee that is formed or that meets the filing threshold more than thirty (30) days before the election is not required to file disclosure statements on any disclosure reporting dates that occur less than twenty-one (21) days after the committee was formed or met the filing threshold. 
(i)  A committee that is formed or that meets the filing threshold on or less than thirty (30) days before the election is required to file its first disclosure statement commencing twenty-four hours after the date the committee was formed or met the filing threshold, and all subsequent disclosure statements on the dates due. 
(j)  The first reporting period shall commence on the first day of the election cycle and shall end five (5) days before the first applicable reporting date that a disclosure statement is due. Subsequent reporting periods shall commence on the day following the end date for the previous reporting period and shall end five (5) days prior to the next reporting date. 
(k)  Each disclosure statement shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be signed under penalty of perjury by the candidate or candidate designee, or by the candidate or the candidate designee or representative for a candidate committee disclosure statement, or representative for an issue committee or a political committee. The forms required by this section shall be created and maintained under a system maintained by the city clerk. 
(l)  Notwithstanding the reporting requirements specified above, sixty (60) days after a committee dissolves or otherwise ceases to function, no further disclosures are required except as required by section 5-26 of this part. 
(m)  No person shall act as a conduit for a contribution to a candidate committee. 
(n)  A committee that publishes a communication in a newspaper shall disclose in the communication the name of the committee or candidate making the expenditure. The disclosure shall be clear, legible, and conspicuous. 
(o)  Every candidate or committee disclosure shall be made on a form provided by the city clerk which shall include the following: 
(1)  The committee's full name, spelling out any acronyms used in the name; 
(2)  The type of report; 
(3)  The name of a natural person authorized to act as a registered agent of the committee; 
(4)  A street address for the principal place of business of the committee; and 
(5)  The name of the financial institution in which all contributions received by the committee are deposited. 
(6)  For each contribution received, the date and amount of the contribution and the name and city and county of residence of each person who has made such contribution. 
(7)  For each expenditure made, the date and amount of the expenditure and the name of the payee. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-1-19)  
Sec. 5-22. - Independent expenditures—Registration—Disclosure. 
(a)  Any person that accepts a donation that is given for the purpose of making an independent expenditure in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or that makes an independent expenditure in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall register with the city clerk within two (2) business days of the date on which an aggregate amount of donations accepted or expenditures made reaches or exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(b)  The registration required by paragraph (a) of this section shall include a statement listing: 
(1)  The person's full name, spelling out any acronyms used therein; 
(2)  A natural person authorized to act as a registered agent; and 
(3)  A street address and telephone number for the principal place of operations; 
(c)  If the person identified in subparagraph (1) of paragraph (b) of this section is a corporation, a subsidiary may register on behalf of its parent corporation or for other subsidiaries of the parent corporation, and the parent corporation may register on behalf of all of its subsidiaries. In each such case, the registered agent of the person registering shall serve as the registered agent for all such affiliated corporations. Registration of a subsidiary shall include the name of its parent corporation as well as any names under which the subsidiary does business. 
(d)  If the person identified in subparagraph (1) of paragraph (b) of this section is a labor organization, a local labor organization may register on behalf of any affiliated local, national, or international labor organization that will be making independent expenditures, and a national or international labor organization may register on behalf of any affiliated local labor organization that will be making independent expenditures. In each such case, the registered agent of the labor organization that is registering shall serve as the registered agent for each affiliated local, national, or international labor organization. 
(e)  Any person who expends an aggregate amount in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more per calendar year for the purpose of making an independent expenditure shall report to the city clerk, in accordance with the requirements of this section, the name and address of any person that, for the purpose of making an independent expenditure, donates more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year to the person expending one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more on an independent expenditure. If the person making the donation of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more is not a natural person, the disclosure required by this paragraph (e) shall also include: 
(A)  The donor's full name, or, if the donor is a subsidiary of a parent corporation, the full name of the parent corporation, spelling out any acronyms used therein; 
(B)  All names under which the donor does business in the state if such names are different from the name identified pursuant to subparagraph (1) of paragraph (b); 
(C)  The address of the home office of the donor, or, if the donor is a subsidiary of a parent corporation, the home office of the parent corporation; and 
(D)  The name and street address in the state of the donor's registered agent. 
(f)  The information required to be disclosed pursuant to this section 5-22 must be reported in accordance with the schedule specified in section 5-21 for committees. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-1-19)  
Sec. 5-23. - Encouraging withdrawal from campaign prohibited. 
No person shall offer or give any candidate or candidate committee any money or any other thing of value for the purpose of encouraging the withdrawal of the candidate's candidacy, nor shall any candidate offer to withdraw a candidacy in return for money or any other thing of value. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-1-19)  
Sec. 5-24. - Enforcement; order to show cause or to cure. 
(a)  The City Clerk shall use his or her best efforts to review all filings for facial compliance within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt and shall consider whether a candidate, a committee, or an elected official has failed to submit a required filing. The city clerk shall determine whether there is reason to believe that a candidate, a committee, or an elected official has violated this part. In making this determination, the city clerk shall disregard any filing that contains, or that the city clerk reasonably believes contains, any false or misleading information. Any filing the city clerk disregards shall be deemed to violate this part and shall be deemed not to have been filed. 
(b)  Within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt, the City Clerk shall use his or her best efforts to review all signed complaints submitted on a form provided by the city clerk that are received not more than forty-five (45) days after the close of the reporting period to which the complaint applies, and shall determine whether the complaint states sufficient grounds to believe that a candidate, a committee, or an elected official has violated this part. Nothing in this section precludes the city clerk or any other officer of the city from filing a complaint, and the complaint shall be processed in the same manner as any other complaint filed under this article. 
(c)  If the clerk believes that a filing, on its face, does not comply with this Code or that a complaint states a probable violation of this Code, the city clerk may notify the appropriate person of the probable errors or omissions, of the failure to file, or of the allegations in the complaint without issuing an order to show cause if the city clerk believes that the violation is the result of a clerical error. If the city clerk believes that a person has violated this part other than by the making of a clerical error that has been rectified, the city clerk shall issue an "order to show cause or to cure" directed to the candidate, if any, and to the registered agent of the committee which shall be served upon that person by first class U.S. mail, postage prepaid. The order shall provide seven (7) days from the date of mailing either: 1) to show cause as to why the city clerk should not assess a civil penalty as provided by section 5-24 of this Part or 2) to cure the alleged violation of this Part. The city clerk shall use his or her best efforts to review a timely filed response to order to show cause within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt, and shall determine whether the response cures the defect or noncompliance or provides a basis to conclude that there has been compliance. If the city clerk determines that the response has done so, the city clerk shall withdraw the order to show cause or to cure. If the city clerk determines that the response has not done so, the city clerk shall consider the response to be an appeal of the order to show cause or to cure. A response that is not timely filed shall not be considered. 
(d)  The order to show cause or to cure shall state: 1) the alleged violations, 2) a general description of the facts upon which the determination was based, 3) that the violations, if any, must be cured within seven (7) days of the date the order to show cause or to cure was mailed, and that if the violations, if any, are timely cured, no penalty will be imposed, 4) the action the city clerk believes is necessary to cure the alleged violations, 5) that if the violations, if any, are not timely cured a civil penalty will be assessed under section 5-24 of this part unless an appeal of the order to show cause or to cure is filed in the office of the city clerk within seven (7) days of the date of mailing of the order, and 6) that if no appeal is timely filed, the violations the city clerk specified in the order to show cause or to cure will be final and not subject to appeal. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-1-19)  
Sec. 5-25. - Appeal of order to show cause—Hearings. 
(a)  If an appeal of the Clerk's order to show cause or cure is timely filed, the city clerk shall, within forty-eight (48) hours of the filing of the appeal, refer the matter to the city attorney. The city attorney shall convene the city's personnel board to hear the appeal and shall set the matter for hearing to be held within twenty-one (21) days of the filing of the appeal. 
(b)  The hearing shall be on the record and all testimony shall be given under oath. The personnel board, in conducting the hearing, shall not be bound by the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure or the Colorado Rules of Evidence, and may consider any evidence reasonably calculated to assist in making a decision. The candidate, committee, or an elected official may be represented by counsel and the city shall be represented by an attorney designated by the city attorney. The city attorney shall serve as hearing officer advising the personnel board with respect to the hearing, and ensuring due process is accorded all parties at the hearing. The hearing officer may issue subpoenas to compel testimony and to produce documents. If any person fails or refuses to comply with a subpoena, the hearing officer may seek to enforce the subpoena in the Alamosa Municipal Court. The hearing officer may also seek to enforce a subpoena in any District Court in the State and in any foreign jurisdiction as permitted under the Uniform Interstate Depositions and Discovery Act, C.R.S. § 13-90.5-101 et seq. 
(c)  The personnel board shall consider all documents and other information in the city clerk's file relating to the matter and all testimony and exhibits presented at the hearing. 
(d)  The personnel board shall issue written findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding whether any violations alleged in the order to show cause or to cure should be sustained, and shall issue a written order within fourteen (14) days after the hearing unless additional time is necessary to consider all relevant information. The order shall be supported by the findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall assess a civil penalty as provided under section 5-24 of this part, if warranted, except that the personnel board may abate all or a portion of any civil penalty for good cause shown. 
(e)  The decision of the personnel board shall be final and may be reviewed only as provided by Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure in an action timely filed pursuant to the provision of that rule in the Alamosa County District Court. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-1-19)  
Sec. 5-26. - Civil penalty. 
(a)  If an affidavit, disclosure statement, or other required document is not filed, or is deemed not to have been filed, by the due date and the violation is not timely cured, a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day shall be imposed from the due date until the date the affidavit, disclosure statement, or other required document was filed. Unless otherwise specified in an order issued under subsection 5-23(d) of this part, if an order to show cause or to cure is sustained in whole or in part, a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day shall be imposed from the due date until the date the appeal was filed plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each day in the period starting ten (10) days after the date the order was issued until the date the civil penalty specified in the order is paid. Except for good cause shown, a civil penalty is not considered paid until it is paid in its entirety. A candidate is liable for any penalty imposed on a candidate committee. 
(b)  Any committee that makes, or causes to be made, a communication in a newspaper that does not provide the disclosure required by subsection 5-22(l) of this part shall be subject to a penalty that is the lesser of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each day that the communication is circulated without the disclosure or five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  The civil penalty imposed by this section shall be separate from and in addition to any penalty or sanction imposed by this Code or any other law. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-1-19)  
Sec. 5-27. - Unpaid civil penalty constitutes debt. 
A civil penalty that remains unpaid for more than thirty (30) days shall constitute a debt due the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-1-19)  
Sec. 5-28. - Unexpended campaign funds. 
(a)  Not later than ninety-one (91) days after the results of an election are certified, campaign funds held by a candidate or a committee shall be donated to a charitable organization recognized by the Internal Revenue Service or returned to the contributors, except that campaign funds held by a candidate or a candidate committee may be retained solely for use by the candidate as a candidate in a subsequent campaign, and except that funds held by a political committee may be retained for future activities. 
(b)  Issue committees shall close and file a final disclosure form no later than ninety-one (91) days after the results of an election are certified. 
(c)  If funds are retained by a political committee or by a candidate committee for a subsequent campaign, the political committee or the candidate shall file a report describing any changes in the account during the year with the city clerk by January 31 of each year, until the candidate declares candidacy in another election or until the political committee participates in another election. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-1-19)  
Sec. 5-29. - Public records. 
Unless disclosure of information is protected by the Colorado Open Records Act, any other law, or by court order, all declarations of candidacy, disclosure statements, affidavits, complaints, and all other documents filed, submitted, or produced under this part shall be public information. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-1-19)  
Sec. 5-30. - No effect on certification of election. 
The certification of election results shall not be affected by the failure of any person to comply with this part. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-1-19)  
Sec. 5-31. - Administration. 
The city clerk shall administer this part and shall have the power to take any action that is necessary or appropriate for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-1-19)  
Secs. 5-32—5-39. - Reserved.  
PART 3. - USE OF CITY RESOURCES FOR CAMPAIGNING 
 
Sec. 5-40. - Definitions. 
Unless the specific language or the context indicates that a different meaning is intended, the following definitions apply to this part: 
City resources; use of city resources: Funds, assets, or any other resources owned, controlled, or otherwise used or employed by the city. Any activity by an individual who acts on City time and any activity by an individual who acts, or purports to act, in his or her capacity with the City constitutes the use of city resources. 
Election issue: A matter that has been submitted to the electors, but only if the matter is not related to the election of an individual to, or the recall of an individual from, public office. 
Municipal election: An election held as required or permitted by the Charter and this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 3, 5-1-19)  
Sec. 5-41. - Use of city resources for campaigning prohibited. 
Except as specifically permitted by section 5-42 of this Part, it shall be a violation of this part to use city resources to support or oppose, directly or indirectly, a person running for office, the retention of a person who is the subject of a recall election, or an election issue. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 3, 5-1-19)  
Sec. 5-42. - Permitted uses of city resources. 
(a)  City resources may be used by city council to adopt resolutions and to issue proclamations supporting or opposing any election issues. 
(b)  City resources may be used to prepare and distribute materials and to otherwise disseminate information relating to council's position supporting or opposing election issues submitted to the voters at a municipal election. The total value of city resources that may be used pursuant to this part shall not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per election issue. The city shall file all disclosure materials required by Part 2 of this Chapter concerning expenditure of City resources on a municipal election issue. 
(c)  City resources may be used to prepare and distribute materials and to otherwise disseminate information relating to council's position supporting or opposing election issues submitted to the voters at elections other than municipal elections only if city council expressly finds and directs, in a resolution containing specific supporting facts and circumstances, that the issue on which it authorizes expenditure of city resources is one that will have a financial or operational impact on the city. The total value of city resources that may be used for any such non-municipal election issue may not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per election issue. The city shall file all disclosure materials required by Part 2 of this Chapter concerning expenditure of City resources on a non-municipal election issue. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 3, 5-1-19)  
Sec. 5-43. - Personal opinions and resources not restricted. 
This part does not restrict an individual from expressing opinions or from using personal resources to support or oppose an election issue, a person running for public office, or a person who is the subject of a recall election. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 3, 5-1-19)  
Chapter 6 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; city council, § 2-16 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7. 
State Law reference— Colorado Disaster Emergency Act of 1973, C.R.S. 24-33.5-701 et seq.; disaster relief, C.R.S. 24-33.5-1101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Council—Creation, function, appointment and term of members. 
There is hereby created and established the Alamosa Disaster Emergency Council under the direction of the mayor. The city council shall serve as the members of the disaster emergency council. They shall have direct responsibility for the organization, operation and administration of the disaster emergency program. 
(Code 1964, § 8-1) 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2.  
Sec. 6-2. - Same—Appointments, delegation of powers, duties. 
The disaster emergency council shall appoint such workers and deputies and delegate such of its powers and duties as it may deem proper to carry out the purpose of this chapter. The scope of the activities of the disaster emergency council shall be in accordance with the tenor of the times and with the state disaster emergency program so as to provide for the common defense against enemy action and emergencies resulting from natural causes. 
(Code 1964, § 8-1)  
Sec. 6-3. - Same—Rights, powers and duties. 
The disaster emergency council shall be charged with the duty of coordinating all civilian defense and emergency activities within the city and shall in conformity with the rules and regulations provided for in this chapter, and shall exercise the following rights, duties and powers: 
(1)  Coordinate the activities of municipal and private agencies cooperating in the emergency management program; 
(2)  Conduct studies and formulate plans and measures designed to afford adequate protection of life and property of the citizens of this community in any emergency likely to arise; 
(3)  Sponsor and carry out recruiting instruction and training of civilian auxiliary and volunteer service units; 
(4)  Perform such other advisory functions as may be requested by the mayor, by the city council, or by agencies or departments of the federal or state governments in connection with the national or state defense program. 
(Code 1964, § 8-2)  
Sec. 6-4. - Promulgation of emergency, duration. 
(a)  In order to protect the public health, welfare, safety, and property of the citizens of this city, in addition to all other powers now existing or which may hereafter exist by virtue of the Charter or ordinances of the city, the mayor shall have the power to declare that an emergency exists when there is reasonable cause to believe that life, property or public welfare are threatened by any natural disaster, force majeure or manmade calamity. 
(b)  An emergency shall be declared by the mayor in a written proclamation delivered to the city manager, who shall then be charged with the duty and responsibility of putting emergency measures into effect, including the duty to publish and disseminate information concerning the powers invoked by the mayor by virtue of such proclamation. 
(c)  Any such emergency declared by proclamation of the mayor shall remain in effect only so long as the mayor reasonably believes the emergency powers granted by this section are necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the residents or property of the city, and such state of emergency shall be terminated by the mayor by written proclamation when the emergency situation is no longer found to exist. It shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local disaster emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the county clerk and recorder, city clerk, or other authorized record keeping agency and with the state division of disaster emergency services. 
(Code 1964, § 8-3(a)—(c); Ord. No. 27-2018 , § D1, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 6-5. - Authority of mayor in emergency. 
Whenever the mayor proclaims that an emergency condition exists, the mayor shall have the authority to make any or all of the following orders in the proclamation: 
(1)  To order the closing of all retail malt, vinous and spirituous liquor outlets, and all fermented malt beverage outlets, and to order the closing of all private clubs wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor or beer is permitted; 
(2)  To order the discontinuance of the selling, distributing or giving away of gasoline or other flammable or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle; 
(3)  To order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments whose business activity is the sale, distribution or dispensing of flammable or combustible materials; 
(4)  To order the discontinuance of the selling, distributing, or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever, and to order the closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof which engage in the sale, distribution, or giving away of firearms and/or ammunition; 
(5)  To designate certain areas of the city as being restricted against entry therein by any unauthorized persons, except bona fide residents living or working within the restricted area; 
(6)  To declare a public curfew prohibiting all persons, except those expressly authorized, from being upon the public streets or in any public place in the city during certain hours; 
(7)  To establish a communications headquarters for the dissemination of all public information and reports relating to the emergency. 
(Code 1964, § 8-3(d); Ord. No. 27-2018 , § D2, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 6-6. - Delegation of authority. 
Whenever the mayor is absent from the city, or is unable to act, the emergency powers authorized may be exercised to the same extent and under the same conditions that the mayor could have exercised them, had he or she been present or able to do so, by the following public officials and in the following sequence: 
(1)  The mayor pro tem; 
(2)  The senior councillor in length of service as councillor; and in the event that two (2) or more councillors have served for the same length of time, then in the order of the alphabetical sequence of their last names. 
(Code 1964, § 8-4; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § D3, 10-3-18  
Sec. 6-7. - Enforcement, police authorized. 
The members of the police force of this city are authorized and directed to enforce the orders, rules and regulations made or issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 8-5)  
Sec. 6-8. - Effect of chapter—Liability for damages. 
This chapter and all things done by authority of same, or by authority of any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, shall constitute the exercise by the city of its governmental functions; and the city, its officers, authorized persons and organizations as provided for in this chapter, and any persons complying with this chapter or with the rules and regulations lawfully promulgated by authority of this chapter, in acting within the authority provided for in this chapter and in a reasonable and prudent manner, shall not be liable for any damage sustained by any person or property as a result of the enforcement of or compliance with this chapter or any such rule or regulation. 
(Code 1964, § 8-6)  
Sec. 6-9. - Same—Benefits under other laws. 
The provisions of section 6-8 shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he or she would otherwise be entitled under this chapter, or under the worker compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive any benefits or compensation under any Act of Congress. 
(Code 1964, § 8-7; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § D4, 10-3-18)  
Chapter 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Fire department, art. XVIII. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; city fire zones established, § 4-1; emergency management, Ch. 6; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks, Ch. 12; fire protection requirements in mobile home parks, § 12-33; nuisances, Ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Fire safety assistance by state division of fire safety, C.R.S. 24-33.5-1203; building and fire regulations, C.R.S. 31-15-601 et seq.; codes adopted by reference, C.R.S. 31-16-201 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Fire codes—Adopted; penalty. 
(a)  Pursuant to parts 1 and 2 of article 16 of title 31, C.R.S., there is hereby adopted by reference the 2015 International Fire Code promulgated and published by the International Code Council, so as to regulate the topics of said code in the manners set forth in said code, which include but are not limited to establishing the minimum requirements consistent with nationally recognized good practice for providing a reasonable level of life safety and property protection from the hazards of fire, explosion or dangerous conditions in new and existing buildings, structures, and premises and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. The International Fire Code is adopted as if set out at length, except that Section 903.2.8 shall not be applicable to one and two family dwellings. A copy of the International Fire Code shall be maintained in the office of the Fire Chief of the City of Alamosa, and may be inspected during regular business hours. 
(b)  The most current versions of the National Fire Protection Association Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code, NFPA 30 and the National Fire Protection Association Code, Code for Motor Fuel Dispensing Facilities and Repair Garages, NFPA 30 A, are hereby adopted by reference, as if said codes were set forth in full, into the Code of Ordinances of the City of Alamosa, Colorado, so as to regulate the topics of said codes in the manners set forth in said code, which include but are not limited to establishing the minimum requirements consistent with nationally recognized good practice for handling and storage of flammable and combustible liquids and other fuels. This ordinance adopts the most current versions of said codes adopted by the National Fire Protection Association without need for further amendment of this ordinance as new such versions are promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(c)  The violation of any provision of the above adopted codes shall by punished by a fine and/or imprisonment not exceeding the jurisdictional limits of the Alamosa Municipal Court applicable at the time of such violation. An act or omission in violation of any provision of this code shall constitute a separate offense for each day in which such violation initially occurs or continues. 
(Code 1964, § 11-3-1; Ord. No. 15-1986, § A, 9-3-86; Ord. No. 5-1997, 4-16-97; Ord. No. 1-2006, § 1, 2-1-06; Ord. No. 15-2011, § 1, 12-7-11; Ord. No. 26-2017 , § 1, 9-20-17; Ord. No. 24-2018 , § 5, 9-5-18) 
Cross reference— Copies to be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, § 1-16; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4.  
Sec. 7-2. - Burning material in city, permission required. 
No material shall be set on fire or burned within the city limits without permission of the fire chief or the fire chief's designee. 
(Code 1964, § 11-4; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § E1, 10-3-18) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; nuisances, Ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16.  
Secs. 7-3—7-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Fire department, art. XVIII. 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-36 et seq.; personnel, Ch. 15. 
 
Sec. 7-16. - Chief of fire department. 
The chief of the fire department shall be responsible for the discipline, good order and proper conduct of the entire fire department, and for the enforcement of all ordinances and regulations pertaining thereto. The fire chief shall have command and control of all members of the fire department and other apparatus and property belonging to the fire department. The fire chief shall in all cases of fires have control of all persons present at a fire; and to that end shall ex officio be and exercise all the powers of a fire chief in this state. The fire chief shall have power, if need be, to compel any and all persons present to aid in extinguishing any fire, in removing property from any burning or exposed building and in guarding the same. The fire chief shall have full power to suspend any member of the fire department at any time for cause, and such person shall remain under suspension until reinstated by the fire chief or by city council. 
(Code 1964, § 11-1; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § E2, 10-3-18) 
Charter reference— Qualifications of chief of the fire department, art. XVIII, § 1.  
Secs. 7-17—7-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 26-2017 , § 2, adopted September 20, 2017 amended art. III by repealing §§ 7-36—7-40 and reenacting a new art. III as set out herein. Former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1964, §§ 11-31—11-36. 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10. 
 
Sec. 7-36. - Permit required for storage in excess of ten gallons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or have in excess of ten (10) gallons of gasoline or other flammable liquids on any premises within the corporate limits of the city, except in the integrated fuel tanks of vehicles, without first obtaining a permit from the Fire Chief/Fire Marshall. Permits shall be issued in accordance with the installation, maintenance and use requirements of the fire code and flammable liquids codes adopted in section 7-1 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Alamosa. Permits shall be subject to fees as established by resolution of city council from time to time. Permits may only be obtained for the following uses: 
(1)  Class II (Diesel/Kerosene) fuels for heating purposes in all zoning districts, maximum allowable storage three hundred (300) gallons; 
(2)  Class I, II and III fuels in Agricultural, Commercial Business, and Industrial Zones only. 
Every application for a permit to sell or store gasoline or other flammable liquids must be made in writing to the fire chief/fire marshall, who, upon receipt of the application and fee shall forthwith make an inspection of the premises proposed to be used for such sale or storage, and the means of distribution, and if the conditions, surroundings and arrangements are such that the intent of this article and the fire and flammable liquids codes adopted by the City of Alamosa can be observed, may issue a permit for the installation of the system or equipment, subject to his or her final inspection and approval after installation and before covering from sight. 
(Ord. No. 26-2017 , § 2, 9-20-17; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § E3, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 7-37. - No storage in public rights-of-way. 
No storage tank shall be installed in the public streets, avenues or alleys of the city. 
(Ord. No. 26-2017 , § 2, 9-20-17)  
Chapter 8 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, adopted March 5, 2014 , repealed and replaced ch. 8, arts. I—III, §§ 8-1—8-11, 8-31—8-34, 8-51—8-53, in its entirety. Former ch. 8 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 6-1987, § 1(11½-1—11½-18), adopted July 1, 1987; Ord. No. 5-1988, §§ 1, 2, 4, adopted May 18, 1988; Ord. No. 5-1990, § 3, adopted October 3, 1990; Ord. No. 3-1991, § 1, adopted August 7, 1991; Ord. No. 1-1995, adopted February 1, 1995; Ord. No. 7-1999, §§ 1—5, adopted April 21, 1999 and Ord. No. 18-2002, § 1, adopted August 21, 2002. 
Cross reference— Comprehensive plan adopted, § 2-131; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks, Ch. 12; location of mobile home park to meet the requirements of the flood ordinance, § 12-23; nuisances, Ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; subdivisions, Ch. 17; utilities, Ch. 20; zoning, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Flood prevention and control, C.R.S. 31-23-301. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the state has, in C.R.S. Title 29, Article 20, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city, does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations: 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to critical facilities, infrastructure and other public facilities such as water, sewer and gas mains; electric and communications stations; and streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood- prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is located in a flood hazard area. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-5. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
One hundred (100) year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (one (1) percent-annual-chance flood). The terms "one-hundred-year flood" and "one (1) percent chance flood" are synonymous with the term "one hundred (100) year flood." The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every one hundred (100) years. 
One hundred (100) year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a one hundred (100) year flood. 
Five hundred (500) year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a two-tenths (0.2) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (two-tenths (0.2) percent-chance-annual-flood). The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every five hundred (500) years. 
Five hundred (500) year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a five hundred (500) year flood. 
Addition means any activity that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the square footage of an existing structure. 
Alluvial fan flooding means a fan-shaped sediment deposit formed by a stream that flows from a steep mountain valley or gorge onto a plain or the junction of a tributary stream with the main stream. Alluvial fans contain active stream channels and boulder bars, and recently abandoned channels. Alluvial fans are predominantly formed by alluvial deposits and are modified by infrequent sheet flood, channel avulsions and other stream processes. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated zone AO or AH on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on a FEMA flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Channel means the physical confine of stream or waterway consisting of a bed and stream banks, existing in a variety of geometries. 
Channelization means the artificial creation, enlargement or realignment of a stream channel. 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) means the codification of the general and permanent rules published in the federal register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government. It is divided into fifty (50) titles that represent broad areas subject to federal regulation. 
Community means any political subdivision in the state that has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations through zoning, including, but not limited to, cities, towns, unincorporated areas in the counties, Indian tribes and drainage and flood control districts. 
Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) means FEMA's comment on a proposed project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map, that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain. 
Critical facility means a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in section 8-58, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. 
Development means any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
DFIRM database means the database (usually spreadsheets containing data and analyses that accompany DFIRMs). The FEMA mapping specifications and guidelines outline requirements for the development and maintenance of DFIRM databases. 
Digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM) means the FEMA digital floodplain map. These digital maps serve as "regulatory floodplain maps" for insurance and floodplain management purposes. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building: 
(1)  Built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and 
(2)  Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. 
In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Federal register means the official daily publication for rules, proposed rules, and notices of federal agencies and organizations, as well as executive orders and other presidential documents. 
FEMA means federal emergency management agency, the agency responsible for administering the national flood insurance program. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of water from channels and reservoir spillways; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or 
(3)  Mudslides or mudflows that occur from excess surface water that is combined with mud or other debris that is sufficiently fluid so as to flow over the surface of normally dry land areas (such as earth carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current). 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the federal emergency management agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by the federal emergency management agency. The report contains the flood insurance rate map as well as flood profiles for studied flooding sources that can be used to determine base flood elevations for some areas. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated as the result of a flood, including the area of land over which floodwater would flow from the spillway of a reservoir. 
Floodplain administrator means the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. See section 8-31. 
Floodplain development permit means a permit required before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area (SFHA). If FEMA has not defined the SFHA within a community, the community shall require permits for all proposed construction or other development in the community including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may determine whether such construction or other development is proposed within flood-prone areas. Permits are required to ensure that proposed development projects meet the requirements of the NFIP and this chapter. 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood control structure means a physical structure designed and built expressly or partially for the purpose of reducing, redirecting, or guiding flood flows along a particular waterway. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and/or non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. The statewide standard for the designated height to be used for all newly studied reaches shall be one-half (½) foot (six (6) inches). Letters of map revision to existing floodway delineations may continue to use the floodway criteria in place at the time of the existing floodway delineation. 
Freeboard means the vertical distance in feet above a predicted water surface elevation intended to provide a margin of safety to compensate for unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood such as debris blockage of bridge openings and the increased runoff due to urbanization of the watershed. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior or; 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Letter of map revision (LOMR) means FEMA's official revision of an effective flood insurance rate map (FIRM), or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) means FEMA's modification of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. 
Levee means a man-made embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. For a levee structure to be reflected on the FEMA FIRMs as providing flood protection, the levee structure must meet the requirements set forth in 44 CFR 65.10. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). Any floor used for living purposes which includes working, storage, sleeping, cooking and eating, or recreation or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could be converted to such a use such as a basement. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home or business. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the national flood insurance program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means for purposes of the national flood insurance program, the North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
Material safety data sheet (MSDS) means a form with data regarding the properties of a particular substance. An important component of product stewardship and workplace safety, it is intended to provide workers and emergency personnel with procedures for handling or working with that substance in a safe manner, and includes information such as physical data (melting point, boiling point, flash point, etc.), toxicity, health effects, first aid, reactivity, storage, disposal, protective equipment, and spill-handling procedures. 
National flood insurance program (NFIP) means FEMA's program of flood insurance coverage and floodplain management administered in conjunction with the Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. The NFIP has applicable federal regulations promulgated in CFR Title 44. The U.S. Congress established the NFIP in 1968 with the passage of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
No-rise certification means a record of the results of an engineering analysis conducted to determine whether a project will increase flood heights in a floodway. A no-rise certification must be supported by technical data and signed by a registered state professional engineer. The supporting technical data should be based on the standard step-backwater computer model used to develop the one hundred (100) year floodway shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM). 
Physical map revision (PMR) means FEMA's action whereby one (1) or more map panels are physically revised and republished. A PMR is used to change flood risk zones, floodplain and/or floodway delineations, flood elevations, and/or planimetric features. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Special flood hazard area means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, i.e., the one hundred (100) year floodplain. 
Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, including substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure just prior to when the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. The value of the structure shall be determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority in the area of interest. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Threshold planning quantity (TPQ) means a quantity designated for each chemical on the list of extremely hazardous substances that triggers notification by facilities to the state that such facilities are subject to emergency planning requirements. 
Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the national flood insurance program regulations). 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of the national flood insurance program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas and areas removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) within the jurisdiction of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-7. - Basis for establishing the special flood hazard area. 
The special flood hazard areas identified by the federal emergency management agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Alamosa," dated April 21st, 1999, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and/or flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. These special flood hazard areas identified by the FIS and attendant mapping are the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies designated and approved by the city. The floodplain administrator shall keep a copy of the flood insurance study (FIS), DFIRMs, FIRMs and/or FBFMs on file and available for public inspection. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-8. - Establishment of floodplain development permit. 
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-9. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed within the special flood hazard area without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. These regulations meet the minimum requirements as set forth by the state water conservation board and the national flood insurance program. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, nor deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-11. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-12. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. 
This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard area or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-13. - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Secs. 8-14—8-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 8-31. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The building official is hereby appointed as floodplain administrator to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (national flood insurance program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-32. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter, including the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and any floodproofing certificate required by section 8-33. 
(2)  Review, approve, or deny all applications for floodplain development permits required by adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(3)  Review floodplain development permit applications to determine whether a proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Inspect all development at appropriate times during the period of construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter, including proper elevation of the structure. 
(6)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard area (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(7)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 8-7 the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III. 
(8)  For waterways with base flood elevations for which a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half (½) foot at any point within the community. 
(9)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the national flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half (½) foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (conditional letter of map revision), fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12 and receives FEMA approval. 
(10)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the state water conservation board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. 
(11)  Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-33. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to special flood hazard area. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures. 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed. 
(3)  A certificate from a registered state professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 8-52(2). 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 8-32. 
Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-34. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The city zoning board of adjustment (hereafter "appeal board") shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 8-33 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (½) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter as stated in section 8-3. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(1)  The criteria outlined in subsections (a)—(i) are met, and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Secs. 8-35—8-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 8-51. - General standards. 
In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(6)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-52. - Specific standards. 
In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) section 8-7, (ii) section 8-32(7), or (iii) section 8-57, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered state professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor. such certification shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in section 8-58, new construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that at one (1) foot above the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
A registered state professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. Such certification shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator, as proposed in section 8-7. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. 
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered state professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: 
a.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, 
b.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision, 
c.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or 
d.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), are elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of the above paragraph, shall be elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), are one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of section 8-33, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (4). 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(6)  Prior approved activities. Any activity for which a floodplain development permit was issued by the city or a CLOMR was issued by FEMA prior to January 14th, 2014 may be completed according to the standards in place at the time of the permit or CLOMR issuance and will not be considered in violation of this chapter if it meets such standards. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-53. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
Located within the special flood hazard area established in section 8-7, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Residential construction. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified). Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered state professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in section 8-58, all new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures, must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified), or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure is watertight to at least one (1) foot above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. A registered state professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 8-33, are satisfied. 
Within zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are required to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-54. - Floodways. 
Floodways are administrative limits and tools used to regulate existing and future floodplain development. The state has adopted floodway standards that are more stringent than the FEMA minimum standard (see definition of floodway in article I). Located within special flood hazard area established in section 8-7, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed by a licensed state professional engineer and in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase (requires a no-rise certification) in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection (1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the national flood insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision through FEMA. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-55. - Alteration of a watercourse. 
For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a special flood hazard area, the following standards apply: 
(1)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition, and channel migration and properly mitigate potential problems through the project as well as upstream and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability should be considered, when appropriate, to assist in determining the most appropriate design. 
(2)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the residual one hundred (100) year floodplain. 
(3)  Any channelization or other stream alteration activity proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local floodplain rules, regulations and ordinances. 
(4)  Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by a registered state professional engineer or by a certified professional hydrologist. 
(5)  All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all applicable federal, state and city floodplain requirements and regulations. 
(6)  Within the regulatory floodway, stream alteration activities shall not be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a floodway analysis and report, sealed by a registered state professional engineer, that there is not more than a zero (0.00) foot rise in the proposed conditions compared to existing conditions floodway resulting from the project, otherwise known as a no-rise certification, unless the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision in accordance with section 8-54. 
(7)  Maintenance shall be required for any altered or relocated portions of watercourses so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-56. - Properties removed from the floodplain by fill. 
A floodplain development permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure or addition to an existing structure on a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F), unless such new structure or addition complies with the following: 
(1)  Residential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that the structure or addition is watertight to at least one (1) foot above the base flood level that existed prior to the placement of fill with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-57. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision or other development proposal is in a flood-prone area, the proposal shall minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 8-8; section 8-33; and the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 8-8 or section 8-32. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Sec. 8-58. - Standards for critical facilities. 
A critical facility is a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Rule 6 of the Rules and regulations for regulatory floodplains in Colorado, 2 CCR 408-1, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. 
(1)  Classification of critical facilities. It is the responsibility of the city to identify and confirm that specific structures in their community meet the following criteria: 
Critical facilities are classified under the following categories: (a) essential services; (b) hazardous materials; (c) at-risk populations; and (d) vital to restoring normal services. 
a.  Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities, and transportation lifelines. 
These facilities consist of: 
1.  Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle and equipment storage, and, emergency operation centers); 
2.  Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent care centers having emergency treatment functions, and non-ambulatory surgical structures but excluding clinics, doctors' offices, and non-urgent care medical structures that do not provide these functions); 
3.  Designated emergency shelters; 
4.  Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio, and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines, cables, and conduits); 
5.  Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution ( hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines, transmission lines, distribution lines, and service lines); and 
6.  Air transportation lifelines (airports (municipal and larger), helicopter pads and structures serving emergency functions, and associated infrastructure (aviation control towers, air traffic control centers, and emergency equipment aircraft hangars). 
Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), non-potable water treatment and distribution systems, and hydroelectric power generating plants and related appurtenances. 
Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either located outside of the one hundred (100) year floodplain or are compliant with the provisions of this article, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the city on an as-needed basis upon request. 
b.  Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. 
These facilities may include: 
1.  Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical manufacturing); 
2.  Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials; 
3.  Refineries; 
4.  Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and 
5.  Above ground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers. 
Facilities shall be determined to be critical facilities if they produce or store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is required by the occupational safety and health administration (OSHA) to keep a material safety data sheet (MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the work place, and the chemical(s) is stored in quantities equal to or greater than the threshold planning quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that facility shall be considered to be a critical facility. The TPQ for these chemicals is: either five hundred (500) pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is lower) for the three hundred fifty-six (356) chemicals listed under 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010), also known as extremely hazardous substances (EHS); or ten thousand (10,000) pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the state department of health and environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found in 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010). The environmental protection agency (EPA) regulation "Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification," 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010) and OSHA regulation "Occupational Safety and Health Standards," 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010) are incorporated herein by reference and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation this chapter, but exclude later amendments to or editions of the regulations specific exemptions to this category include: 
1.  Finished consumer products within retail centers and households containing hazardous materials intended for household use, and agricultural products intended for agricultural use. 
2.  Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local authority having jurisdiction by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified professional (as determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a major threat to the public. 
3.  Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage, and distribution centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products. 
These exemptions shall not apply to buildings or other structures that also function as critical facilities under another category outlined in this article. 
c.  At-risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care, and schools. 
These facilities consist of: 
1.  Elder care (nursing homes); 
2.  Congregate care serving twelve (12) or more individuals (day care and assisted living); 
3.  Public and private schools (pre-schools, K-12 schools), before-school and after-school care serving twelve (12) or more children); 
d.  Facilities vital to restoring normal services including government operations. 
These facilities consist of: 
1.  Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails, building permitting and inspection services, community administration and management, maintenance and equipment centers); 
2.  Essential structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories, offices, and classrooms only). 
These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the floodplain administrator that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the alternative facilities are either located outside of the one hundred (100) year floodplain or are compliant with this chapter, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the city on an as-needed basis upon request. 
(2)  Protection for critical facilities. All new and substantially improved critical facilities and new additions to critical facilities located within the special flood hazard area shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be critical facilities. For the purposes of this chapter, protection shall include one (1) of the following: 
a.  Location outside the special flood hazard area; or 
b.  Elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
(3)  Ingress and egress for new critical facilities. New critical facilities shall, when practicable as determined by the city, have continuous non-inundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a one hundred (100) year flood event. 
( Ord. No. 2-2014, § 1, 3-5-14 )  
Chapter 10 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; service charge on checks or bank drafts returned to the city, § 2-117; financial matters, § 2-117 et seq.; dog licenses required, § 3-46; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; licenses and regulations for building contractors, § 4-81 et seq.; license required for engaging in the business of contractor, § 4-96 et seq.; plumber's license required, § 4-131; permit required for storage of flammable liquids, § 7-36 et seq.; distribution of handbills and posters regulated, § 11-2; mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks, Ch. 12; license required to operate a mobile home park, § 12-17; sales and use tax levied, § 18-16 et seq.; outdoor sign regulations, § 21-226 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Ordinances governing licensing, prosecution for violation. 
All licenses which may be issued under any ordinance of the city shall be subject to the ordinances and regulations which may be in force at the time of the issuing thereof, and which may subsequently be ordained by the city council. If any person so licensed shall violate any of the provisions thereof, such person shall be liable to be proceeded against for any fine or penalty imposed thereby and such person's license shall be subject to revocation, in the discretion of the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 14-1; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F1, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-2. - Scope and assignability of licenses. 
No license granted under any ordinance shall be assignable or transferable, nor shall any such license authorize any person to do business or act under it but the person named therein, unless otherwise provided by the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 14-2)  
Sec. 10-3. - Register, required to be kept, contents. 
The city clerk shall keep a license register in which shall be entered the name of each and every person licensed, pursuant to the ordinances of this city, the date of the license, the purpose for which granted, the amount paid therefor, and the date at which the same shall expire. 
(Code 1964, § 14-3)  
Secs. 10-4—10-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Colorado Beer Code, C.R.S. 12-46-101 et seq.; Colorado Liquor Code, C.R.S. 12-47-101 et seq.; local licensing authority, C.R.S. 12-46-107, 12-47-301 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-21. - Definitions. 
The words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the same meanings ascribed to them in C.R.S. 12-46-103, 12-47-103, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-22. - License required, conditions of issuance, posting; tax. 
(a)  No person shall sell, or keep for sale, any alcoholic beverages within the city without first having obtained a license from the city. The license fee for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall be the sums fixed by the Colorado Beer Code, C.R.S. 12-46-101 et seq. and the Colorado Liquor Code, C.R.S. § 12-47-101 et seq. 
(b)  Licenses shall be granted by the city council acting as the local licensing authority only after the payment of such license fee. No such license shall be granted until an underlying license from the state licensing authority is in place. 
(c)  Any license issued shall specify the date of issuance, the period covered by the license, the name of the licensee, and the place licensed. Such license shall not authorize the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages at any place other than that designated in the license, nor shall such license be transferable to any other person. Any license which may be issued shall be subject to all ordinances and regulations of the city in effect at the time of the issuance thereof or which may thereafter be adopted by the city council. 
(d)  The city clerk shall keep a license register showing the name of each licensee, the date of the license and the place licensed. Any license issued shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the room to which the license has been granted. 
(Code 1964, § 3-2; Ord. No. 13-1994, § 1, 12-7-94; Ord. No. 02, 2011, § 1, 2-2-11; Ord. No. 7-2018 , § 2, 3-7-18) 
State Law reference— Fermented malt beverage licenses, C.R.S. 12-46-106 et seq.; malt, vinous and spirituous liquor license, C.R.S. 12-47-105 et seq.  
Sec. 10-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2-2017 , § 4, adopted February 15, 2017, relocated § 10-23 to chapter 11, § 11-12. The historical notation has been retained.  
Sec. 10-24. - Disturbance on premises. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, except in (d) hereof, the term "licensee" shall include any person, firm or corporation licensed to sell or disburse fermented malt beverages or beer, wine and spirituous liquors as defined by state statutes, and any agent, servant or employee of such person, firm or corporation. 
(b)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any disturbance, or any unlawful or disorderly act or conduct to be committed by any person or group of persons upon the premises where such licensee's business is carried on. It shall be unlawful for a licensee in any manner to encourage or participate in any such disturbance or unlawful or disorderly act or conduct on such premises. Such licensee may use such lawful means as may be proper to protect his or her person or property from injury or damage. 
(c)  Notice to police. Every licensee shall immediately report to the police department of the city any unlawful or disorderly act, conduct or disturbance committed on such licensee's premises. 
(d)  Absence by licensee no defense. It shall not be a defense that the licensee was not personally present on the premises at the time such unlawful or disorderly act, conduct or disturbance took place; provided, however, an agent, servant, or employee of the person, firm or corporation actually licensed, shall not be liable when absent from the premises while not on duty. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof be fined or shall be imprisoned, or shall be both so fined and imprisoned. 
(f)  Penalty cumulative. Prosecution or conviction under this section shall not prevent prosecution or conviction under any other applicable law or ordinance and the penalties provided hereunder shall be cumulative and in addition to all other penalties provided for under such applicable law or ordinance. 
(Code 1964, §§ 3-9—3-14; Ord. No. 11-2001, § 5, 12-19-01; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F2, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-25. - Optional premises. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning specified below: 
Alcoholic beverages shall mean malt, vinous or spirituous liquors, as defined in the Colorado Liquor Code. 
Ancillary facility shall mean a permanent, temporary or moveable structure located on an optional premises and used to dispense alcoholic beverages. 
Authority shall mean the Alamosa City Council acting in its capacity as the local licensing authority for the City of Alamosa, Colorado. 
Optional premises shall mean outdoor sports and recreational facilities, as defined in the Colorado Liquor Code, located on or adjacent to premises licensed to sell or serve alcoholic beverages pursuant to the Colorado Liquor Code, and intended for the convenience of guests of the licensee, or the general public, or both. 
Optional premises license shall mean a license to sell or serve alcoholic beverages on the optional premises specified in the license. 
(b)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at an outdoor sports and recreational facility, unless licensed for a special event, or without first having obtained a valid optional premises license to do so as provided in this article. 
(c)  Application. Application for an optional premises license shall be made to the authority by the holder of or an applicant for a liquor license under the Colorado Liquor Code upon forms to be furnished by the authority for that purpose, which forms shall contain the following information in addition to information required by the state licensing authority: 
(1)  A detailed sketch of the outdoor sports and recreational facility, indicating the locations desired to be optional premises, including not more than one (1) proposed permanent location for ancillary facilities and the number, not to exceed two (2), of movable ancillary facilities to be used for special events or tournaments. 
(2)  Such other information as reasonably may be required to satisfy the authority that control of the optional premises will be assured, and that the health, welfare and morals of the neighborhood will not be adversely affected should the license issue. 
(d)  Notification of alcoholic beverage service. No alcoholic beverages shall be served on a licensed optional premises without the licensee having first provided written notice to the authority and the state licensing authority, no less than forty-eight (48) hours nor more than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to such service of alcoholic beverages. Such notice shall contain the specific days and hours on which the optional premises are to be used. 
(Ord. No. 4-1989, § 1, 5-17-89)  
Sec. 10-26. - Children prohibited from taverns; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a child to patronize a tavern, as defined in the Colorado Liquor Code, §§ 12-47-101 et seq., C.R.S., as amended, or for a child to gain entry, or attempt to gain entry, into a tavern unless accompanied by the child's parent or legal guardian. 
(b)  Child herein means an unemancipated person younger than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1, 6-5-96; Ord. No. 4-2002, § 1, 2-20-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1, adopted June 5, 1996, added new provisions to the Code as § 10-23; as § 10-23 already existed within the Code, said provisions of Ord. No. 9-1996 have been redesignated as § 10-26 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 10-27. - Sale or service to, or procurement for, visibly intoxicated persons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, give away, dispose of, exchange, or deliver or permit the sale, serving, giving or procuring of any alcohol beverage to a visibly intoxicated person. 
(Ord. No. 11-2002, § 1, 5-1-02)  
Sec. 10-28. - Distance restriction reduced to 400 feet for hotel and restaurant licenses, and not to apply to hotel and restaurant licenses and beer and wine licenses to be issued to premises in proximity to the Adams State University Campus and Trinidad State Junior College Campus. 
The distance restriction set forth in C.R.S. §12-47-313(1)(d), as amended, shall be reduced from 500 feet to 400 feet for hotel and restaurant licenses. Additionally, the distance restriction shall not apply to the Adams State University campus with respect to premises to be licensed for a hotel and restaurant license, a beer and wine license, or a hotel and restaurant with optional premises license, nor to the Trinidad State Junior College campus with respect to premises to be licensed for hotel and restaurant license or a beer and wine license. 
(Ord. No. 10-2003, § 1, 9-17-03; Ord. No. 7, 2011, § 1, 6-1-11; Ord. No. 1, 2012, § 1, 2-1-12; Ord. No. 6, 2016 , § 1, 3-2-16; Ord. No. 7-2018 , § 1, 3-7-18)  
Sec. 10-29. - Alcohol beverage tastings. 
(a)  Permit required. 
(1)  Alcohol beverage tastings on the licensed premises of a retail liquor store or of a liquor-licensed drugstore are authorized to be conducted within the city in accordance with CRS § 12-47-301(10) and subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  The authority is authorized to issue tasting permits in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct tastings within the city without having first received a permit issued in accordance with this chapter. 
(4)  Submittal requirements. The initial application and any renewal applications shall be submitted on a tasting permit application form obtained from the city clerk's office. This form shall include the following: 
a.  Licensee information including but not limited to name, address, contact information, and license number. 
b.  Verification that the licensee and employee(s) who will be conducting the tastings have completed a seller/server training program that meets the standards established by the liquor enforcement division in the department of revenue and is qualified to conduct an alcohol beverage tasting. 
c.  The appropriate initial or renewal fee as established by resolution. 
(5)  Advance notification. No alcohol can be provided as samples during a tasting until the licensee has provided written notice to the Alamosa City Clerk's Office at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to conduct said tasting. Such notice shall contain the specific days and hours on which the tasting will occur. There is no limitation on the number of days which a licensee may specify in each notice. 
(6)  Renewal of tasting permits shall be concurrent with the renewal of licenses for retail liquor stores and liquor-licensed drugstores. A licensee's initial tasting permit shall expire on the same date as the date of the licensee's underlying liquor license. The initial tastings permit application fee shall not be prorated if the permit expires in less than one (1) year. Renewal permits shall be issued for a period of time concurrent with the underlying license. 
(7)  Tasting permits shall be conspicuously and prominently posted by the licensee on the licensed premises at all times during business house. 
(8)  A tasting permit shall only be valid when issued to a retail liquor store or a liquor-licensed drugstore licensee whose license is valid and is in full force and effect. 
(b)  Limitations on tastings. Tastings within the City of Alamosa shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Tastings shall be conducted only by a person who has completed a server training program that meets the standards established by the Liquor Enforcement Division of the Colorado Department of Revenue and who is either a retail liquor store licensee or a liquor-licensed drugstore licensee, or an employee of such licensee, and only on a licensee's licensed premises; 
(2)  The alcohol beverages used in tastings shall be purchased through a licensed wholesaler, licensed brew pub or winery licensed pursuant to CRS § 12-47-403, at a cost that is not less than the laid-in cost for such alcohol; 
(3)  The size of an individual sample shall not exceed one (1) ounce for malt or vinous liquor, or one-half (½) ounce for spirituous liquors; 
(4)  The licensee shall not serve more than four (4) individual samples to a patron during a tasting; 
(5)  Tastings shall not exceed a total of five (5) hours in duration per day, which need not be consecutive; 
(6)  Tastings shall be conducted only during the operating hours in which the licensee on whose premises the tastings occur is permitted to sell alcohol beverages, and in no case earlier than 11:00 a.m. or later than 7:00 p.m.; 
(7)  The licensee shall prohibit patrons from leaving the licensed premises with an unconsumed sample; 
(8)  The licensee shall promptly remove all open and unconsumed beverage samples from the licensed premises or shall destroy the samples immediately following the completion of the tasting; 
(9)  The licensee shall not serve a person who is under twenty-one (21) years of age, or who is visibly intoxicated; 
(10)  The samples used in the tastings shall be served in open containers and shall be provided to a patron free of charge; 
(11)  Tastings may occur on no more than four (4) of the six (6) days from a Monday to the following Saturday, not to exceed fifty (50) days per year; 
(12)  No manufacturer of spirituous or vinous liquors shall induce a licensee through free goods or financial or in-kind assistance to favor the manufacturer's products being sampled at a tasting. The licensee shall bear the financial and all other responsibility for a tasting. 
(c)  Violations. 
(1)  A violation of this section, whether by the licensee's employees, agents, or otherwise, shall be the responsibility of the licensee who is conducting the alcohol tasting. 
(2)  Licensees conducting a tasting shall be subject to the same revocation, suspension and enforcement provisions as otherwise apply to those licenses. 
(Ord. No. 6, 2010, § 1, 5-5-10)  
Sec. 10-30. - Tagging of kegs required. 
Any retail liquor establishment selling alcoholic beverages by the keg within the City of Alamosa shall be required at the time of sale to fill out an identifying "keg tag form" with information as to the purchaser's/renter's name, address, date of birth, driver's license number and date of sale. A copy of the person's identification will be attached to the form. Forms shall be as approved and provided by the Police Department of the City of Alamosa. 
(1)  Records to be kept of keg sale/rentals. At the time of sale/rental of any keg of alcoholic beverage, the retail liquor establishment shall record the individualized/specific serial number of the keg on the keg tag form, and maintain those identifying records for a period of twelve (12) months for purposes of inspection at any reasonable time by the Police Department of the City of Alamosa. Keg tag forms shall not be considered public records. 
(2)  Failure to comply with keg tag requirements, penalty. Any retail liquor outlet that fails to record the required data or keep and make available the keg tag forms as required by this section, shall be subject to fines and penalties as authorized under the Charter or Code of Ordinances of the City of Alamosa. Any owner or operator of any retail liquor outlet who, through act of omission or commission, fails to ensure that the owner's employees properly comply with this law shall be guilty of violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 01, 2011, § 1, 2-2-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01, 2011, § 1, adopted Feb. 2, 2011, set out provisions intended for use as § 10-29. For purposes of classification and to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 10-30.  
Sec. 10-31. - Unlawful to provide keg alcohol to minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase a keg of alcoholic beverage and to thereafter allow consumption of said alcoholic beverage by minors, unless said consumption is authorized and allowed pursuant to the laws of the State of Colorado as enumerated in Section 18-13-122 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 01, 2011, § 2, 2-2-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01, 2011, § 2, adopted Feb. 2, 2011, set out provisions intended for use as § 10-30. For purposes of classification and to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 10-31.  
Sec. 10-32. - Liquor violation penalties and process. 
(a)  Definitions: 
Local licensing authority (authority) means the Alamosa City Council (Council) sitting in its capacity as the local licensing authority. If the Alamosa City Council chooses to appoint a separate authority, this section would apply directly to that authority. 
Licensee means the person or entity holding an alcohol beverage license of any class, or the person or entity holding an alcohol beverage permit of any type. 
(b)  Investigation of cause for suspension and revocation of licenses. An investigation may be commenced upon motion of the authority, request of the police department, request of the city prosecutor, or upon the city clerk's own initiative. If the investigation shows reasonable suspicion to believe that grounds for suspension or revocation exist, show cause hearing proceedings may be initiated. 
(c)  Pre-hearing negotiated stipulation. For violations as specified in this section, the city prosecutor is authorized to conduct a pre-hearing negotiation meeting. After considering results of the initial investigation and considering any mitigating or aggravating factors, the prosecutor may offer a stipulated agreement to the licensee. If the licensee agrees, the stipulation agreement will be presented to the local licensing authority for final action. The range of the city prosecutor's discretion is specified in this section. An offer of stipulation is intended to be a lesser penalty than the local licensing authority would reasonably be expected to impose after a hearing. 
A stipulated agreement is not required to be offered, and both the city prosecutor and police department reserve the right at their discretion to move directly to show cause hearing. 
(d)  Penalty guidelines. Penalties for violation of any provisions of this chapter, the Colorado Liquor Code, Colorado Beer Code, or Colorado Special Events Code shall be as provided in the guidelines below. Nothing in the following guidelines is meant to restrict the local licensing authority from issuing a lesser penalty, a higher penalty, or additional penalties as allowed by this Code or state law, up to and including suspension or revocation of a liquor license. 
When the penalty is a result of a violation that occurred during a compliance check, the guidelines in the Code of Regulations, 1 C.C.R. 203-2, Regulation 47-604 shall apply. The penalties described below reflect this Regulation, and may also be applied to a similar violation that occurs outside of a compliance check. 
Violation: Sale to a Minor 	Penalty Range 	Payment of fine permitted 	Negotiated Stipulation Range 	Additional Requirements 
First offense within one year 	Written warning up to 15 day suspension 	Yes 	0 to 10 days served with 15 to 5 days held in abeyance for one year 	If the employee making the sale has completed a state-approved server training, a written warning is recommended in compliance with Regulation 47-604(A)(2). 
Second offense within one year 	5 to 30 day suspension 	Yes, if fine was not paid or suspension served for first offense and if there are no other offenses within the past two years 	10 to 20 days served with 20 to 10 days held in abeyance for up to 18 months 	Any time held in abeyance from a prior penalty must be served. May not pay fine in lieu of this portion of the suspension. 
Third offense within two years 	20 to 45 days suspension 	No 	30 to 40 days served 	Time held in abeyance not allowed. Time held in abeyance from prior offense(s) must be served. May not pay a fine in lieu of. 
Fourth offense within two years 	45 day suspension to up revocation 	No 	No stipulation offered 	Time held in abeyance not allowed. If not previously served, all time held in abeyance from prior offenses must be served. May not pay a fine in lieu of. 
 
When considering mitigating and aggravating factors, the authority and/or city prosecutor shall consider: 
• Action taken by the licensee to prevent violations, such as server training. 
• Licensee's past history of success or failure with compliance checks. 
• Any corrective action taken by the licensee. 
• Any corrective action taken for prior violations and the success or failure with the implementation of this action. 
• Willfulness or deliberateness of the violation. 
• Likelihood of recurrence of the violation. 
• Factors which might make the situation unique, such as: 
º Prior notification that the compliance check would be forthcoming. 
º The dress or appearance of the underage operative, i.e. the operative was wearing a high school letter jacket. 
º Licensee or registered manager is the violator or directed an employee or other individual to violate the law. 
For violations that are not part of a compliance check, the following guidelines apply: 
Violation: Procurement of liquor from prohibited source 	Penalty Range 	Payment of fine permitted 	Negotiated Stipulation Range 	Additional Requirements 
First offense 	Written warning up to 10 days suspension 	Yes 	3 to 7 days served plus 7 to 3 days held in abeyance for one year 	
Second offense within one year 	5 to 15 days suspension 	Yes, if fine was not paid or suspension served for first offense 	7 to 12 days served with 8 to 3 days held in abeyance for up to 18 months 	Any time held in abeyance from a prior penalty must be served. May not pay fine in lieu of this portion of the suspension. 
 
Violation: Sale to visibly intoxicated person 	Penalty Range 	Payment of fine permitted 	Negotiated Stipulation Range 	Additional Requirements 
First offense 	Written warning up to 15 day suspension 	Yes 	0 to 10 days served with 15 to 5 days held in abeyance for one year 	
Second offense within one year 	10 to 30 days suspension 	Yes, if fine was not paid or suspension served for first offense 	15 to 20 days served with 15 to 10 days held in abeyance for 18 months 	Any time held in abeyance from a prior penalty must be served. May not pay fine in lieu of this portion of the suspension. 
 
Violation: Failure to meet food requirements 	Penalty Range 	Payment of fine permitted 	Negotiated Stipulation Range 	Additional Requirements 
First offense 	Written warning up to 10 days suspension 	Yes 	3 to 7 days served plus 7 to 3 days held in abeyance for one year 	
Second offense within one year 	5 to 15 days suspension 	Yes, if fine was not paid or suspension served for first offense 	7 to 12 days served with 8 to 3 days held in abeyance for up to 18 months 	Any time held in abeyance from a prior penalty must be served. May not pay fine in lieu of this portion of the suspension. 
 
Violation: Sale, service or consumption outside legal hours 	Penalty Range 	Payment of fine permitted 	Negotiated Stipulation Range 	Additional Requirements 
First offense 	Written warning up to 15 day suspension 	Yes 	0 to 10 days served with 15 to 5 days held in abeyance for one year 	
Second offense within one year 	10 to 30 days suspension 	Yes, if fine was not paid or suspension served for first offense 	15 to 20 days served with 15 to 10 days held in abeyance for 18 months 	Any time held in abeyance from a prior penalty must be served. May not pay fine in lieu of this portion of the suspension. 
 
Violation: Failure to report change in Manager, Trade Name, or Entity Structure 	Penalty Range 	Payment of fine permitted 	Negotiated Stipulation Range 	Additional Requirements 
First offense 	Written warning up to 10 days suspension 	Yes 	3 to 7 days served plus 7 to 3 days held in abeyance for one year 	
Second offense within one year 	5 to 15 days suspension 	Yes, if fine was not paid or suspension served for first offense 	7 to 12 days served with 8 to 3 days held in abeyance for up to 18 months 	Any time held in abeyance from a prior penalty must be served. May not pay fine in lieu of this portion of the suspension. 
 
Violation: Sale or service by underage employee 	Penalty Range 	Payment of fine permitted 	Negotiated Stipulation Range 	Additional Requirements 
First offense 	Written warning up to 10 days suspension 	Yes 	3 to 7 days served plus 7 to 3 days held in abeyance for one year 	
Second offense within one year 	5 to 15 days suspension 	Yes, if fine was not paid or suspension served for first offense 	7 to 12 days served with 8 to 3 days held in abeyance for up to 18 months 	Any time held in abeyance from a prior penalty must be served. May not pay fine in lieu of this portion of the suspension. 
 
(e)  Consideration of payment of fine in lieu of suspension The City of Alamosa Local Licensing Authority agrees to accept and adopt the optional procedures described in C.R.S. § 12-47-601(3) through (6). This shall apply to any licensee who violates or whose employees violate any terms of this chapter or of Title 12, Articles 46, 47, and 48, or the rules and regulations related thereto. 
A fine in lieu of suspension may be considered for suspensions of fourteen (14) days or less. In considering the licensee's petition to pay a fine in lieu of suspension, the authority shall use the criteria set forth in C.R.S. § 12-47-601(3)(a)(I) through (III), which provide that a fine in lieu of suspension may be considered when the authority is satisfied that the following conditions obtain: 
(I)  That the public welfare and morals would not be impaired by permitting the licensee to operate during the period set for suspension and that the payment of the fine will achieve the desired disciplinary purposes; 
(II)  That the books and records of the licensee are kept in such a manner that the loss of sales of alcohol beverages that the licensee would have suffered had the suspension gone into effect can be determined with reasonable accuracy therefrom; and 
(III)  That the licensee has not had his or her license or permit suspended or revoked, nor had any suspension stayed by payment of a fine, during the two (2) years immediately preceding the date of the motion or complaint which has resulted in a final decision to suspend the license or permit. 
The fine shall be determined in accordance with C.R.S. § 12-47-601(3) (b) and (c), which provide as follows: 
(I)  The fine accepted shall be the equivalent to twenty (20) percent of the licensee's estimated gross revenues from sales of alcohol beverages during the period of the proposed suspension; except that the fine shall be not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(II)  Payment of any fine pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall be in the form of cash or in the form of a certified check or cashier's check made payable to the state or local licensing authority, whichever is appropriate. 
The city prosecutor is authorized to recommend payment of a fine in lieu of suspension that meets the criteria set forth as part of a stipulated agreement. 
(f)  Recovery of costs. If a stipulated agreement is offered but not accepted, and the local licensing authority conducts a show cause hearing and determines that the alleged violation did occur, the licensee is required to pay to the city reasonable costs incurred, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). The city shall submit its bill of costs to the licensee within forty-five (45) days of the show cause hearing. These costs are intended to represent actual expenses for legal fees, professional services, or any other direct out-of-pocket expense paid by the city in connection with conducting the hearing. These costs are separate and in addition to any other penalty imposed by either the local licensing authority or municipal court. 
The licensee shall be notified of this requirement in writing at the time of rejecting a stipulated agreement. 
Recovery of costs will not apply if a stipulated agreement is not offered and the violation moves directly to hearing at the request of either the city prosecutor and/or the police department. Recovery of costs will not apply if a stipulated agreement is presented to the local licensing authority but declined for approval. 
Failure of a licensee to pay the costs assessed within thirty (30) days of receipt of the bill of costs from the city is punishable as a violation of this Code, and may be considered as a violation of the ongoing requirement that a licensee be of good moral character. 
(Ord. No. 02, 2011, § 2, 2-2-11; Ord. No. 13-2018 , § 1, 5-16-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02, 2011, § 2, adopted Feb. 2, 2011, set out provisions intended for use as § 10-31. For purposes of classification and to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 10-32.  
Secs. 10-33—10-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AGRICULTURAL LABOR CAMPS 
 
Sec. 10-41. - Definition. 
Agricultural labor camp shall mean and include one (1) or more buildings or structures, together with the land appertaining thereto established, operated or used as living quarters for three (3) or more seasonal or temporary workers engaged in agricultural activities, including related food processing. 
(Code 1964, § 14-56) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-42. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
The city manager and the city manager's authorized representatives may enter and inspect agricultural labor camps at all reasonable hours and may question such persons and investigate such facts, conditions, matters or practices as he or she may deem necessary or appropriate to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this article, and to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this article. The city manager may, after giving twenty-four (24) hours' written notice to the owner of the premises or holder of the permit, or posting of such notice on such premises, revoke a permit authorizing the operation of an agricultural labor camp if the city manager finds that the holder of such permit has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this article or order issued hereunder, and if compliance is not made within the twenty-four-hour period. 
(Code 1964, § 14-57; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F3, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-43. - Responsibility for compliance. 
Every person owning an agricultural labor camp or premises where an agricultural labor camp is operated or maintained shall be obligated to and shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 14-59)  
Sec. 10-44. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person, directly or indirectly, shall operate an agricultural labor camp until such person has obtained from the city clerk a permit to operate such a camp and shall have paid a permit or license fee of five dollars ($5.00) therefor and unless such permit is in full force and effect and is posted in the camp to which it applies at all times during the maintenance and operation of the camp. 
(b)  The permit shall issue after investigation and approval by the city manager and such other officials of the city as the city clerk may determine to be necessary if the city clerk is satisfied that the camp meets the minimum standards of construction, sanitation, equipment and operation required by the terms of this article. 
(c)  This permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year unless revoked and shall be nontransferable. 
(Code 1964, § 14-60; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F4, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-45. - Regulations; continued compliance. 
(a)  The following regulations shall apply to and shall be complied with by every agricultural labor camp and any person operating or owning such a camp: 
(1)  Shelter. All structures used for sleeping purposes shall be properly constructed of easily cleanable materials, maintained in a clean condition and in good repair to afford protection of the occupants from the elements. Floors of buildings used for sleeping or living quarters shall be constructed of wood, asphalt, concrete or other comparable material. Each room used for sleeping purposes shall have at least three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet of air space per person and provide at least fifty (50) square feet of floor space for each occupant. Each habitable room shall be provided with one (1) or more windows having an aggregate area of ten (10) percent of the floor space for the room; windows shall have at least one-half of the required window area openable and all exterior openings fitted with screening of at least 16-mesh to prevent insect entry. 
(2)  Beds. Beds shall be furnished to all camp occupants and except in families a single bed shall be provided for each person. Single beds shall be spaced not less than thirty-six (36) inches laterally or end-to-end, and double bunks not less than four (4) feet eight (8) inches laterally or end-to-end. A clear ceiling height above a mattress shall be not less than thirty-six (36) inches, and twenty-seven (27) inches between mattresses of a double-deck bunk, and a clear space of at least twelve (12) inches from the floor for all beds shall be provided. 
(3)  Exits. All buildings used as living or sleeping quarters shall have at least two (2) exits leading to the outside or a public corridor for use in case of fire, and so located as to provide alternate means of egress. If the building is a single story and occupied by less than ten (10) persons, one (1) exit may be a window easily accessible and of sufficient size to permit escape. If sleeping quarters are above the ground floor, at least one (1) outside exit shall be required. 
(4)  Lighting. Each habitable room shall have at least one (1) ceiling-type light fixture and one (1) separate wall-type electric convenience outlet properly installed and maintained. Such artificial lighting shall be provided on the basis of one (1) 40-watt bulb per one hundred (100) square feet of floor area and shall be reasonably well distributed. 
(5)  Water supply. A source of water meeting the minimum sanitary standards established by the state department of public health shall be provided for drinking, cooking, washing and bathing purposes. 
(6)  Sewage. Excreta and liquid wastes shall be disposed of by a method which shall not create a nuisance condition, serve as an attractant to insects or rodents, or contaminate surface or ground waters. Where public sewers are available, all building sewers shall be connected thereto, and where public sewers are not available, a subsurface sewage disposal system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the state department of public health. 
(7)  Toilet, bathing, lavatory, laundry facilities. Except where private sanitary facilities are provided for family use, toilet, bathing and lavatory facilities shall be provided for each sex at the rate of one (1) per ten (10) persons or fractional number thereof, provided that a No. 3 tub may be substituted for bathing use if there is a camp occupancy of less than five (5) persons. A urinal and one (1) toilet may be optionally provided for each twenty (20) men. Where sanitary facilities are shared they shall be so arranged as to secure privacy for both sexes and clearly marked "For Men" and "For Women" at the entrance to each. No privies shall be allowed. 
(8)  Refuse and garbage disposal. Sufficient numbers of metal cans with tight-fitting covers shall be provided and located adjacent to shelters to store refuse and garbage pending collection and final disposal. 
(9)  Nuisance control. Effective measures shall routinely be taken to control rats, flies, mosquitoes, bedbugs and other insect vectors or parasites within the camp premises. 
(b)  Every agricultural labor camp shall be maintained and operated in good repair and in a safe and sanitary condition, and in accordance with the above regulations and so as not to create any health or fire hazard. 
(Code 1964, § 14-61) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; nuisances, Ch. 14; utilities, Ch. 20.  
Secs. 10-46—10-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - AMUSEMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 10-61—10-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COIN-OPERATED MACHINES 
 
Sec. 10-71. - Definitions. 
Coin-operated amusement game or game, as used in this chapter, shall mean any machine or mechanical device which is placed in operation by a coin or slug for amusement purposes and shall expressly include, but not be limited to, pin ball machines, an Arcade Machine, but it shall not include any phonograph, music box or other music machine. 
Merchant, as used in this chapter, shall include any person using, renting or otherwise displaying for hire one (1) or more games or music machines in a place of business under such person's control. 
Music machine, as used in this chapter, shall mean any phonograph, juke box, music box or other music machine operated by coins, slugs or similar means. 
Operator, as used in this chapter, shall mean any person owning one (1) or more games or music machines which are rented, displayed or otherwise used in a place of business. 
(Code 1964, § 14-15; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F5, 10-3-18) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-72. - Use or display without licenses. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator or merchant to display, let, or otherwise permit to be used, within the jurisdiction of the city any coin-operated amusement game or music machine without the annual license required for such game or music machine by this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any operator to display, let or otherwise permit to be used within the jurisdiction of the city any game or music machine belonging to such operator unless he or she has an operator's license as required by this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 14-16; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F6, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-73. - License period. 
The annual period for which licenses shall be issued under this chapter shall begin on the first day of January in each year and terminate upon the last day of December in each year, provided that the first license period under this chapter shall commence January 15, 1951. 
(Code 1964, § 14-17)  
Sec. 10-74. - Operator's license fee. 
Upon application to the city finance director, and the payment to the city of the annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for an operator's license, such license shall be issued to any operator, provided that such operator shall not have violated any of the provisions of this chapter, and provided further that if any operator shall own and rent, display or otherwise permit to be used within this city both coin-operated amusement games and music machines, such license fee shall be the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Code 1964, § 14-18; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F7, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-75. - Machine license fees; displaying license. 
Upon application to the city finance director and payment of the annual license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each music machine sought to be licensed, and twelve dollars ($12.00) for each game sought to be licensed, a license for each game or music machine shall be issued, provided that such license shall not be issued to the owner of any game or music machine operated in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or to any owner who shall have violated the terms of this chapter, and provided further that such license issued shall at all times be conspicuously displayed and affixed upon the game or music machine licensed and shall state the name of the owner, and the owner's place of business and the model and serial number of the game or machine licensed. 
(Code 1964, § 14-19; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F8, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-76. - Disturbances prohibited. 
Every merchant shall so use and control such games and music machines as are in use upon such merchant's premises as not to create a public annoyance or disturbance to other property owners and residents of this city. 
(Code 1964, § 14-21; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F9, 10-3-18)  
Secs. 10-77—10-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PAWNBROKERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, C.R.S. 12-56-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-141. - License; fee; bond; issuance. 
(a)  Required. In accordance with the provisions of the statutes of the state, it shall be unlawful for any person to establish or conduct the business of pawnbroker within the city unless such person shall have first procured a license from the city and shall have executed a bond as hereinafter provided. The license shall expire on December thirty-first and shall be renewed annually. 
(b)  Application. Every person desiring a pawnbroker's license shall make application therefor to the city setting forth the proposed place of business, including the street and number where the business is to be carried on, the amount of capital proposed by the applicant to be used in the business; and such application shall be accompanied by satisfactory evidence of the applicant's good character, to carry on the business of pawnbroker. 
(c)  Fee. The license fee to be paid for such license is the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(d)  Bond. At or prior to the issuance of such license which shall be issued under the hand and seal of the mayor, the licensee shall enter into a bond or recognizance in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with two (2) or more sufficient sureties or with a sufficient corporate surety to the people of the state, to be approved by the mayor, conditioned for the due observance of all ordinances and regulations of the city in force or at any time thereafter enacted respecting pawnbrokers and for the safekeeping and return of all articles held in pawn by such pawnbroker in accordance with the applicable statutes of the state. 
(e)  Insurance. Insurance shall be obtained to protect all articles held in pawn against loss from the perils included within fire and property coverage insurance.  
Secs. 10-142—10-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SECONDHAND DEALERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Ord. No. 12-1997, § 1, adopted Sept. 3, 1997, amended Art. VI of this chapter in its entirety to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Art. VI, §§ 10-161—10-171, pertained to secondhand good dealers and derived from the 1964 Code, §§ 14-27—14-29. 
State Law reference— Secondhand goods sales, C.R.S. 18-13-114 et seq.; junkyards adjacent to highways, C.R.S. 43-1-501 et seq.; purchasers of valuable articles, C.R.S. 18-16-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Purchase means giving money to acquire any secondhand property, taking secondhand property in full or partial satisfaction of a debt, taking secondhand property for resale for the purpose of full or partial satisfaction of a debt, or taking secondhand property for sale on consignment. 
Secondhand dealer means any person or entity who shall engage in the business of buying, selling or trading secondhand property, or any person who operates a store for the purpose of buying, selling or trading secondhand property, or any person who has repeatedly engaged in the buying, selling or trading of secondhand property. 
The term secondhand dealer shall not include: 
(1)  A person or organization which is charitable, non-profit, recreational, fraternal, or political in nature or which is exempt from taxation pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; 
(2)  A person selling or trading secondhand property so long as such property was not originally purchased for resale and so long as such person does not sell or trade secondhand property more than five (5) weekend periods on any one calendar year as verified by a declaration to be prepared by the seller. For the purposes of this paragraph, "weekend period" means that period of time beginning Friday and continuing throughout the immediately following Monday. 
(3)  A person who sells new goods exclusively, is in the business of selling such goods, is in all respects a retailer of such goods, and holds a retail license and a sales tax license in the city. 
(4)  An antique dealer who sells antiques, has a retail license and sales tax license in the city. 
Secondhand property means used or previously sold (other than at wholesale) cameras, camera equipment, camera lenses, slide and movie projectors, flash units, enlargers, tripods, binoculars, telescopes, microscopes, televisions, phonographs, tape decks, video recorders, radios, compact disc players, amplifiers, receivers, speakers, all other stereo equipment, musical instruments, citizen band radios, skis, all ski related equipment, golf clubs, fishing rods and reels, firearms, bows, jewelry, watches, furs, typewriters, adding machines, computers and computer equipment, portable air conditioners, sewing machines, bicycles and all bicycle equipment. Secondhand property shall also include all used or previously sold items marked, or which were at one time marked, with a serial or manufacturer's identification number and with a value of thirty dollars ($30.00) or more except for stoves, ovens, ranges, dishwashers, refrigerators, boats, airplanes, washing machines, clothes dryers, normal household furniture, freezers, motor vehicles, snowmobiles, all terrain vehicles and any other item which weighs more than six hundred (600) pounds. 
Seller means any person offering secondhand property for money to any purchaser, offering secondhand property in full or partial satisfaction of a debt, or offering secondhand property for resale for the purpose of full or partial satisfaction of a debt. 
(Ord. No. 12-1997, § 1, 9-3-97) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-162. - Storage of materials, covering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, keep or maintain any secondhand store, junk store, junkyard or automobile wrecking establishment within the city limits of the city unless all machinery, iron, junk and property of any kind kept, stored or offered for sale within the city limits in connection with the conduct of such store, yard or establishment shall be kept and stored within a building or buildings completely covered over by a roof and complying in all respects with the fire and building regulations of the city. The provisions of this section shall include any and all property in course of alteration or repair or upon which work of any kind is being performed in order to prepare it for sale or shipment and the intent of this section is that no unenclosed or unroofed junkyard shall be maintained within the city limits of the city. 
(b)  Each person or entity who owns, keeps, operates or maintains a store yard or establishment governed by this section 10-162 shall have six (6) months from the passage of the effective date of this article to bring such store yard or establishment into compliance with these provisions. 
(Ord. No. 12-1997, § 1, 9-3-97) 
Cross reference— Zoning, Ch. 21.  
Sec. 10-163. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer to operate or to sell, purchase or trade secondhand property without holding a valid secondhand dealer license. 
(Ord. No. 12-1997, § 1, 9-3-97)  
Sec. 10-164. - License application. 
Every secondhand dealer shall be required to obtain, upon application to the city clerk, a secondhand dealer license. Application shall be submitted upon forms provided by the city clerk which shall require applicant to state the applicant's name, address, telephone number, social security number (or employer's identification number for a business entity), and the address where the proposed business will be conducted, together with such additional information as the city clerk reasonably determines to be necessary to verify the applicant's eligibility for licensure. If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners shall be disclosed. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the president, secretary, treasurer and any local manager shall be stated. Application shall be accompanied by an annual license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). The license shall expire at midnight on December 31 and may thereafter be annually renewed. 
(Ord. No. 12-1997, § 1, 9-3-97)  
Sec. 10-165. - Seller identification. 
No secondhand dealer shall purchase and/or trade for any secondhand property without first securing adequate identification from any of the following forms of identification: 
(1)  A valid Colorado driver's license; 
(2)  An identification card issued in accordance with C.R.S. 42-2-402; 
(3)  A military identification card; 
(4)  A valid driver's license, containing a picture, issued by another state; 
(5)  A valid passport; 
(6)  An alien registration card; or 
(7)  A non-picture identification document issued by a state or federal government entity. 
(Ord. No. 12-1997, § 1, 9-3-97) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, C.R.S. 18-16-103.  
Sec. 10-166. - Purchases prohibited. 
No secondhand dealer shall purchase and/or trade for any secondhand property from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Ord. No. 12-1997, § 1, 9-3-97) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 18-16-104.  
Sec. 10-167. - Records. 
Every secondhand dealer shall make a record of each purchase, sale, or trade of secondhand property. The record shall be made on forms provided by the city chief of police and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and date of birth of the seller or trader; 
(2)  The date, time, and place of the sale or trade; 
(3)  A description of the secondhand property including make, model, type, brand and any serial or manufacturer's identification number; 
(4)  The identification number from an approved form of identification produced by the seller or trader including drivers license, military identification card, passport or alien registration card with proof that the seller is eighteen (18) years of age or older; 
(5)  The signature of the seller or trader. 
(Ord. No. 12-1997, § 1, 9-3-97) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, C.R.S. 18-16-105.  
Sec. 10-168. - Holding period. 
(a)  Secondhand dealers shall hold all secondhand property for a period of seven (7) days from the date of purchase. 
(b)  Every secondhand dealer shall permit inspection by the ordinance enforcement officer, any police officer or designee at any time during reasonable business hours of all secondhand property within such secondhand dealer's possession. 
(Ord. No. 12-1997, § 1, 9-3-97; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F10, 10-3-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, C.R.S. 18-16-106.  
Sec. 10-169. - Reports required. 
(a)  Within seventy-two (72) hours of the purchase, sale or trade of any item of secondhand property, the secondhand dealer shall transmit by U.S. mail or hand delivery to the city police chief or the chief's authorized designee, the original and one (1) copy of the record made as provided in section 10-167. The secondhand dealer shall maintain, at his or her place of business, one (1) copy of the record, for a period of not less than one (1) year from the date of purchase, sale or trade. The copies of records maintained by the secondhand dealer shall remain open to inspection by the ordinance enforcement officer, any police officer or designee during reasonable business hours of the secondhand dealer. 
(b)  The city chief of police shall cause to be printed suitable forms of records which shall be made available to secondhand dealers for use upon their request. Secondhand dealers obtaining record forms from the city shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of said forms. 
(Ord. No. 12-1997, § 1, 9-3-97; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F11, 10-3-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, C.R.S. 18-16-107.  
Sec. 10-170. - Display of notice. 
(a)  Every secondhand dealer shall conspicuously display a notice in a place clearly visible to all sellers, buyers and traders which sets forth in not less than eight (8) point type the requirements of Sections 18-13-114, 18-13-115, 18-13-116 and 18-4-410, C.R.S., as amended. In large bold type at least one (1) inch high the following statements shall be displayed upon the notice: 
ALL TRANSACTIONS ARE REPORTED TO THE POLICE! 
STOLEN PROPERTY WILL BE CONFISCATED BY THE POLICE. 
POSSESSION OR SALE OF STOLEN PROPERTY IS A FELONY CRIME. 
SELLER MUST BE 18 YEARS OF AGE 
(b)  The chief of police shall cause to be printed forms of the notice required by this section which shall be provided without additional charge to all licensed secondhand dealers. 
(c)  Failure of any secondhand dealer to display the notice required by this section shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 12-1997, § 1, 9-3-97) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, C.R.S. 18-16-110.  
Sec. 10-171. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer to violate any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-1997, § 1, 9-3-97)  
Secs. 10-172—10-185. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SECURITY SERVICES 
 
Sec. 10-186. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Contract Security Licensing and Regulatory Ordinance." 
(Code 1964, § 14-66)  
Sec. 10-187. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to increase the levels of integrity, competence and performance of contract security personnel in order to safeguard the public against illegal, improper or incompetent actions committed by private security personnel. 
(Code 1964, § 14-67)  
Sec. 10-188. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief of police means and refers to the chief of police of this city. 
City means the City of Alamosa, Colorado. 
Clerk means and refers to the clerk of the city. 
Contract security service means any person which conducts or is engaged in the business of providing for-hire protection to persons and/or property, or preserving the peace in the conduct of any business. This definition specifically excludes the assignment by an employer of its employees to duties which involve apprehending shoplifters or preserving the peace on the premises of the employer, or protecting property belonging to the employer. 
Security guard means any individual who accepts employment from any employer providing contract security services as defined in this section. 
(Code 1964, § 14-68) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-189. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of contract security services within this city or to act as a security guard within this city without having first obtained a license from the city. 
(Code 1964, § 14-69)  
Sec. 10-190. - License qualifications. 
No applicant shall be granted a license unless such applicant, or in the case of a partnership or corporation, each partner, officer and director of such applicant, meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Is twenty-one (21) years of age or older; 
(2)  Is a citizen of the United States or resident alien; 
(3)  Has not been declared by any court of competent jurisdiction, incompetent by reason of mental defect or disease and has not had competency restored; 
(4)  Is not an habitual drunkard or addicted to or dependent upon any drugs, and does not have any record evidencing alcoholism or drug addiction; 
(5)  Is of good moral character; 
(6)  Has not been convicted of a felony, or of a misdemeanor or ordinance violation involving moral turpitude, within ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(7)  Has not been convicted of or found to be guilty of, in either a criminal or a civil action, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation within ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(8)  Does not suffer from any physical or mental condition or impairment such that the performance of the functions of a security guard would jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of any person. 
(Code 1964, § 14-70; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F12, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-191. - License application. 
Applicants for a license as contract security service or security guard shall file an application with the city clerk, on forms to be provided for that purpose, which shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  A description of the nature and type of business to be conducted, the services to be offered, and the area to be covered in the conduct of the business; 
(2)  A statement as to the number and identity of persons to be employed as agents or employees; 
(3)  A statement as to the type and number of vehicles to be used in the business, a description of vehicles and equipment to be used in providing protection, and other pertinent facts requested by the city; 
(4)  The address and name of the person, firm or corporation by whom the applicant is to be employed; 
(5)  Each applicant for a license shall be required to furnish the following information, and if the applicant is a partnership or corporation, such information shall be furnished for each partner, officer and director: 
a.  A statement of applicant's convictions of any felony, misdemeanor, or ordinance violation (other than minor traffic violations); the nature of the offense; the penalty or punishment imposed; and the date and place where such event occurred; 
b.  A statement as to whether or not an applicant has ever had a judgment entered against him or her for fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation, and if so, details thereof; 
c.  A statement as to the business or employment record of the applicant for the ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
d.  Three (3) letters certifying to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant; 
e.  For applicants for a license as security guard only, a certificate of a licensed physician reciting that the applicant has been examined by such physician within sixty (60) days prior to the date of application, and was found to be free from any condition that would affect such applicant's ability to satisfactorily perform the duties required by his or her employer; 
f.  Two (2) current passport sized photographs; 
g.  Two (2) sets of fingerprints to be taken by the police department; 
h.  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and percentages of ownership of each shareholder. The applicant shall also furnish any of the foregoing information which may be requested by the city with regard to any shareholder. 
(Code 1964, § 14-71; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F13, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-192. - Investigation of applicant; issuance or denial of license. 
Upon receipt of each application, the clerk shall immediately institute such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character as may be deemed necessary for the protection of the public welfare, and the city clerk shall issue or deny the application within two (2) weeks after it has been filed. 
(Code 1964, § 14-72)  
Sec. 10-193. - Application fee. 
All applications for licenses shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Code 1964, § 14-73)  
Sec. 10-194. - License and renewal fee. 
A license shall be issued for a period of one (1) year, and may, upon application, be renewed from year to year. The fee for the renewal of such license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. 
(Code 1964, § 14-74)  
Sec. 10-195. - Insurance requirements. 
All licensees shall file with the clerk a certificate of insurance evidencing comprehensive general liability coverage for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage with endorsements for assault and battery, and personal injury, including false arrest, libel, slander and invasion of privacy in the minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily or personal injury and property damage. Licensees shall also file endorsements for damage to property in their care, custody and control and for errors and omissions. The certificates shall provide that the insurance shall not be modified or cancelled unless ten (10) days' prior notice shall have been given to the city clerk. 
(Code 1964, § 14-75)  
Sec. 10-196. - Identification cards, badges, uniforms, and equipment. 
(a)  Identification cards. Every contract security service shall issue to each security guard employed by it an identification card which shall be approximately two and one-half (2½) inches by four and one-half (4½) inches, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The type of license issued and the date of expiration; 
(2)  Name, address, physical description and picture of the licensee; 
(3)  The name of the employer; 
(4)  A statement as to whether or not the licensee is authorized by the contract security service to carry a firearm during the course of employment; 
(5)  Such other information as the city may deem necessary. 
(b)  Badges. No badge shall be worn by any licensee which is a colorable imitation of badges worn by officers of the police department, county sheriff's department or the state patrol. 
(c)  Vehicles. No vehicle shall be used which may be confused with those vehicles used by the police department, the county sheriff's department or the state patrol, nor shall any vehicle be equipped with a siren or lights, except for lights normally required on civilian motor vehicles. 
(d)  Terminology. The words "police" or "officer" shall not be used in any advertisement or notice, or on any vehicle or equipment used by the licensee. 
(e)  Discretion of police chief. The chief of police may request of each licensee further information on equipment, vehicles, uniforms or badges used by the licensee; may request samples, pictures or inspection of such items; and may issue an order denying use of any item which contravenes this section. 
(f)  Uniforms. The uniforms, if any, worn by security guards while employed within the city shall be of a color and type that are readily distinguishable from the uniforms of the police department, and the county sheriff's department or the state patrol. 
(Code 1964, § 14-76; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F14, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-197. - Firearms. 
(a)  No contract security service licensee shall permit any employee to carry a firearm during working hours unless such employee has qualified in the use of firearms according to the standards of the police department within the immediately preceding ninety (90) days. All firearms and ammunition for such qualification shall be furnished by the licensee. 
(b)  Each licensee shall notify the chief of police of the name of each employee who is authorized to carry a firearm and of the description of the firearm used by each such employee. Any change in the use of a firearm shall immediately be reported to the chief of police. 
(c)  Any such notification to the chief of police regarding a firearm or authorization given by a contract security service to carry a firearm shall not constitute a permit to carry a concealed weapon. 
(Code 1964, § 14-77)  
Sec. 10-198. - Change in personnel. 
(a)  Any contract security service shall notify the clerk of the termination or dismissal of any employee licensed under this article, and of the reason for the termination or dismissal. 
(b)  Upon termination or dismissal from employment, every licensed security guard shall surrender to the city clerk his or her license and identification card. 
(c)  Any licensee changing a place of business or residence shall immediately notify the city clerk of such fact, together with the location of the new place of business or residence, but such notification shall not be deemed to be a transfer of license or to require the payment of a new fee. 
(Code 1964, § 14-78; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F15, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-199. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or to conduct a business of security service or to act as such business or as a security guard without obtaining a license as provided in this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to exhibit such licensee's certificate of license or identification card to any police officer of the city upon demand. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to turn over any person arrested by such licensee pursuant to the laws of the state immediately to the police department or other public law enforcement agency. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to report immediately to the police department of the city any discharge of a firearm by such licensee within the city. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to hinder or interfere with any investigation under the jurisdiction of any public law enforcement agency. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to report immediately to the police department of the city all violations of the city ordinances or to fail to report to the police department or other public law enforcement agency all violations of state or federal laws which come to such licensee's attention. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to represent himself to be an officer of the police department of the city. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any applicant to knowingly misrepresent or to fail to disclose any required fact or information in connection with obtaining a license under this article. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to surrender his or her identification card or badge after discharge or termination. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to violate any other requirement or provision of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 14-79; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F16, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-200. - Revocation and suspension of licenses. 
The city may revoke or suspend a license, either summarily or after hearing, if it finds that: 
(1)  The licensee has engaged in any act of coercion, threat or harassment in order to obtain business; 
(2)  Any licensee has failed to record all contracts for provisions of security services with the chief of police; 
(3)  The insurance required by this article to be carried by every licensee has been or will be revoked or modified; 
(4)  The licensee has falsified or misrepresented facts on his or her application; 
(5)  The licensee has done anything which would have caused a denial of a license when originally applied for; 
(6)  The licensee has violated any provision of this article which would bring into question the licensee's ability to continue his duties as a security guard or contract security service. 
(Code 1964, § 14-80; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F17, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-201. - Power of city regarding rules and regulations. 
The city may issue and promulgate from time to time rules and regulations to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the city in relation to the contract security service business. 
(Code 1964, § 14-81)  
Sec. 10-202. - Appeal procedures. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the city in the denial, suspension or revocation of a license, or in rules and regulations, as provided in this article may appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city clerk, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of, a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in writing. If the action complained of was summary action, such hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) days of the filing of the appeal. In all other cases the hearing shall be held within forty-five (45) days of the filing of the appeal. 
(Code 1964, § 14-82)  
Sec. 10-203. - Duty of citizens. 
(a)  Any person residing or doing business in the city and having reason to employ a contract security service or security guard shall have a duty to request the party employed to produce a valid license and shall not employ such person until license is secured and produced. 
(b)  Any person is also under a duty to bring to the attention of the chief of police any irregularities relating to the provision of security services. 
(Code 1964, § 14-83)  
Sec. 10-204. - Bond. 
(a)  Any person licensed as a contract security service or security guard shall furnish a good and sufficient cash or corporate security bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned upon faithful compliance with the terms of this article and the legal conduct of the security service or security guard. 
(b)  Such bond shall be payable to the city and, in addition, shall provide for the compensation or reimbursement of any person employing the licensee and suffering loss or injury because of any wanton, willful or illegal act of licensee, its agents or employees. 
(Code 1964, § 14-84)  
Secs. 10-205—10-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-2000, § 1, adopted October 18, 2000, enacted provisions intended for use as §§ 10-210—10-219. At the discretion of the editor and to preserve the style of the Code, these provisions have been set out herein as §§ 10-211—10-220. 
 
Sec. 10-211. - Definitions. 
(a)  Rules of construction. The words and terms used, defined, interpreted, or further described in this chapter shall be construed as follows: 
(1)  The particular controls the general; 
(2)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not directory. The word "may" is permissive; 
(3)  Words used in the present tense include the future unless the context clearly indicates the contrary; 
(4)  Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person or business that applies for a license or permit or renews a license or permit under the provisions of this article. 
Central business district means that area defined as the downtown core of the city, being more particularly described as that area bounded on the north by Fourth Street, on the south by Sixth Street, on the west by Bell Avenue, and on the east by Denver Avenue. 
Food zone means an area approved by the city council for the specific operation of mobile food vendors within public rights of way or other publicly held property. 
Hours of operation, when used with respect to mobile food vendors, shall be the designated time frame mobile food vendors are authorized to operate within the city, regardless of whether operation is in a designated food zone or on private property within the city limits. 
Mobile food vehicle means a licensed and insured unit mounted on or pulled by a self-propelled vehicle where food including prepackaged foods for individual portion service is prepared or dispensed; is self-contained with its own drinking water and waste water tanks; is designed to be readily movable; and is fully permitted and in full compliance with any applicable state, county, and city regulations, including but not limited to section 10-215. Operation of a mobile food vehicle shall require a mobile vending permit rather than a transient dealer's license. 
Mobile food vendor park means a parcel of property established pursuant to the provisions of this section for purposes of providing more than two (2) mobile food vehicles access to a single parcel of privately owned property. 
Mobile vending permit means a written authorization to operate a mobile food vehicle within the city limits. This requirement shall apply to each mobile food vehicle operated within the city limits, i.e., an individual owner owning more than one (1) mobile food vehicle shall be required to obtain a mobile vending permit for each mobile food vehicle operated. 
Operator means the entity that is legally responsible for the operation of the mobile food vehicle such as the permittee, the permittee's agent, or other person and processes a valid permit for the operation of each and every mobile food vehicle within the city limits. 
Peddler means any person who travels from place to place by any type of conveyance, carrying such person's wares with him or her, offering and exposing the wares for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or any person who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers the same for sale from any type of vehicle or conveyance. A peddler generally offers for sale, consummates the sale and delivers the goods at one (1) and the same time to the ultimate consumer. Any person who solicits orders and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this definition shall be deemed peddling and shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
Permittee means a person that has been granted a permit by the city to operate one (1) or more mobile food vehicles within the city. 
Restaurant means a brick and mortar establishment where meals are generally served and eaten on premises in exchange for money. 
Solicitor means any person who travels from place to place by any type of conveyance taking or attempting to take orders for the sale at retail of goods, wares and merchandise or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether or not such person is collecting advance payments on such sales. 
Transient seller means any person, either as principal or agent, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise from a fixed location within the city and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, room, apartment, lot, parking lot, street or other place, whether public or private, within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at an auction. Any person who engages in transient selling shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this article by reason of associating himself with any established local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting transient selling in connection with, as part of or in the name of any established local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. If the conduct of any person falls within the definitions of both peddler and transient selling as contained in this section, such person shall be deemed to be transient selling for the purposes of this article. 
Vending means the business of selling or causing to be sold any of the following items: 
• Food products. 
• Produce. 
• Prepared foods and beverages. 
• Pre-packaged foods. 
• Non-alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 14-2000, § 1, 10-18-00; Ord. No. 21-2015, § 1, 11-18-15 ; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F18, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-212. - Exemptions from article. 
(a)  Religious, nonprofit and charitable organizations and persons soliciting on behalf of such organizations shall be exempt from the licensing provisions of this article. 
(b)  Yard and garage sales shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Vendors, merchants, exhibitors and salesmen who exhibit, demonstrate or solicit orders for goods or merchandise in conjunction with and as part of an organized program of conventions, professional meetings, trade association meetings, seminars or other similar meetings held at hotels, motels or public or private meeting areas within the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Any fair, show or exhibition of arts, crafts or similar handiwork, or citywide celebrations, observances or special events such as an annual sidewalk or parking lot sale, which includes more than five (5) exhibitors or merchants, shall be exempt from this article; provided, however, that the sponsor shall apply to the city manager, or the city manager's designee, for a special events license. The application shall include the name and local address of the sponsor, number of exhibitions or merchants taking part in the event, purpose and duration of the event, and a description of the goods or types of goods to be sold. 
At the time of filing the application, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated in the application. No fee shall be charged to religious, nonprofit or charitable organizations. The city manager, or the city manager's designee, may impose conditions on the approval of the special events license, including required sanitation, cleanup measures, and security measures, and bond to guarantee performance of the conditions or to secure the payment of the sales tax due to the city. 
The city manager, or the city manager's designee, may deny an application; however the denial must be in writing, and must provide an opportunity for the applicant to be heard by city council. Notice of the city manager's denial of the application shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds for denial and the time and place of hearing by city council. Such notice shall be personally served, or may be mailed, postage prepaid, to the applicant at the address as set forth in the application, at least three (3) days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(e)  Door-to-door non-commercial solicitation shall be exempt from the licensing provisions of this article. Door-to-door noncommercial solicitation means attempting to make personal contact with a resident at his or her residence, without prior specific invitation by or appointment with the resident, for the primary purpose of: 
(1)  Seeking or asking for a gift or donation for a public entity or nonprofit organization exempt from federal income tax under 26 U.S.C. 501 (c)(3); 
(2)  Soliciting the sale of goods, wares or merchandise for present or future delivery, or the sale of services to be performed immediately or in the future, with the entire proceeds of such sale to be paid directly to, or used exclusively for the benefit of, a public entity or nonprofit organization exempt from federal income tax under 26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3); 
(3)  Personally delivering to the resident a handbill or flyer advertising a future, not-for-profit event, activity, good or service; 
(4)  Proselytizing on behalf of a religious organization; 
(5)  Soliciting support for a political candidate or organization, or ballot measure or ideology; or 
(6)  Soliciting the sale of newspaper or magazine subscriptions. 
(Ord. No. 14-2000, § 1, 10-18-00; Ord. No. 5-2013, §§ 1—3, 5-15-13; Ord. No. 9-2018 , § 1, 4-18-18; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F19, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-213. - Limitations on door-to-door soliciting. 
(a)  All solicitation prohibited by posting of "no solicitation" or "no trespassing" sign. No solicitor, whether commercial or noncommercial, shall enter or remain upon any private premises in the city if a "no solicitation" or "no trespassing" sign is posted at or near the entrance(s) to such premises. For the purposes of this provision, if an occupant of a multi-family dwelling wishes to prohibit door-to-door solicitation by the posting of a sign, the sign prohibiting solicitation must be posted at or near the entrance(s) to the occupant's individual dwelling. This provision shall apply to all solicitation, including, without limitation, all activities that are religious, charitable or political in nature and all solicitation of newspaper or magazine subscriptions. 
(b)  Permissible times. All door-to-door commercial solicitation and all door-to-door noncommercial solicitation shall be undertaken and completed between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and sunset as announced and published by the national weather service daily. 
(c)  No person shall engage in solicitation upon residential premises after having been asked by the owner or occupant of such premises to leave. 
(d)  Every person engaged in solicitation shall, at the time of initial contact with a prospective customer or donor, immediately identify themselves and truthfully state the purpose of the solicitation. 
(e)  City council hereby finds and declares a violation of this section is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 14-2000, § 1, 10-18-00; Ord. No. 5-2013, § 4, 5-15-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5-2013, § 4, adopted May 15, 2013, amended the title of § 10-213. Previosuly § 10-213 was titled uninvited peddling and canvassing prohibited; same declared nuisance.  
Sec. 10-214. - Conduct of business on street or other public place. 
(a)  No peddler, solicitor or transient seller shall: 
(1)  Conduct business upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park or any other public place unless the license specifies that peddling, soliciting or transient selling in such public place is permitted thereunder. 
(2)  Sell from any location within the city without a valid license; or 
(3)  Park or stand his or her wagon, automobile or other vehicle upon any sidewalk or sidewalk area, street, alley, highway or public thoroughfare so as to obstruct free travel thereon. 
(b)  The city manager, or the city manager's designee, may approve an application for a transient dealer's license to use a public place; however, the city manager, or the city manager's designee may determine that the proposed transient selling would constitute an obstruction of the public way or place, a health hazard or other hazardous condition upon the public way or place, is not in compliance with the laws of the city, or is not compatible with the intended use or traffic upon the public way or place, and refuse to issue the license or may add reasonable conditions. 
(Ord. No. 14-2000, § 1, 10-18-00; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F20, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-215. - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person over sixteen (16) years of age to peddle, solicit or engage in transient selling within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a transient dealer's license or mobile food vending permit as provided in this article, except as specifically exempted in this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-2000, § 1, 10-18-00; Ord. No. 21-2015, § 2, 11-18-15 ; Ord. No. 9-2018 , § 2, 4-18-18)  
Sec. 10-216. - Application; term; fee; deposit. 
Every person transacting any business or other activity requiring a transient dealer's license under this article shall first procure from the city finance director a license permitting such person to engage in any of such selling or soliciting activities. This license shall be referred to as a transient dealer's license. A transient dealer's license shall be issued in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Term. A transient dealer's license shall be issued for no more than fourteen (14) days in any calendar year and may not be renewed, except that a transient dealer's license issued for the sales and delivery of food and/or beverage may be issued for no more than one hundred eighty (180) days in any calendar year. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a transient dealer's license may be extended to twenty-one (21) days upon a finding by the city manager that the licensee applying for the extension provides a significant and articulable benefit to the City as a result of such extension. The days need not be consecutive, but must be identified by the applicant in its application. 
(2)  Applicants for a transient dealer's license shall file with the city finance director, at least three (3) days prior to the date upon which the applicant desires to commence business, a sworn application, in writing, on a form to be furnished by the city finance director, which shall give the following information: 
a.  The name, physical description, age, social security number and driver's license number of the applicant; 
b.  Applicant's permanent home address and local address; 
c.  A brief description of the nature of the business and goods to be shown for sale or future delivery, including the manufacturer, producer and supplier of the goods; 
d.  If employed, the name, address and phone number of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship between the employer and employee; 
e.  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
f.  The exact location in which the applicant intends to do business. If the location is to change during the license period, the applicant must so state on the application; 
g.  If any one (1) or more vehicles are to be used, a description of the vehicles, together with the license numbers and other means of identification; and 
h.  The particular manner and means by which the applicant intends to sell goods or take orders. 
(3)  At the time of filing the application, a license fee shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated in the application and administrative costs. The license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(4)  Limit on gross sales. No person licensed under the provisions of this article may make gross sales, as that term is defined in Chapter 18, whether taxable in accordance with Chapter 18 or not, in excess of $100,000 in any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 14-2000, § 1, 10-18-00; Ord. No. 10, 2010, § 1, 6-2-10; Ord. No. 21-2015, § 3, 11-18-15 ; Ord. No. 9-2018 , §§ 2, 3, 4-18-18; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F21, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-217. - Investigation of applicant; issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the application for a transient dealer's license under this article, the city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall conduct an investigation of applicant's history of compliance, or lack thereof, with state and local laws and regulations. 
(b)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's business responsibility is determined to be unsatisfactory by the city manager, the city manager may deny the application; however the denial must be in writing, and must provide an opportunity for the applicant to be heard by city council. Notice of the city manager's denial of the application shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds for denial and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be personally served, or may be mailed, postage prepaid, to the applicant at the local address set forth on the application, at least three (3) days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(c)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's business responsibility is determined to be satisfactory by the city manager, the city manager shall approve the application, and the city clerk shall upon receipt of the necessary fees as set forth in this article, execute and deliver to the applicant a transient dealer's license to carry on such business within the city limits. 
(d)  The license shall contain the signature of the city clerk, a description of the type of goods to be sold thereunder, the date of issuance and the expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 14-2000, § 1, 10-18-00; Ord. No. 21-2015, § 4, 11-18-15 ; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F22, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-218. - Separate license required for each person engaging in business. 
No more than one (1) individual person shall engage in business or operate under the same transient dealer's license, whether as principal or agent, or as an assistant to any principal or agent, unless such additional person or persons is operating as an employee of the licensee, and is assisting the licensee in the same location as the licensee operating. 
(Ord. No. 14-2000, § 1, 10-18-00; Ord. No. 10, 2010, § 2, 6-2-10)  
Sec. 10-219. - Revocation. 
(a)  A license issued under this article may be revoked by the city manager after notice to the licensee and a hearing at which the licensee may be heard, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement contained in the application for the license; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made in the course of carrying on the licensee's business as a transient dealer; 
(3)  Any violation of this article; 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving fraud or deceit, or the violation of the regulations of a federal, state or local agency; 
(5)  Conducting business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to public health, safety or general welfare. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be personally served, or may be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at such licensee's local address as set forth on the application, at least three (3) days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 27-2018 , § F23, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 10-220. - Record of licenses. 
The city clerk shall maintain a record of all licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this division and all license fees collected, which fees shall be paid into the general fund for the city. 
(Ord. No. 14-2000, § 1, 10-18-00)  
Sec. 10-221. - Mobile food vending. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The general purpose of this section is to promote the health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to provide balanced business, employment, and recreational opportunities by establishing reasonable guidelines and regulations for the operation of mobile food vehicles within the city. The regulations contained herein are not intended to prohibit or hamper economic activity, but merely to regulate specific activities that are commercial in nature. It is the intent of these regulations to: 
(1)  Establish regulations in accordance with the vision statement for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city; and 
(2)  Establishing a uniform set of fair and equitable rules and regulations to be applied consistently to mobile food vendors; and 
(3)  Provide economic development opportunities to smaller entrepreneurs; and 
(4)  Attempt to mitigate the potential negative impact to established brick and mortar dining establishments by mobile food vendors. 
(b)  Applicability. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of mobile food vending or the operation of a mobile food vehicle as defined above unless such person has obtained a mobile vending permit from the city finance department, except as exempted herein. 
(c)  Application procedure. Applicants may request a mobile vending permit for mobile food vending from the office of the director of finance of the city. The application shall contain all information relevant and necessary to determine whether a particular permit may be issued, including, but not necessarily limited to: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, current address, telephone number, mailing address and proof of identity. The application shall also include a color photograph of the mobile food vehicle to which the permit will apply. 
(2)  A brief description of the nature, character, and quality of foods to be offered for sale. 
(3)  Site plan showing proposed location and distances in compliance with the location requirements outlined in subsection (f)(3), including manufacturers specifications for decibel range of the generator used to provide power to the vehicle, if any. 
(4)  Written express consent of the property owner to operate a mobile food vending business on the property. 
(5)  A copy of a current State of Colorado Health Department Inspection Certificate for the subject vehicle. 
(6)  If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of the person, firm, association, organization, company or corporation of employment. 
(7)  Make, year, model, color, and license number of the mobile food vehicle to which the permit shall apply. 
(8)  Written approval from the city zoning administrator or public works director. 
(9)  A signed statement that the applicant shall hold harmless the city and its officers and employees, and shall indemnify the city, its officers, and employees for any claims of property damage or injury to persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried out under the terms of the permit. 
(10)  If the applicant will be operating on city property or rights of way in a designated food zone, the applicant shall also furnish and maintain such public liability, food products liability, and property damage insurance as will protect vendor, property owners, and the city from all claims for damage to property or bodily injury, including death, which may arise from the operations under the permit or in connection therewith. Such insurance shall provide coverage of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per accident or occurrence. The policy shall further provide that it shall not be cancelled except upon thirty (30) days written notice served upon the City of Alamosa, Office of the Director of Finance, 300 Hunt Avenue, Alamosa, Colorado 81101. A permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be invalid at any time the insurance required herein is not maintained and evidence of continuing coverage is not filed with the director of finance. Proof of insurance must be shown for each mobile food vehicle in operation. 
(11)  Applicant shall pay that fee as adopted from time to time by the city council at the time of application, application fees are non-refundable. 
(12)  The applicant shall be notified in writing by the finance director or his/her designee of the city's decision to issue or deny the mobile vending permit not later than ten (10) business days after the applicant has filed a completed application with the finance department. 
(13)  Each permit shall show the name and address of the mobile vendor, the type of permit issued, the nature of the food to be sold, the cost of the permit, the date of issuance, the date of expiration, and a brief description of the mobile food vehicle. 
(14)  Any permit issued by the director of finance or his/her designee shall be carried with the vendor whenever they are engaged in activities regulated under this permit and conspicuously displayed on the mobile food vehicle adjacent to the current state health inspection certificate. 
(d)  Expiration and renewal. 
(1)  All mobile food vending permits expire annually at midnight on December 31 st . A permit may be renewed, provided an application for renewal and permit fees are received by the city no later than the expiration date of the current permit. Any application received after that date shall be processed as a new application. The finance director or his/her designee shall review each application for renewal, and upon determining that the applicant is in full compliance with the provision of these regulations, shall issue a new permit. 
(e)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Exempt activities. The provisions of this section do not apply to: 
a.  Temporary sales to benefit non-profit organizations, schools, youth or youth groups and conducted on private property provided such sales last no longer than two (2) consecutive days. 
b.  Ice cream trucks. All ice cream trucks are required to obtain a business license. An ice cream truck shall not be required to apply for a mobile food vending permit unless and except it wishes to operate in a designated food zone or mobile food vendor park. Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any ice cream truck, while engaged in the business of selling, to stop or stand or permit or suffer any vehicle to do so upon any street of the city except during the actual sale of its ice cream product. In no event shall an ice cream truck be or remain upon any street or sidewalk longer than is reasonable to conduct a sale; such time not to exceed five (5) minutes. 
(2)  Claims of exemption. Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the regulations set forth herein, or from the payment of a permit fee, shall cite to the finance director or his/her designee, the statute or other legal authority under which exemption is claimed and shall present proof of qualification of such exemption. 
(f)  General rules and regulations. 
(1)  Mobile food vendors shall be permitted on all developed private property with a primary use (parking, retail, office, etc.) in areas of the city with underlying commercial and industrial zonings with written owner permission and all areas within the downtown design overlay district as depicted on the official zoning map of the city. Mobile food vendors shall not be permitted in any residential zoning unless the requested site has been designated a food zone by the city. 
(2)  Mobile food vending shall not be permitted on undeveloped property lacking a primary use in any zoning district. 
(3)  No mobile food vendor shall be permitted to operate in the following areas: 
a.  Within any residential zoning unless the proposed location has been designated a food zone by the city. 
b.  Outside of the required building setbacks as defined in article V. 
c.  Within thirty (30) feet of any stop sign, street intersection, pedestrian crosswalk, driveway, or loading zone. 
d.  Within fifty (50) feet of any primary building entrance or within twenty (20) feet of an emergency or secondary entrance that is defined as a point of ingress or egress that is normally locked during business hours. 
e.  Within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant. 
f.  Within fifteen (15) feet of any parking space or access ramp designated for persons with physical disabilities. 
g.  Within any publicly owned parking lot unless that area has been specifically designated a food zone by the city. 
h.  Within two hundred (200) feet of a public entrance to a brick and mortar dining establishment not owned by the mobile food vendor unless permission in writing is obtained from the owner of record of the property and the operator of the establishment if other than the owner. Said two hundred (200) feet shall be measured in a straight line from the location of the mobile food vehicle to the nearest existing public entrance of the established restaurant. 
i.  Within any area that obstructs pedestrian traffic. 
j.  On any vacant or undeveloped property. 
k.  Within two hundred (200) feet of any primary or secondary school. Two hundred (200) feet shall be measured to the nearest point on the lot line of the school property. 
(4)  A developed property proposed for the siting of a mobile food vendor shall have fifty (50) feet of minimum frontage adjacent to a dedicated public street, developed ingress and egress, and hard surface paving to a point that will contain the mobile food vehicle behind the building setback line required by the underlying zoning and allow patrons to exit the property without backing into the public street. 
(5)  Mobile food vending on private property shall in no way alleviate the compliance requirement for property owners to meet off street parking and loading requirements for the primary use of the property as provided for in section 21-171. 
(6)  Mobile food vendors shall provide for adequate solid waste receptacles and shall be responsible for the cleanliness and neat appearance of the sidewalks, roadways, and other spaces adjacent to their vending sites by keeping them clean and free of paper, peelings, and refuse of any kind generated from the operation of their business. The use of public trash receptacles shall be prohibited. 
(7)  No person or entity authorized to engage in the business of mobile food vending under these regulations shall be permitted to do any of the following under any circumstances: 
a.  Unduly obstruct pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic. 
b.  Obstruct traffic signals or signs. 
c.  Stop, stand, or park any mobile food vehicle upon any street or public way for the purpose of selling unless that area has been designated a food zone by the city. 
d.  Operate any mobile food vehicle that when fully loaded and operating cannot be easily moved and maintained under control by the permittee, his employee or an attendant. 
e.  Sound any device that produces a loud and raucous noise or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier, or similar device to attract public attention. 
f.  Conduct his/her business in any way that would restrict or interfere with the ingress or egress of the abutting property owner or tenant, create a nuisance, increase traffic congestion or delay on any public street or travelled way, constitute a hazard to traffic, life or property, or obstruct adequate access to emergency and sanitation vehicles. 
g.  Install or erect any free-standing signage not in full compliance with chapter 21, article X. 
h.  Run hoses, electric cords, gas lines, or other apparatus to the mobile food vehicle in any manner that presents an unsafe condition to pedestrians or the motoring public. Any power generated on site shall be produced with a generation sound level not to exceed eighty (80) decibels at the source. 
(8)  Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 2:30 a.m. When operating within three hundred (300) feet of an occupied residence, hours will be limited to between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. unless that residence is located in the downtown design overlay in which case hours of operation will continue to be allowed between the hours of 6:00 a.m. [and] 2:30 a.m. Vendors shall be allotted thirty (30) minutes set-up and thirty (30) minutes breakdown before and after allowed hours of operation. 
(9)  All locations are subject to the regulations and other requirements established by the health department. 
(10)  Mobile food vending within a public street shall occur only from the side of a vehicle that is parked abutting and parallel to the curb or edge of travelled way. 
(11)  No mobile food vehicle shall have a drive through service. 
(12)  Any mobile food vendor operating at any location not permitted by these regulations or outside of the allowable hours of operation shall be deemed to be operating without a permit in violation of this Code and may be subject to enforcement. 
(13)  Any new business that opens or moves near an existing mobile food vendor park, established food zone, or historically occupied private property shall be deemed to have accepted the proximity of the existing use. 
(g)  Temporary food zone designation. 
(1)  A temporary food zone permit allows mobile food vendors the opportunity to serve specific events for the duration of the event so long as mobile food vending is not associated with said event. These permits are allowed only when the timing and place of said activity does not conflict with the city's desire to protect the safe and convenient use of public rights-of-way. It is the city's intent to control pedestrian and street congestion as it relates to the operation of mobile food businesses and the proximity to established brick and mortar businesses. This permit is primarily used to grant permission to operate in locations within public rights-of-way that have not been designated as food zones by the city. 
(2)  Application procedure. 
a.  The applicant must make application a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of the event for which the temporary food zone designation will apply. 
b.  Applicant must first possess a current mobile food vendor permit. 
c.  The temporary food zone permit shall only be issued for an event abutting a curb space in the right of way, it shall not apply to operation on private property. 
d.  The temporary food zone permit shall be subject to the same rules and regulations governing the primary permit. 
e.  The permit application shall be reviewed by the city police department, the department of public works, and the department of parks and recreation. 
f.  The following items will be considered prior to the issuance of the temporary food zone permit: 
• Public safety concerns 
• Access to entrances and exits to city parks and publicly owned facilities 
• Conflicts with existing businesses and concessionaires, permitted events, or other special activities occurring in the area 
g.  Upon approval, the city shall provide the permittee evidence of its authorization for a temporary food zone. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to secure any temporary zone that has been authorized by the permit. The city shall not be held liable for the failure of the permittee to secure the temporary zone once approval is provided. 
(h)  Mobile food vendor park designation. Any property owner that wishes to make a single parcel available to more than two (2) mobile food vendors simultaneously shall apply to the department of public works for a mobile food vendor park designation. This is considered a permitted use by special review in all zoning districts and shall be obtained by the process outlined in chapter 21, article VI. 
(i)  Suspension and revocation of permit. 
(1)  Conditions for suspension/revocation of permit. Any permit issued under these regulations may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Fraud, misrepresentation or knowingly providing a false statement in the application for the permit. 
b.  Fraud, misrepresentation or knowingly providing a false statement in the course of performing the activities regulated by this permit. 
c.  Conducting the operations regulated by this permit in any manner contrary to the conditions of the permit. 
d.  Conducting the business of vending in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, cause a breach of the peace, constitute a danger to the public health, safety, welfare, or morals, or interfere with the rights of abutting property owners. 
e.  Cancellation of health department authorization for a food or beverage vending unit due to uncorrected health or sanitation violations. 
f.  The permittee or any of its principals has been convicted of any crime that involves any local, state, or federal law or regulation arising out of the operation of a similar business. 
g.  The permittee or any of its agents is in default on any payments owed to the city. 
h.  The permittee or any of its agents or employees interfere with an inspection of the mobile food vehicle by a health department inspector. 
(2)  Notification of suspension or revocation. The city finance director or his/her designee shall provide written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation in a brief statement setting forth the complaint and the grounds for suspension or revocation. Such notice shall be mailed to the address shown on the permit holder's application by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(3)  Fine in lieu of suspension or revocation. The city may choose, at its sole discretion, to offer the permittee the opportunity to pay a fine in lieu of permit suspension or revocation. In that event, the mobile food vendor shall be subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. Each violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Each day shall be considered a separate offense. 
(4)  Forfeiture of fee. If the city revokes a vending permit, the fee already paid for the permit shall be forfeited. A person whose permit has been revoked under this section may not apply for a new permit for a period of one (1) year from the date that the revocation took effect. 
( Ord. No. 21-2015, § 5, 11-18-15 )  
Secs. 10-222—10-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-003, § 1, adopted February 19, 2003, enacted provisions intended for use as §§ 10-230—10-233. To preserve the style of the Code, these provisions have been renumbered as §§ 10-231—10-234, at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 10-231. - Definitions. 
Adult-oriented business shall mean an establishment which includes, whether as a principal or adjunct portion of its offerings, the sale, rental, display or other offering, whether live or recorded, of entertainment, dancing, or material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on depicting, exhibiting, describing or relating to sexual activities. The term "adult-oriented business" includes, but is not limited to, bookstores, video stores, gift stores, cabarets, motels and hotels, and theaters. 
(Ord. No. 02-2003, § 1, 2-19-03)  
Sec. 10-232. - Restricted locations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated an adult-oriented business in any location other than a commercial or industrial district as defined in chapter 21 of the Code. An adult-oriented business shall be deemed to be a conditional use and shall require special review approval under article VI of chapter 21. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated an adult-oriented business within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of a church, school, child-care or day-care home or facility, dormitory, health services center or hospital, public park, or residential property ("protected uses"). For the purposes of this section, distance between an adult-oriented business and church, school, child-care or day-care home or facility, dormitory, health services center or hospital, public park, or residential property shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point of the building or structure in which the adult-oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of the premises in which a church, school, child-care or day-care home or facility, dormitory, health services center or hospital, public park, or residential property is located. 
(c)  In the event the application of provisions (a) and (b) of this section, at a time when no adult-oriented business is located in the City of Alamosa, would require denial of an application under this chapter on the basis that no location in the City of Alamosa fits the restricted location criteria, the distance from protected uses may be reduced to less than seven hundred fifty (750) feet, but in no event shall the distance be reduced to less than five hundred (500) feet. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated an adult-oriented business within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of another adult-oriented business. The distance between any two (2) such businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structures in which the adult-oriented businesses are located. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated more than one (1) adult-oriented business in the same facility or portion thereof. 
(f)  An adult business lawfully operating within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of a location on which a church, school, child-care or day-care home or facility, dormitory, health services center or hospital, public park, or residential subsequently commences shall be deemed a permitted non-conforming use; provided, however, if the adult-oriented business ceases operation for a period of thirty (30) days or more, after becoming a permitted non-conforming use, recommencement of operation shall no longer be permitted, and shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-2003, § 1, 2-19-03)  
Sec. 10-233. - Minimum age limitations. 
(a)  All minors, being persons under eighteen (18) years of age, shall be prohibited admission to an adult-oriented business; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to the non-adult business portion of a business's premises if the interior of the adult-business portion of the premises is not visible from the non-adult-business portion, and access is restricted and regulated so as to bar entrance by minors. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to violate this provision. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to violate this provision. In addition to whatever punishment may be imposed hereunder in the event of prosecution of a violation of this provision as a municipal code violation, conviction of a licensee for a violation under this provision may be grounds for revocation or non-renewal of a license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 02-2003, § 1, 2-19-03)  
Sec. 10-234. - Restricted hours of operation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an adult-oriented business to be open for business or for a licensee to allow patrons on the premises from two o'clock a.m. to 12:00 noon of any day. 
(b)  Sub-part (a) of this section shall not apply to private rooms within an adult-oriented motel or hotel. 
(Ord. No. 02-2003, § 1, 2-19-03)  
Secs. 10-235—10-249. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITIES PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 10-250. - Purpose. 
Although the possession and use of marijuana is and remains unlawful under Federal law, Section 14 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution provides an exception to prosecution under state criminal laws when marijuana is possessed and used for medicinal purposes by a patient who has been diagnosed with a debilitating medical condition, and by the patient's primary caregiver. The Constitution does not, however, contain any provision for the lawful sale or distribution of marijuana to patients. The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code clarifies Colorado law regarding the scope and extent of Article XVIII, § 14 of the Colorado Constitution, and at the same time authorizes a regulatory scheme for the retail sale, distribution, cultivation and dispensing of medical marijuana known as a "Medical Marijuana Center," and further authorizes licensing mechanisms known as an "Optional Premises Cultivation Operation" and a "Medical Marijuana-Infused Products Manufacturers' License. C.R.S. § 12-43.3-106 specifically authorizes the governing body of a municipality to "vote to prohibit the operation of medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation operations, and medical marijuana-infused products manufacturers' licenses". The purpose of this article is to prohibit, within the City of Alamosa, such medical marijuana facilities as provided for by the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare. This article does not prohibit the operation of medical marijuana testing facilities within the city operated pursuant to the provisions of Article XII of the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 21-2010, § 1, 12-15-10; Ord. No. 3-2016 , § 2, 1-20-16)  
Sec. 10-251. - Prohibition on licensed medical marijuana facilities. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for a person to establish, operate, cause or permit to be operated, or continue to operate within the City of Alamosa and within any area annexed to the city after the effective date of this article, a medical marijuana center, a medical marijuana infused product manufacturing facility, an optional premises cultivation operation, or any business, facility or any other operation requiring a license under C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101 et seq. as that statute may be amended from time to time, other than a medical marijuana testing facility operated pursuant to the provisions of Article XII of the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 21-2010, § 1, 12-15-10; Ord. No. 3-2016 , § 3, 1-20-16)  
Sec. 10-252. - Patients and primary caregivers. 
Nothing in this article shall prohibit, regulate or otherwise impair or be construed to prohibit, regulate or impair the cultivation, use or possession of medical marijuana by a patient and/or by a primary caregiver for his/her patients provided that such patient or primary caregiver is acting in accordance with all applicable provisions of Article XVIII, § 14(1)(c) of the Colorado Constitution, C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101 et seq. as amended, C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106 as amended, the regulations promulgated by the state department of public health and environment, the department of revenue or any other agency with regulatory authority and the laws of the city. 
(Ord. No. 21-2010, § 1, 12-15-10)  
Secs. 10-253—10-259. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA FACILITIES PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 10-260. - Purpose. 
Although the possession and use of marijuana is and remains unlawful under Federal law, Article XVIII § 16 of the Colorado Constitution provides an exception to prosecution under state criminal laws when persons over the age of twenty-one (21) possess and use one ounce or less of marijuana for any purpose. The state constitution further provides that it is lawful to cultivate, harvest, process, package, transport, display, and possess marijuana; deliver or transfer marijuana to a marijuana testing facility; sell marijuana to a marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana product manufacturing facility, or a retail marijuana store; or purchase marijuana from a marijuana cultivation facility, if the person conducting the activities has obtained a current, valid license to operate a marijuana cultivation facility, marijuana product manufacturing facility, marijuana testing facility, marijuana retail store, or is acting in his or her capacity as an owner, employee, or agent of such a licensed marijuana facility. However, the Colorado Constitution, at Article XVIII § 16(5)(f) authorizes municipalities to prohibit such facilities, if they deem it appropriate. The city has carefully considered Article XVIII, § 16 of the Colorado Constitution, and the secondary effects of marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing facilities and retail marijuana stores on the health, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants, and deems it appropriate to prohibit marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and retail marijuana stores within the city. Retail marijuana testing facilities operated pursuant to the provisions of Article XII of the city Code shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 10, 2013, § 1, 8-7-13; Ord. No. 3-2016 , § 4, 1-20-16)  
Sec. 10-261. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, consistent with the meanings established in Article XVIII, § 16 of the Colorado Constitution: 
Marijuana means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marihuana concentrate. Marijuana does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product. 
Marijuana cultivation facility means an entity licensed to cultivate, prepare, and package marijuana and sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers. 
Marijuana product manufacturing facility means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana; manufacture, prepare, and package marijuana products; and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers. 
Marijuana products means concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments, and tinctures. 
Retail marijuana store means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities and marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers. 
(Ord. No. 10, 2013, § 1, 8-7-13; Ord. No. 3-2016 , § 5, 1-20-16)  
Sec. 10-262. - Prohibition on retail marijuana facilities. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for a person to establish, operate, cause or permit to be operated, or continue to operate within the city and within any area annexed to the city after the effective date of this ordinance, any marijuana cultivation facility, marijuana product manufacturing facility, retail marijuana store, or any business, facility or any other operation requiring a license under the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, C.R.S. § 12-43.4-101 et seq. as that statute may be amended from time to time, other than a retail marijuana testing facility Alamosa operated pursuant to the provisions of Article XII of the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 10, 2013, § 1, 8-7-13; Ord. No. 3-2016 , § 6, 1-20-16)  
Secs. 10-263—10-299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - MEDICAL AND RETAIL MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITIES PERMITTED 
 
Sec. 10-300. - Definitions. 
Medical marijuana testing facility means a facility that analyzes and certifies the safety and potency of medical marijuana, pursuant to the provisions of Article 43.3 of Title 12, C.R.S. 
Retail marijuana testing facility means a facility that analyzes and certifies the safety and potency of retail marijuana and industrial hemp, pursuant to the provisions of Article 43.4 of Title 12, C.R.S. 
(Ord. No. 3-2016 , § 1, 1-20-16)  
Sec. 10-301. - State license required. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to establish, operate, cause or permit to be operated, or continue to operate within the city and within any area annexed to the city after the effective date of this ordinance, any medical marijuana testing facility or any retail marijuana testing facility without having a license in good standing for such facility from the State of Colorado. No city license other than a city sales tax license, if applicable, shall be required, however, any person operating a medical marijuana testing facility or a retail marijuana testing facility shall provide a copy of the license for such facility issued by the State of Colorado to the city clerk, to be kept in the register of licenses kept by the city clerk pursuant to the provisions of section 10-3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 3-2016 , § 1, 1-20-16)  
Sec. 10-302. - Compliance with Colorado Statutes and Regulations. 
Any medical marijuana testing facility and any retail marijuana testing facility shall at all times be operated in compliance with the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Article 43.3 of Title 12, C.R.S., the Retail Marijuana Code, Article 43.4 of Title 12, C.R.S, and the Retail Marijuana Rules, 1 CCR 212-2, Series 100 through 1500, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 3-2016 , § 1, 1-20-16)  
Sec. 10-303. - Zoning—Dual facilities permitted. 
(a)  Zoning. Medical marijuana testing facilities and retail marijuana testing facilities shall be considered a permitted use in areas of the city zoned industrial, and shall only be permitted in those areas of the city zoned industrial. 
(b)  Distance from residential uses and residential zoning districts. No medical marijuana testing facility or retail marijuana testing facility shall be permitted within three hundred (300) feet of an existing residential use or any residential zoning district. This distance shall be measured from the nearest property boundary of such use or district to the nearest property boundary of such facility. 
(c)  Dual facilities. Any facility may hold licenses and be operated as both a medical marijuana testing facility and a retail marijuana testing facility. 
(Ord. No. 3-2016 , § 1, 1-20-16)  
Sec. 10-304. - Noxious gases and fumes. 
Medical marijuana testing facilities and retail marijuana testing facilities shall include appropriate ventilation systems to mitigate noxious gases or other fumes used or created as part of the testing. 
(Ord. No. 3-2016 , § 1, 1-20-16)  
Chapter 11 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police department, art. XIX. 
Cross reference— Municipal court, Ch. 13; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference— Colorado Criminal Code, C.R.S. 18-1-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  (1) It shall be unlawful for any child who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age to be or remain upon any street, alley, or other public place in the city, or on any private property in the city without the express consent of the owner or lawful occupant of such property, on Sundays, Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays, between the hours commencing at 11:00 p.m. and ending at 5:00 a.m. the next day, and on Saturdays and Sundays commencing at the hours of 12:01 a.m. and ending at 5:00 a.m. the same day, unless such child is accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other person having legal care and custody of such child, unless there exists a reasonable justification therefor. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any child who is younger than sixteen (16) years of age to be or remain upon any street, alley, or other public place in the city, or on any private property in the city without the express consent of the owner or lawful occupant of such property, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless such child is accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other person having legal care and custody of such child unless there exists a reasonable justification therefor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the legal care or custody of a child under the age of eighteen (18) years to allow or permit any such child to be or remain on any street, alley, or other public place in the city, or on any private property without the express consent of the owner or lawful occupant thereof between the hours specified in subsection (a) above unless there exists a reasonable justification therefor. 
(c)  Each custodial parent, guardian or other person having the legal care or custody of a child under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be presumed to know the whereabouts of said child at all times. 
(d)  Indifference or ignorance as to the whereabouts of one's child or ward shall not be a reasonable justification under subsections (a) or (b) of this section 11-1. 
(Code 1964, §§ 17-9, 17-10; Ord. No. 4-1996, § 1, 5-1-96)  
Sec. 11-2. - Handbills, posters; area where distribution prohibited, exception. 
No person shall distribute, scatter, deposit or place, or cause to be placed, in, upon or about any street, alley or other public place, or in, upon, or about any private property belonging to any person, or in or upon any automobile or other vehicle belonging to any other person, any handbill, circular or other printed advertising of any kind. This section shall not apply to newspapers and political advertisements. 
(Code 1964, § 17-27) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference— Littering of public and private property, C.R.S. 18-4-511.  
Sec. 11-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Deadly weapon means any of the following which in the manner it is used or intended to be used is capable of producing death or serious bodily injury: 
(1)  A firearm, whether loaded or unloaded; 
(2)  A knife; 
(3)  A bludgeon; 
(4)  Any other weapon, device, instrument, material or substance, whether animate or inanimate. 
Illegal weapon means a blackjack, gas gun, metallic knuckles, gravity knife or switchblade knife. 
Loiter means to be dilatory, to stand idly around, to linger, delay, or wander about, or to remain, abide, or tarry in a public place. 
Obstruct means to render impassable or to render passage unreasonably inconvenient or hazardous. 
Premises means any real estate and improvements erected thereon. 
Public place means a place to which the public or a substantial number of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, highways, school, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds and common areas of public and private buildings and facilities. 
Riot means a public disturbance involving an assemblage of three (3) or more persons which by tumultuous and violent conduct creates grave danger of damage or injury to property or persons or substantially obstructs the performance of any governmental function. 
(Ord. No. 21-1999, § 15, 11-17-99)  
Sec. 11-4. - Intentionally inhaling volatile solvents prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to inhale volatile solvents, which shall include, but not be limited to, the smelling, breathing, or inhaling the fumes or vapors from any paint, glue, gasoline or similar substance containing one (1) or more volatile solvents for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, inebriation, stupefication, euphoria, exhilaration or the dulling of the brain or the nervous system. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "volatile solvent" shall include, but not be limited to, the following types of chemical compounds: 
(1)  Hydrocarbons, including, but not limited to, petroleum distillates and aromatic hydrocarbons; 
(2)  Oxygenated organic compounds, including, but not limited to, ketones, esters, and ethers; 
(3)  Halogenated hydrocarbons; and 
(4)  Nitrous oxides. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from smelling, breathing, or inhaling one (1) or more volatile solvents when done under the supervision of a licensed physician, licensed podiatrist or licensed dentist in the administration of lawful healing practices. 
(d)  In imposing a fine for the violation of the provisions of this section, the court is encouraged, but not required to take into account whether or not the violator is an inhalant abuser, and the treatment, if any, and the likely rehabilitative success of any treatment the violator is undertaking. 
(Ord. No. 3-1988, § 1, 4-6-88)  
Sec. 11-5. - Drug and marijuana paraphernalia—Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this article I shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the laws of this state. "Drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances under circumstances in violation of the laws of this state; 
b.  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
c.  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana; 
d.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
e.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
f.  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; or 
g.  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
1.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
2.  Water pipes; 
3.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
4.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
5.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
6.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
7.  Chamber pipes; 
8.  Carburetor pipes; 
9.  Electric pipes; 
10.  Air-driven pipes; 
11.  Chillums; 
12.  Bongs; or 
13.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(2)  Drug paraphernalia does not include any marijuana paraphernalia. 
(3)  Marijuana means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marihuana concentrate. "Marijuana" does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product. 
(4)  Marijuana paraphernalia means any equipment, products, or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body. 
(Ord. No. 11-2002, § 2, 5-1-02; Ord. No. 2-2017 , § 1, 2-15-17)  
Sec. 11-6. - Drug paraphernalia—Determination—Considerations. 
(a)  In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the court, in its discretion, may consider, in addition to all other relevant factors, those factors set forth in § 18-18-427, C.R.S., as amended. 
(b)  In the event a case brought pursuant to sections 11-5 through 11-10 is tried before a jury, the court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on issues related pursuant to this section. Such hearing shall be conducted in camera. 
(Ord. No. 11-2002, § 3, 5-1-02)  
Sec. 11-7. - Possession of drug and marijuana paraphernalia. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess drug paraphernalia when such person knows or reasonably should have known that the drug paraphernalia could be used under circumstances in violation of the laws of this state. 
(b)  Except as described by Section 14 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution and Section 18-18-406.3, of the Colorado Revised Statutes, a person under twenty-one (21) years of age who possesses marijuana paraphernalia anywhere in the City of Alamosa, and knows or reasonably should know that the marijuana paraphernalia could be used in circumstances in violation of the laws of Colorado, commits illegal possession of marijuana paraphernalia by an underage person. 
(Ord. No. 11-2002, § 4, 5-1-02; Ord. No. 2-2017 , § 2, 2-15-17; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G1, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 11-8. - Manufacture, sale, or delivery of drug paraphernalia. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or deliver, possess with intent to sell or deliver, or manufacture with intent to sell or deliver equipment, products, or materials knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that such equipment, products, or materials could be used as drug paraphernalia. 
(Ord. No. 11-2002, § 5, 5-1-02)  
Sec. 11-9. - Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication who intends thereby to promote the sale in this state of equipment, products, or materials designed and intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(Ord. No. 11-2002, § 6, 5-1-02)  
Sec. 11-10. - Defenses. 
The common law defense known as the "procuring agent defense" is not a defense to any offense in this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-2002, § 7, 5-1-02)  
Sec. 11-11. - Offenses relating to display or consumption of marijuana in certain circumstances. 
(a)  Definition: As used in this section: 
(1)  Motor vehicle means a vehicle driven or drawn by mechanical power and manufactured primarily for use on public highways but does not include a vehicle operated exclusively on a rail or rails. 
(2)  Open marijuana container means a receptacle or marijuana accessory that contains any amount of marijuana and: 
a.  That is open or has a broken seal; and 
b.  The contents of which are partially removed. 
(3)  Passenger area means the area designed to seat the driver and passengers, including seating behind the driver, while a motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in his or her seating position, including, but not limited to the glove compartment. 
(b)  Open display or consumption prohibited. Any person who openly and publicly displays, consumes or uses marijuana commits a municipal code violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished, at a minimum, by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  Open marijuana container—Motor vehicle—Prohibited. 
(1)  Except as otherwise permitted in paragraph (2) of this subsection (c), a person while in the passenger area of a motor vehicle that is on a public highway of this state or the right-of-way of a public highway of this state may not knowingly: 
a.  Use or consume marijuana; or 
b.  Have in his or her possession an open marijuana container. 
(2)  The provisions of this subsection (c) shall not apply to: 
a.  Passengers, other than the driver or a front seat passenger, located in the passenger area of a motor vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of persons for compensation; 
b.  The possession by a passenger, other than the driver or a front seat passenger, of an open marijuana container in the living quarters of a house coach, house trailer, motor home, as defined in § 42-1-102(57), Colorado Revised Statutes (or its successor provision), or trailer coach, as defined in § 42-1-102(106)(a), Colorado Revised Statutes (or its successor provision); 
c.  The possession of an open marijuana container in the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk; or 
d.  The possession of an open marijuana container in an area not normally occupied by the driver or a passenger in a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(3)  A person who violates the provisions of this subsection (c) commits a class A traffic infraction and shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 2-2017 , § 3, 2-15-17)  
Sec. 11-12. - Consumption of, possession of open container of fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous, spirituous liquors in public places, vehicle. 
(a)  Except at such times and in such places as permitted by a special events permit issued pursuant to the provisions of the special events permitting section of the Colorado Liquor Code or exempt from permitting requirements under C.R.S. § 12-48-108 as amended from time to time, it shall be unlawful for any person to drink or have in possession an opened container of fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place in the city, or while within any vehicle in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place in the city. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a person in possession of one (1) opened but resealed container having a capacity not larger than seven hundred fifty (750) millilitres and containing vinous liquor (i.e., wine) lawfully purchased on the premises provided that said opened container was lawfully removed from an establishment licensed for the consumption of vinous spirits on the premises, pursuant to Article 12, Chapter 47, Part 4 of the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
(Code 1964, § 3-19.2; Ord. No. 15-2005, §§ 1, 2, 8-17-05; Ord. No. 10, 2011, § 1, 8-3-11; Ord. No. 2-2017 , § 4, 2-15-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2-2017 , § 4, adopted February 15, 2017, redesignated former § 10-23 as a new § 11-12. The historical notation has been retained for reference. 
State Law reference— Consumption of alcoholic beverages, C.R.S. 12-47-128.  
Sec. 11-13. - Complicity. 
A person is legally accountable as principal for the behavior of another constituting a criminal offense if, with the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of the offense, he or she aids, abets, advises, or encourages the other person in planning or committing the offense. 
(Ord. No. 10-2019 , § 1, 4-3-19)  
Sec. 11-14. - Criminal attempt. 
(1)  A person commits criminal attempt if, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for commission of an offense, he or she engages in conduct constituting a substantial step toward the commission of the offense. A substantial step is any conduct, whether act, omission, or possession, which is strongly corroborative of the firmness of the actor's purpose to complete the commission of the offense. Factual or legal impossibility of committing the offense is not a defense if the offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the actor believed them to be, nor is it a defense that the crime attempted was actually perpetrated by the accused. 
(2)  A person who engages in conduct intending to aid another to commit an offense commits criminal attempt if the conduct would establish such person complicity under section 18-1-603 were the offense committed by the other person, even if the other is not guilty of committing or attempting the offense. 
(3)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the defendant abandoned his or her effort to commit the crime or otherwise prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting the complete and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal intent. Renunciation and abandonment are not voluntary and complete so as to be a defense to prosecution under this section if they are motivated in whole or in part by: 
(a)  A belief that a circumstance exists which increases the probability of detection or apprehension of the defendant or another or which makes more difficult the consummation of the crime; or 
(b)  A decision to postpone the crime until another time or to substitute another victim or another but similar objective. 
(Ord. No. 10-2019 , § 2, 4-3-19)  
Sec. 11-15. - Criminal liability of an individual for corporate conduct. 
A person is criminally liable for conduct constituting an offense which he performs or causes to occur in the name of or in behalf of a corporation to the same extent as if that conduct were performed or caused by him in his own name or behalf. 
(Ord. No. 10-2019 , § 3, 4-3-19)  
Sec. 11-16. - Criminal liability of business entities—definitions. 
(a)  A business entity is guilty of an offense if: 
(1)  The conduct constituting the offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty of affirmative performance imposed on the business entity by law; or 
(2)  The conduct constituting the offense is engaged in, authorized, solicited, requested, commanded, or knowingly tolerated by the governing body or individual authorized to manage the affairs of the business entity or by a high managerial agent acting within the scope of his or her employment or in behalf of the business entity. 
(b)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Agent means any director, officer, or employee of a business entity, or any other person who is authorized to act on behalf of the business entity, and "high managerial agent" means an officer of a business entity or any other agent in a position of comparable authority with respect to the formulation of the business entity's policy or the supervision in a managerial capacity of subordinate employees. 
(2)  Business entity means a corporation or other entity that is subject to the provisions of title 7, C.R.S.; foreign corporations qualified to do business in this state pursuant to article 115 of title 7, C.R.S., specifically including federally chartered or authorized financial institutions; a corporation or other entity that is subject to the provisions of title 11, C.R.S.; or a sole proprietorship or other association or group of individuals doing business in the state. 
(c)  Every offense committed by a corporation which would be an ordinance violation if committed by an individual shall subject the corporation to the payment of a fine within the jurisdiction of the municipal court, which fine shall be at least twice the fine amount the court would otherwise levy upon an individual committing the same particular offense of which the business entity is convicted. 
(Ord. No. 10-2019 , § 4, 4-3-19)  
Secs. 11-17—11-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES RELATING TO ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— False report of fire alarm or other emergency, C.R.S. 18-8-111(1)(a); false reporting to authorities, C.R.S. 18-8-111; refusing to aid a peace officer, C.R.S. 18-8-107. 
 
Sec. 11-21. - Escape from custody. 
It is unlawful for any person lawfully confined or detained in custody of or otherwise lawfully restrained by the city to escape or absent himself from custody. 
(Code 1964, § 17-32.1) 
State Law reference— Escapes, C.R.S. 18-8-208.  
Sec. 11-22. - Resisting arrest; obstructing public officers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly prevent or attempt to prevent a police officer, acting under color of his or her official authority, from effecting an arrest of the actor or another by: 
(1)  Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the police officer or another; or 
(2)  Using any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing bodily injury to the police officer or another. 
(3)  Fleeing from the police officer after being ordered to stop in a manner that would indicate to a reasonable person that the police officer was ordering such person to stop. 
(b)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the police officer was attempting to make an arrest that in fact was unlawful if the police officer was acting under color of official authority and in attempting to make the arrest such officer was not resorting to unreasonable or excessive force giving rise to the right of self-defense. A police officer acts under color of official authority when, in the regular course of assigned duties, such officer is called upon to make, and does make, a judgement in good faith based upon surrounding facts and circumstances that an arrest should be made. 
(c)  The term police officer as used in this section means a police officer in uniform or a police officer out of uniform who has identified himself or herself by exhibiting police officer credentials to the person whom such officer is attempting to arrest. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, by using or threatening to use violence, force, physical interference, or an obstacle, to knowingly obstruct, impair or hinder the: 
(1)  Enforcement of the law or the preservation of the peace by a police officer; or 
(2)  The prevention, control, or abatement of fire by a firefighter; or 
(3)  The administration of medical treatment or emergency assistance by an emergency medical service provider or rescue specialist; or 
(4)  The administration of emergency care or assistance by a volunteer, acting in good faith to render such care or assistance at the scene of an emergency or accident. 
(Code 1964, § 17-55; Ord. No. 21-1999, § 1, 11-17-99; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G2, 10-3-18; Ord. No. 8-2019 , 4-3-19) 
State Law reference— Resisting arrest, C.R.S. 18-8-103.  
Sec. 11-23. - Refusing to aid a police officer. 
A person, eighteen (18) years of age or older, commits an unlawful act when, upon command by a person known to such person to be a police officer, such person unreasonably refuses or fails to aid the police officer in effecting or securing an arrest or preventing the commission by another of any offense. 
(Ord. No. 21-1999, § 2, 11-17-99; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G3, 10-3-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 18-8-107.  
Sec. 11-24. - Impersonating a police officer or public servant. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to falsely pretend to be a police officer or a public servant and perform an act in that pretended capacity. It is no defense under this section that the office the actor pretended to hold did not in fact exist. 
(Ord. No. 21-1999, § 3, 11-17-99)  
Sec. 11-25. - False reporting. 
It shall be unlawful to commit false reporting to authorities. A person commits false reporting to authorities if such person: 
(1)  Knowingly causes a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be transmitted to or within a fire department, ambulance service, or any other government agency which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property; or 
(2)  Makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities of a crime or other incident within their official concern when such person knows that it did not occur; 
(3)  Makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities pretending to furnish information relating to an offense or other incident within their official concern when such person knows that he or she has no such information or knows that the information is false; 
(4)  Knowingly provides false identifying information to law enforcement authorities. 
(Ord. No. 21-1999, § 4, 11-17-99; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G4, 10-3-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 18-8-111.  
Sec. 11-26. - Violation of a restraining order. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of violating a restraining order. A person commits the offense of violating a restraining order if such person contacts, harasses, injures, intimidates, molests, threatens, or touches any protected person or enters or remains on premises or comes within a specified distance of a protected person or premises or violates any other provision of a restraining order to protect the protected person from imminent danger to life or health, and such conduct is prohibited by a restraining order, after such person has been personally served with any such order or otherwise has acquired from the court actual knowledge of the contents of any such order. 
(b)  The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
(1)  Protected person means the person or persons identified in the restraining order as the person or persons for whose benefit the restraining order was issued. 
(2)  Restraining order means any order issued by the City of Alamosa Municipal Court pursuant to section 13-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 15-2000, § 2, 12-6-00) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 18-6-803.5.  
Secs. 11-27—11-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY AND ORDER 
 
Sec. 11-41. - Disturbing religious meeting. 
It is unlawful for any person to disturb or disquiet any congregation or assembly met for religious worship by making a noise, or by rude and indecent behavior or by profane discourse which tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace within their place of worship, or so near the same as to disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting. 
(Code 1964, § 17-11) 
State Law reference— Disturbing lawful assembly, C.R.S. 18-9-108.  
Sec. 11-42. - Disturbing lawful assemblage. 
It is unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage of people by rude and indecent behavior or otherwise which tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace. 
(Code 1964, § 17-12) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 18-9-108.  
Sec. 11-43. - Disorderly conduct prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits disorderly conduct if such person intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly: 
(1)  Makes a coarse and obvious offensive utterance, gesture, or display in a public place and the utterance, gesture, or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; or 
(2)  Abuses or threatens a person in a public place in an obviously offensive manner; or 
(3)  Makes a noise which is unreasonable, by nature of content, volume, repetitiveness, hour of day or night, in a manner which disturbs or unreasonably threatens to disturb the peace of a person in a public place or of a person on private property where the perpetrator has no right to be. 
(4)  Fights with another in a public place except in an amateur or professional contest of athletic skill; or 
(5)  Not being a peace officer, discharges a firearm in a public place except when engaged in lawful target practice or hunting; or 
(6)  Not being a peace officer, displays a deadly weapon in a public place in a manner calculated to alarm; or 
(7)  Permits or suffers any of the foregoing conducts or acts in any house or upon any premises owned or possessed by such person or under his or her management or control, when within his or her power to curtail or prevent; or 
(b)  Self-defense shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section. 
(Code 1964, § 17-13; Ord. No. 4-1997, § 1, 4-16-97; Ord. No. 9-1998, § 1, 6-3-98; Ord. No. 1-1999, § 1, 2-17-99; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G5, 10-3-18; Ord. No. 2-2019 , § 1, 1-16-19) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, C.R.S. 18-9-106.  
Sec. 11-44. - Public urination and defecation unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any public place, or in any place within public view, other than a toilet facility provided for such purpose. A "place within public view" is any place where conduct by a person reasonably may be expected to be open to view by members of the public. A public place is a place to which the public or a substantial number of the public has access, such as, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, streets, alleys, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds, the common areas of private buildings and facilities as well as such areas of public buildings and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 19-1994, § 1, 12-21-94)  
Sec. 11-45. - Unlawful conduct on public property. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any public building or on any public property or to conduct himself in or on the same in violation of any rule, order, or regulation limiting or prohibiting the use or activities or conduct in such public building or on such public property, issued by any officer or agency having the power of control, management or supervision of the building or property, concerning any of the following matters: 
(1)  Preservation of property, vegetation, wildlife, signs, marker, statues, buildings and grounds, and other structures, and any object of scientific, historical or scenic interest; 
(2)  Restriction or limitation of the use of such public buildings or property as to time, manner or permitted activities; 
(3)  Prohibition of activities or conduct within the public buildings or on public property which may be reasonably expected to substantially interfere with the use and enjoyment of such places by others or which may constitute a general nuisance; 
(4)  Necessary sanitation, health and safety measures; 
(5)  Camping and picnicking, public meetings and assemblages, and other individual or group usages, including the place, time and manner in which such activities may be permitted; and 
(6)  Use of all vehicles as to place, time and manner of use. 
(b)  No conviction may be obtained under subsections (a)(2) through (a)(6) of this section unless notice of such limitations or prohibitions is prominently posted at all public entrances to such buildings or property or unless such notice is actually first given by the officer or agency or by any law enforcement officer having jurisdiction or authority to enforce this section. 
(c)  No person shall so conduct himself or herself at or in any public building owned, operated, or controlled by the state, or any of the political subdivisions of the state, including the City of Alamosa, or at any building owned, operated, or controlled by the federal government as to willfully deny to any public official, public employee, or invitee on such premises the lawful rights of such official, employee, or invitee to enter, to use the facilities of, or to leave any such public building. 
(d)  No person shall, at or in any such public building, willfully impede any public official or employee in the lawful performance of duties or activities through the use of restraint, abduction, coercion, or intimidation or by force and violence or threat thereof. 
(e)  No person shall willfully refuse or fail to leave any such public building upon being requested to do so by the chief administrative officer or such officer's designee charged with maintaining order in such public building, if the person has committed, is committing, threatens to commit, or incites others to commit any act which did, or would if completed, disrupt, impair, interfere with, or obstruct the lawful missions, processes, procedures, or functions being carried on in the public building. 
(f)  No person shall, at any meeting or session conducted by any judicial, legislative, or administrative body or official at or in any public building, willfully impede, disrupt, or hinder the normal proceedings of such meeting or session by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of the body or official conducting the meeting or session or by any act designed to intimidate, coerce, or hinder any member of such body or official engaged in the performance of duties at such meeting or session. 
(g)  No person shall, by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of any executive body or official at or in any public building, willfully impede, disrupt, or hinder the normal proceedings of such body or official. 
(h)  No person, alone or in concert with another, shall picket inside any building in which a legislative hearing or meeting is being or is to be conducted. 
(i)  The term "public building", as used in this section, includes any premises being temporarily used by a public officer or employee in the discharge of his or her official duties. 
(Ord. No. 21-1999, § 5, 11-17-99; Ord. No. 9-2019 , §§ 1—3, 4-3-19)  
Sec. 11-46. - Interference [with] educational institutions. 
(a)  No person shall, on or near the premises or facilities of any educational institution, willfully deny to students, school officials, employees and invitees: 
(1)  Lawful freedom of movement on the premises; 
(2)  Lawful use of the properties or facilities of the institution; 
(3)  The right of lawful ingress and egress to the institution's physical facilities. 
(b)  No person shall, on the premises of any educational institution or at or in any building or other facility being used by an educational institution, willfully impede the staff or faculty of such institution in the lawful performance of their duties, or willfully impede a student of the institution in the lawful pursuit of educational activities through the use of restraint, abduction, coercion or intimidation or when force and violence are present or threatened. 
(c)  No person shall willfully refuse or fail to leave the property of or any building or other facility used by any educational institution upon being requested to do so by the chief administrative officer, his designee charged with maintaining order on the school premises and its facilities, if such person is committing, threatens to commit, or incites others to commit any act which would disrupt, impair, interfere with, or obstruct the lawful missions, processes, procedures, or functions of the institution. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense that the defendant was exercising his or her right to lawful assembly and orderly petition for the redress of grievances. 
(Ord. No. 21-1999, § 8, 11-17-99; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G6, 10-3-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 18-9-100.  
Sec. 11-47. - Rioting prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a riot, to incite or urge a group of five (5) or more persons to engage in a current or impending riot, or to give commands, instructions or signals to a group of five (5) or more persons in furtherance of a riot. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, during a riot or when one is impending, to knowingly disobey a reasonable public safety order to move, disperse, or refrain from specified activities in the immediate vicinity of the riot. A public safety order is an order designed to prevent or control disorder or promote the safety of persons or property issued by an authorized member of the police or military. 
(Ord. No. 21-1999, § 9, 11-17-99) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 18-9-102, 18-9-104.  
Sec. 11-48. - Loitering school property. 
No person shall, with intent to interfere with or disrupt the school program or with intent to interfere with or endanger schoolchildren, loiter in a school building or on school grounds or within one hundred (100) feet of school grounds when persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present in the building or on the grounds, not having any reason or relationship involving custody of, or responsibility for, a pupil or any other specific, legitimate reason for being there, and having been asked to leave by a school administrator, such administrator's representative, or a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 21-1999, § 10, 11-17-99; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G7, 10-3-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 18-9-112.  
Sec. 11-49. - Obstructing; hindering transportation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without legal privilege, to intentionally, knowingly or recklessly: 
(1)  Obstruct any place used for the passage of persons, vehicles or conveyances, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, building entrances and hallways, to which the public, or a substantial group of the public, has access, whether the obstruction arises from such person's acts alone or in conjunction with the acts of others; 
(2)  Disobey a reasonable request or order to move by a police officer, or a person with authority to control the use of the premises, to prevent obstruction of a place used for such passages, or to maintain public safety by dispersing those gathered in dangerous proximity to a fire, riot or other hazard. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and without lawful authority forcibly stop and hinder the operation of any vehicle used in providing transportation services of any kind to the public or any person. 
(Ord. No. 21-1999, § 11, 11-17-99; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G8, 10-3-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 18-9-1107, 18-9-114.  
Sec. 11-50. - Throwing missiles at vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly project any missile at or against any vehicle or equipment designed for the transportation of persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 21-1999, § 12, 11-17-99) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 18-9-116.  
Sec. 11-51. - Serving an alcoholic beverage to a person under the age of twenty-one years. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, give away, dispose of, exchange, or deliver or permit the sale, serving, giving, or procuring of any alcohol beverage, as defined in Title 12 Articles 46 or 47 of the Colorado Revised Statutes at the time of the adoption of this section or as may be subsequently modified, to or for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(Ord. No. 11-2006, § 1, 12-27-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 12-47-901.  
Sec. 11-52. - Mandatory minimum penalty; sale of liquor to a minor. 
Upon conviction of a violation of section 11-51 of this Code, the offender shall be fined no less that $500.00. The minimum fine required hereunder shall be imposed and shall not be subject to being suspended, or deferred under a deferred prosecution or deferred sentence, unless the municipal court determines and identifies expressly the existence of extraordinary circumstances that warrant a deferral of the prosecution, imposition of sentence, or suspension of the imposition of the full fine mandated hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 02-2007, § 1, 2-19-07; Ord. No. 13-2018 , § 2, 5-16-18)  
Sec. 11-53. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3-2017 , § 1, adopted February 15, 2017, repealed § 11-53, which pertained to regulation of panhandling and derived from Ord. No. 4, 2013, adopted June 26, 2013.  
Sec. 11-54. - Residency and loitering restrictions on sexually violent predators. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Permanent residence: A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days. 
(2)  Temporary residence: 
a.  A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of ten (10) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent residence; or 
b.  A place where a person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of three (3) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar month and which is not the person's permanent address. 
(3)  The word "loiter" means to be dilatory, to stand idly around, to linger, delay, or wander about, or to remain, abide, or tarry in a public place. 
(4)  Retail shopping mall. A retail shopping facility (other than such a facility dedicated primarily to the sale of groceries) which contains in excess of twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet in the aggregate of contiguous retail space, or of retail space separated by a common wall. 
(b)  Prohibition on residency of sexually violent predators. It shall be unlawful for any person who has been adjudicated to be a sexually violent predator pursuant to C.R.S. § 18-3-414.5 to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within one thousand (1,000) feet of any school, after-school program facility, designated public or private school bus stop, park or athletic field, playground, recreational trail, licensed day care center, recreation center or swimming pool (other than pools located at private, single-family residences), library, church, or retail shopping mall. 
(c)  It is unlawful to let or rent any portion of any property, room, place, structure, trailer or other vehicle with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent or temporary residence at such location pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  Prohibition on loitering by sexually violent predators. It shall be unlawful for any person who has been adjudicated to be a sexually violent predator pursuant to C.R.S. § 18-3-414.5 to loiter within one thousand (1,000) feet of any school, after-school program facility, designated public or private school bus stop, park or athletic field, playground, recreational trail, licensed day care center, recreation center or swimming pool (other than pools located at private, single-family residences), library, church, or retail shopping mall. 
(e)  Exceptions. A sexually violent predator or person who knowingly lets or rents property to a sexually violent predator is not guilty of a violation of the residency restrictions set forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section if: 
(1)  The sexually violent predator established the permanent or temporary residence prior to the effective date of this chapter; provided, however, that this exception shall not apply if the person committed the offense, for which registration under the Colorado Sex Offender Registration Act is required, after the effective date of this chapter; 
(2)  The sexually violent predator is a minor who resides with his or her parents or legal guardians; 
(3)  The sexually violent predator committed the offense for which such person was adjudicated a sexually violent predator in Alamosa, is being paroled to Alamosa because the person has not been accepted at any other location, and is being housed at the Alamosa Community Corrections facility and receives treatment and counseling there as a condition of parole. This exception shall only apply during such time as the sexually violent predator meets all of these conditions. 
(4)  The facility which creates the distance restriction was opened after the sexually violent predator established the permanent or temporary residence, and is not replacing an existing such facility. 
(f)  Measurement. For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation required herein, the measurement shall be made by following a straight line from the outer property line of the property (or from the location of the bus-stop, if a bus stop) on which the school, after-school program facility, park or athletic field, playground, recreational trail, licensed day care center, recreation center or swimming pool, library, church, or retail shopping mall is located to the nearest point on the outer property line of the property on which the permanent or temporary residence is located. 
(Ord. No. 7-2016 , § 1, 2-17-16)  
Secs. 11-55—11-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-2001, § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 2001, divided Art. IV into two divisions, with existing §§ 11-61—11-63, and reserved §§ 11-64—11-67, to be designated Div. 1, and new §§ 11-68—11-73 to be designated Div. 2. 
State Law reference— Offenses against the person, C.R.S. 18-3-101 et seq.; assault, C.R.S. 18-3-201 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-61. - Assault. 
A person commits "assault" if such person: 
(1)  Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly causes bodily injury to another person; or 
(2)  With criminal negligence causes bodily injury to another person by means of a deadly weapon. 
(Code 1964, § 17-41; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G9, 10-3-18) 
State Law reference— Assault in the third degree, C.R.S. 18-3-204; throwing missiles at vehicle, C.R.S. 18-9-116.  
Sec. 11-62. - Harassment prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, he or she: 
(1)  Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise touches a person or subjects him or her to physical contact; or 
(2)  In a public place directs obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to or at another person; or 
(3)  Follows a person in or about a public place; or 
(4)  Engages in conduct or repeatedly commits acts that alarm or seriously annoy another person and that serve no legitimate purpose; or 
(5)  Initiates communication with a person, anonymously or otherwise by telephone, in a manner intended to harass or threaten bodily injury or property damage, or makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal by telephone which is obscene; or 
(6)  Makes a telephone call or causes a telephone to ring repeatedly, whether or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate conversation; or 
(7)  Makes repeated communications at inconvenient hours that invade the privacy of another or interfere in the use and the enjoyment of another's home or private residence or other private property; 
(8)  Repeatedly insults, taunts, challenges, or makes communications in offensively coarse language to another in a manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response. 
(b)  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires "obscene" means a patently offensive description of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not said ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, analingus, or excretory functions. 
(c)  Any act prohibited by subpart (4) of subsection (a) of this section may be deemed to have occurred or to have been committed at the place at which the telephone call either was made or received. 
(Ord. No. 18-1994, § 1, 12-21-94; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G10, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 11-63. - Reckless endangerment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly engage in conduct which creates a substantial risk of serious bodily injury to another person. 
(Ord. No. 21-1999, § 6, 11-17-99) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 18-3-208.  
Secs. 11-64—11-67. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 31-2018 , § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 2018, repealed Div. 2 in its entirety and enacted a new division as set out herein. The former Div. 2, §§ 11-68—11-73, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 10-2001, §§ 2—7, adopted Sept. 19, 2001. 
State Law reference— Colorado Clean Indoor Air Act, C.R.S. § 25-14-201 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11-68. - Definitions. 
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Building means any structure enclosed for protection from the weather, whether or not windows or doors are open. If a person leases or possesses only a portion of a building, the term building applies to the leasehold or possessory interest as well as to an ownership interest. 
Dwelling means any place used primarily for sleeping overnight and conducting activities of daily living, including, without limitation, a hotel or motel room or suite or a hospital, hospice or nursing home room, but not the lobby, common elevator, common hallway, or other common area of a hotel, motel, hospital, hospice or nursing home lobby. 
Entryway means the outside of any doorway used by the public leading into any public building, plus a twenty-five-foot radius outside the doorway. 
Public, when used to describe or identify a building, means a building which is wholly or partially accessible for use by the public at will during hours of patronage, whether or not the use by the public is for commercial or non-commercial purposes. 
Smoke or smoking shall mean the combustion of any cigar, cigarette, pipe or similar article, using any form of tobacco or other combustible substance in any form, or the possession of any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or similar article, using any form of tobacco or other combustible substance in any form. 
Smoking lounge means a retail tobacco businesses in which on-premises smoking is allowed, or a private club in which tobacco is smoked on the premises. 
Tobacco business means an enterprise engaged primarily in the sale, manufacture, or promotion of tobacco, tobacco products, or smoking devices or accessories, either at wholesale or retail, and in which the sale, manufacture, or promotion of other products is merely incidental. 
(Ord. No. 31-2018 , § 1, 12-5-18)  
Sec. 11-69. - Smoking prohibited within public buildings. 
(a)  No person shall smoke within or within the entryway to any public building, except: 
(1)  Within any dwelling this prohibition applies only to an entryway, lobby, common elevator, common hallway, or any other common area of a dwelling; this prohibition does not apply to portions that are not public. 
(2)  In a properly licensed and permitted smoking lounge. 
(3)  In a building or on property which is owned or operated by the United States Government and not subject to regulation by the city, and which has not been designated as a no-smoking area by the manager of such area. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent an owner, lessee, primary manager or person in control of any place, including, without limitation, any motor vehicle, outdoor area, or dwelling, from prohibiting smoking completely in such place. Within a place so restricted, it shall be unlawful to fail, neglect, or refuse to abide by such a private prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 31-2018 , § 1, 12-5-18)  
Sec. 11-70. - Additional responsibilities of proprietors. 
No owner, lessee, principal manager, or person in control of a public building or establishment shall fail to ask smokers to refrain from smoking in any smoking-prohibited area. 
(Ord. No. 31-2018 , § 1, 12-5-18)  
Sec. 11-71. - Violations declared. 
It shall be unlawful to violate any of the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 31-2018 , § 1, 12-5-18)  
Secs. 11-72—11-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES RELATING TO MORALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses relating to morals, C.R.S. 18-7-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11-76. - Bawdy houses. 
No bawdy house, house of ill-fame, house of assignation or the place for the practice of fornication or commonly ill-governed or disorderly house shall be kept or maintained within the limits of the city or within three (3) miles of the outer boundaries. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any such house, or be an inmate thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 17-7) 
State Law reference— Keeping a place of prostitution, C.R.S. 18-7-204; jurisdiction extends to three (3) miles outside city, C.R.S. 31-15-401.  
Sec. 11-77. - Indecent exposure. 
It is unlawful for any person to appear in any public place in a state of nudity or to make any indecent exposure of his or her person. It shall not be indecent exposure for a mother to breastfeed, and a mother may breastfeed in any place she has a right to be. 
(Code 1964, § 17-35; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G11, 10-3-18) 
State Law reference— Indecent exposure, C.R.S. 18-7-302.  
Sec. 11-78. - Nude bathing in public. 
It is unlawful for any person to bathe or swim within the limits of the city in a state of nudity in public view in any river, lake or pool. 
(Code 1964, § 17-42) 
State Law reference— Indecent exposure, C.R.S. 18-7-302.  
Sec. 11-79. - Prostitution prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or offer or agree to perform any act of sexual intercourse with any person not his or her spouse or intimate partner in exchange for money or other thing of value. 
(Ord. No. 21-1999, § 7, 11-17-99; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G12, 10-3-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 18-7-201.  
Secs. 11-80—11-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses against property, C.R.S. 18-4-101 et seq.; theft, C.R.S. 18-4-401 et seq.; theft of rental property, C.R.S. 18-4-402; concealment of goods, C.R.S. 18-4-406; trespass, C.R.S. 18-4-502 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11-96. - Injury to property—In general. 
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly damage the real or personal property of another person or public property, whether occupied or unoccupied. 
(Code 1964, § 17-29) 
State Law reference— Criminal mischief, C.R.S. 18-4-501.  
Sec. 11-97. - Damage to property by animals. 
Any animal owner whose animal, whether or not running at large, destroys, damages or injures any shrubbery, plants, flowers, grass, lawn, fence, or anything whatsoever upon any public property or private property without the permission of the owner or tenant of the property shall be in violation of this chapter, and the same is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 6-2002, § 2, 3-6-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2001, § 6, repealed in its entirety former § 11-97, which pertained to injury to public or private trees, etc.; injury by animals, and derived from the Code of 1964, §§ 17-30 and 17-31. Subsequently, Ord. No. 6-2002, § 2, adopted March 6, 2002, added a new § 11-97, as set forth herein.  
Sec. 11-98. - Injuring building, pavement, etc. 
It is unlawful for any person to willfully destroy, cut, injure, mark, damage or deface any public building or real or personal property of any kind belonging to the city, or any sidewalk, curbing, pavement, lamppost, tree, shrub, grass, pipe, hydrant, fence, tombstone, monument or other improvement located in or upon any street, sidewalk, public park, rights-of-way, parkways, cemetery, airport or golf course belonging to the city. 
(Code 1964, § 17-32) 
State Law reference— Defacing property, C.R.S. 18-4-509 et seq.; defacing posted notice, C.R.S. 18-4-510.  
Sec. 11-99. - Trespass. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to commit the crime of trespass. A person commits the crime of trespass if he/she: 
(1)  Enters upon the premises of another which is posted in a manner to indicate that it is not open to the general use of the public during certain hours, unless that person has first obtained the consent of the owner or person in possession or control of the property; 
(2)  Enters upon the premises of another without their consent during the hours after sunset and before sunrise in areas not normally used as an access to such property; 
(3)  Enters upon the premises of another which is enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or is fenced; or 
(4)  Enters upon the parking lot of, and owned by, a business which is posted to indicate that use of the parking lot is limited to customers of said business. Provided, however, that this subsection (4) shall not apply to a person who is patronizing the business while parked in the lot, or who has patronized the business within the preceding ten (10) minutes. 
(5)  Remains on the premises of another when requested to leave by the owner, the tenant, or the person in possession and control of such premises; or 
(6)  Enters on the premises of another any time, after the owner, the tenant, or the person in possession or control of such premises has given written notice, substantially in the following form, to such person: 
"You are excluded from the following (insert address and/or name of retail establishment). You may not remain or return there after you receive this notice. If you return to the property the police may be called, and charges of trespass and/or disturbing the peace may be brought against you." 
(b)  As used in this section, "premises" means real property, buildings, and other improvements thereon. 
(Code 1964, § 17-70; Ord. No. 10-1998, § 1, 7-1-98; Ord. No. 2-2019 , § 1, 1-16-19) 
State Law reference— Trespassing on private property, C.R.S. 18-4-502, 18-4-503.  
Sec. 11-100. - Theft. 
(a)  A person commits theft when he or she knowingly obtains, retains, or exercises control over anything of value of another without authorization or by threat or deception; or receives, loans money by pawn or pledge on, or disposes of anything of value or belonging to another that he or she knows or believes to have been stolen, and: 
(1)  Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value; 
(2)  Knowingly uses, conceals, or abandons the thing of value in such manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; 
(3)  Uses, conceals, or abandons the thing of value intending that such use, concealment, or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; 
(4)  Demands any consideration to which he or she is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person; 
(5)  Obtains the temporary use of personal property of another, which is available only for hire, by means of threat or deception, or knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the personal property; or 
(6)  Knowingly retains the thing of value more than seventy-two (72) hours after the agreed-upon time of return in any lease or hire agreement. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, a thing of value is that of "another" if anyone other than the defendant has a possessory or proprietary interest therein. 
(Ord. No. 15-1994, § 1, 12-21-94; Ord. No. 13-2017 , § 1, 6-7-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 18-4-401.  
Sec. 11-101. - Library property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or to assist in the removal from the library to the city, Southern Peaks Public Library, ("the library") any book or other item belonging to the library, without first having the same checked out by an employee of the library according to the rules and regulations of the library. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to write or mark upon, injure, deface, tear, or destroy any book or other item belonging to the library. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to return any book or other item belonging to the library in accordance with the rules and regulations of the library. 
(Ord. No. 16-1994, § 1, 12-21-94)  
Sec. 11-102. - Procuring accommodation with intent to defraud. 
(a)  The following words and phrases as used in this section shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Public establishment means any establishment selling or offering for sale prepared food or beverages to the public generally, or any establishment leasing or renting overnight sleeping accommodations to the public generally, including, but not limited to, restaurants, cafes, dining rooms, lunch counters, coffee shops, boarding houses, hotels, motor hotels, motels, and rooming houses, unless the rental thereof is on a month-to-month basis for a longer period of time. 
(2)  Notice as used in this section shall be given by posting a printed copy of C.R.S. sections 12-44-101 through 12-44-103 at any conspicuous place within the public establishment. 
(3)  Agreement with such public establishment means any written or oral agreement as to the price to be charged for, and the acceptance of, food, beverage, or accommodation where the price to be charged therefor is printed on a menu or schedule of rates shown to or made available by a public establishment to the patron and includes the acceptance of such food, beverage, service, or accommodations for which a reasonable charge is made. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to, with intent to defraud, procure food, beverages, or accommodations from any public establishment without making payment therefore in accordance with his or her agreement with such public establishment. 
(c)  It shall be evidence of an intent to defraud that food, beverages, or accommodations were given to any person who gave false information concerning his or her name or address, or both, in obtaining such food, beverage, or accommodations, or that such person removed or attempted to remove his or her person or baggage from the premises of such public establishment without giving notice of his or her intent to do so to such public establishment, and without having made the agreed payment for such food, beverage, or accommodation. These provisions shall not constitute the sole means of establishing evidence that a person accused under this section had an intent to defraud. Proof of such intent to defraud may be made by any facts or circumstances sufficient to establish such intent to defraud beyond a reasonable doubt as provided by law. 
(d)  No conviction shall be had under this section, unless it is made to appear upon the trial for a violation of this section that the person charged with such violation was given notice of the terms and provisions of C.R.S. sections 12-44-101 to 12-44-103, or of this section 11-102. 
(Ord. No. 16-1994, § 1, 12-21-94) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 12-44-101—12-44-103.  
Sec. 11-103. - Theft of cable service. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly: 
(1)  Obtain cable service by any means, including the modification or alteration of an authorized device, from a cable operator without its authorization or with the intent to deprive the cable operator of lawful compensation for services rendered; or 
(2)  Make or maintain, without authority from or payment to a cable operator, a connection or connections, whether physical, electrical or otherwise, with any cable, wire, component, or other device used for the distribution of cable services, unless such connection results from the cable operator's failure to disconnect a previously authorized cable service; or 
(3)  Fail to return or surrender equipment used to receive cable services and provided by a cable operator, after such service has been terminated for any reason. 
The terms used herein shall be defined as set forth in C.R.S. 18-4-701 as amended. 
(Ord. No. 14-1999, § 1, 8-4-99; Ord. No. 21-1999, § 5, 11-17-99) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 18-4-701.  
Sec. 11-104. - Procuring transportation with intent to defraud. 
(a)  The following words and phrases as used in this section shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Public taxicab means any vehicle, subject to regulation by the public utilities commission, which is used commercially to provide transportation services. 
(2)  Notice as used in this section shall be given by posting a printed copy of section 11-104 at a conspicuous place with the public taxicab. 
(3)  Where the price or rate to be charged for transportation services by a public taxicab is printed on a schedule of rates conspicuously displayed, or advised at the inception of the service by the public taxicab driver to the patron, agreement for service by a public taxicab means: 
a.  Any written or oral agreement as to the price to be charged for transportation services by a public taxicab; or 
b.  The acceptance of transportation services by a public taxicab. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to defraud, to procure transportation by means of a public taxicab without making payment therefore in accordance with his or her agreement for service by a public taxicab. 
(c)  It shall be evidence of an intent to defraud that transportation services were provided to any person who gave false information concerning his or her name or address, or both, in obtaining or in arranging to obtain such transportation services, or that such person removed or attempted to remove his or her person or baggage from a public taxicab without having paid the agreed amount for such transportation services. These provisions shall not constitute the sole means of establishing evidence that a person accused under this section had an intent to defraud. Proof of such intent to defraud may be made by facts or circumstances sufficient to establish such intent beyond a reasonable doubt, as provided by law. 
(d)  No conviction shall be had under this section, unless it is made to appear upon trial for a violation of this section that the person charged with such violation was given notice of the terms and provisions of this section 11-104. 
(Ord. No. 15-2002, § 1, 7-10-02; Ord. No. 13-2017 , § 2, 6-7-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-2017 , § 2, adopted June 7, 2017, repealed §§ 11-104 and 11-105, and subsequently renumbered §§ 11-106 and 11-107 as §§ 11-104 and 11-105. Former §§ 11-104 and 11-105 pertained to theft of rental property and theft by receiving and derived from Ord. No. 11-2001, adopted December 19, 2001; and Ord. No. 11-2002, adopted May 1, 2002.  
Sec. 11-105. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Legislative declaration: 
(1)  This section shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Alamosa Graffiti Ordinance." 
(2)  The city council find and declare that it is the right of every person, regardless of race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, age, or handicap, to be secure and protected from intimidation and physical harm caused by the activities associated with the application of graffiti and the property destruction caused by said graffiti. It is not the intent of this section to interfere with the exercise of the constitutionally protected rights of freedom of expression and association. The city council hereby recognize the constitutional right of every citizen to harbor and express beliefs on any subject whatsoever, to lawfully associate with others who share similar beliefs, to petition lawfully constituted authority for redress of perceived grievances, and to participate in the electoral process. 
(3)  The city council further finds that graffiti is detrimental to adjacent property owners and its existence attracts additional graffiti and can be used by gangs to communicate. 
(4)  It is the intent of the city council in enacting this section to prevent the destruction of public or private property by the application of graffiti. 
(5)  It is also the purpose and intent of this section to provide a procedure for removal of graffiti from public and privately owned property in order to reduce deterioration of neighborhoods within the City of Alamosa. 
(6)  In consideration of the purposes and recitals stated above, it is the intent of this section to reduce crime, protect communities, and avoid deterioration of neighborhoods due to graffiti on public and privately owned property. It is further intended that this section provide for the abatement of graffiti and for the imposition of fines and costs related to the removal of graffiti on public or private property. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section the following words are defined as follows: 
Council means the City Council of the City of Alamosa, Colorado. 
Court means the City of Alamosa Municipal Court. 
Day means any business day and shall exclude Saturday and Sunday or any legal City of Alamosa holiday. 
Enforcement officer means, a peace officer as defined in C.R.S. § 18-1-901(3)(1), or any official charged with enforcement of zoning regulations within the City of Alamosa, including Code Compliance Officers employed by the City of Alamosa. 
Graffiti means the defacing or tagging of public or private property by one or more persons by means of painting, drawing, dye, chalk, ink, writing, etching, carving with knives, carving with scribes, or any similar method or substance without the written consent of the property caretaker. 
Owner means the person listed, as of the date of the notice described below, as the current owner of the property in the records of the county assessor's office. 
Police means the chief of police for the City of Alamosa or his duly appointed officers. 
Property means any real property, including structures and fixtures. 
Structure means any improvement to real property and shall include but not be limited to walls, sidewalks, windows, fixtures, sheds, storage units, semi-tractor trailers, mobile storage and masonry. 
(c)  Notice to remove graffiti. Whenever an enforcement officer determines that graffiti exists on property which is visible to any member of the public, the enforcement officer may serve a written notice in accordance with the procedures outlined in subsection (d), below, to the owner to abate such graffiti. The owner so noticed shall have ten (10) days after the date notice is served to remove the graffiti or to be subject to the city entering the property to abate the graffiti at the owner's expense. If the graffiti cannot be removed within ten (10) days, the owner may so advise the enforcement officer who may allow the owner additional time to diligently pursue removal of the graffiti. The notice shall also advise the owner that the owner may, within the ten-day period, object to the required abatement and/or to the city entering onto the property to perform any required abatement. The city manager or designee is hereby authorized to create the required notice forms. 
(d)  Service of notice. 
(1)  A "notice to remove graffiti" as outlined in subsection (c) shall be served in one (1) of the following manners: 
a.  By personal service pursuant to Colorado Rule of Civil Procedure 4(e), or 
b.  By certified mail sent to the address of the owner, as appearing on the property tax rolls, and to the address where the graffiti is located if different, and by sending an additional copy by regular mail. If no such address appears on the property tax rolls, notice shall be sent to the address of the premises where the graffiti exists by both certified and regular mail. 
1.  If both the certified mail and regular mail notice are returned undelivered, the notice may be served by posting the same in a conspicuous place on the premises where the graffiti exists. Attempting personal service is not required prior to posting of the notice. 
(2)  Notice is deemed to be received for purposes of subsection (c), as follows: 
a.  If service is attempted using personal service, notice is provided upon personal service, pursuant to Rule 4 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure; 
b.  If service is obtained through certified mail, notice is provided upon signature by any recipient; and service is presumed to be obtained through regular mail three (3) days after mailing. 
c.  if service is obtained through posting, notice is presumed to have been provided three (3) days after posting. 
(e)  Failure to abate. 
(1)  If, after notice, the graffiti has not been abated and no objection to the city entering the property has been received by the city within the ten-day period allotted for abatement of the graffiti, the enforcement officer may arrange for city employees or private contractors to enter upon the property and abate, cover, or remove such graffiti. The owner shall pay all reasonable costs for the abatement of such graffiti. In addition to such costs, the owner shall also pay associated administrative expenses, which shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). Such costs and expenses may be placed as an assessment on the property. 
(2)  If an owner objects in writing within the ten-day period following notice to the city entering the subject property to abate, cover, or remove the graffiti, a hearing shall be scheduled in the municipal court. The owner shall be given written notice of such hearing by regular mail addressed to the owner at the address specified in the written objection filed by the owner. 
(3)  At the hearing, the enforcement officer shall demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence, the existence of graffiti on the subject property. The owner may then give evidence and show cause why the graffiti should not be abated forthwith. 
(4)  If the court finds that graffiti exists on the property as alleged and that the owner has failed to abate such graffiti, without good cause, within ten (10) days after receiving notice thereof, then the court shall issue an order authorizing the City of Alamosa or other abatement personnel (such as private contractors) to enter upon the property for the purpose of abating, covering, or removing such graffiti; and ordering that the owner failing to abate such graffiti shall pay all reasonable costs for the removal of such graffiti, plus administrative expenses not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(f)  Assessment of costs. 
(1)  If the city abates, covers, or removes graffiti from the subject property, a notice of assessment shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the owner. All costs (including administrative expenses not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) must be paid by the owner within thirty (30) days from the date mailing of the notice of assessment. The notice of assessment shall specify the work done, including the itemized and total cost of the work, and state the description and the street address of the property assessed. 
(2)  If assessed costs and administrative expenses for the removal of graffiti are not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of mailing of the notice of assessment, the city manager or the city manager's designee shall file with the city clerk a copy of the notice of assessment. The city clerk shall send a written notice, mailed by certified or registered mail, to the owner at the owner's last address shown by the county assessor's records. Such notice shall include a copy of the notice of assessment referenced above, and shall state that the owner may, within fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice, request in writing a hearing before city council of the owner's objections to the assessment. 
(3)  If a hearing is requested within the fifteen-day period set forth above, the council shall fix a time, date and place for hearing regarding the notice of assessment and any protests or objections thereto. The city clerk shall cause notice of said hearing to be served on the owner by regular and certified mail, postage prepaid. Such notice shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing and shall specify the day, hour and place when the city council will hear and pass upon the assessment notice, together with any objections or protests which may be filed as hereinafter provided by any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge. 
(4)  Any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge may file written protests or objections with the city clerk at any time prior to the time set for the hearing on the assessment notice. Each such protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the signer thereof is interested and the grounds of such protest or objection. The city clerk shall endorse on every such protest or objection the date of receipt. The clerk shall present such protests or objections to the city council at the time set for the hearing, and no other protests or objections shall be considered, unless otherwise authorized by the city council. 
(5)  Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the city council shall hear and pass upon the assessment notice together with any such objections or protests. The city council may make such revision, correction or modification in the assessment notice or the charges as it may deem just; and when the city council is satisfied with the correctness of the charge, the assessment notice (as submitted or as revised, corrected, or modified) together with the charge, shall be affirmed or rejected. The decision of the city council on the assessment notice and the charge, and on all protests or objections, shall be final and conclusive. 
(6)  After the hearing, or, if no hearing has been requested, after expiration of the fifteen-day period referenced in subsection (f)(2), above, the council may thereupon order that said charge shall be made a personal obligation of the owner, and/or assess said charge against the property involved, and may: 
a.  Seek collection through any court of competent jurisdiction, along with all associated costs, including reasonable attorney fees and/or 
b.  Certify the assessment amount to the county treasurer for collection in the same manner as taxes are authorized to be, pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S. § 31-20-105. 
(7)  Any protesting owner dissatisfied with the decision of city council shall have the right to have the decision reviewed pursuant to Rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, provided that such a review is sought within the time and in the manner provided by law. 
(8)  Immediately upon its being placed on the assessment roll, the assessment shall be deemed to be complete, the several amounts assessed shall be payable, and the assessments shall be liens against the lots or parcels of land assessed, respectively. The lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest due and payable thereon are paid. 
(9)  All such assessments remaining unpaid after thirty (30) days from the date of recording on the assessment roll shall become delinquent and shall bear interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from and after said date. 
(10)  After confirmation of the assessment notice, certified copies of the assessment shall be given to the assessor and the treasurer for the county, who shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular tax bill levied against the parcel for city purposes. 
(11)  The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary property taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of property taxes shall be applicable to such assessment. 
(12)  All money recovered by payment of the charge or assessment or from the sale of the property at foreclosure sale shall be paid to the director of finance for the City of Alamosa, who shall credit the same to the City of Alamosa Graffiti Removal Account. 
(g)  Alternative remedies. It is the intent of the city council that the provisions and procedures set forth in this section shall not expressly or by implication repeal or supersede any other provisions or procedures under city ordinance, state law, or otherwise. This section shall supplement existing procedures and will provide an alternative, nonexclusive procedure for the abatement of graffiti nuisances. Nothing in this section shall preclude abatement of graffiti by the City of Alamosa through civil process by means of preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. Nothing in this section shall preclude or prohibit the City of Alamosa from resorting to any appropriate legal remedy, whether civil or criminal, in the abatement of any graffiti, and when such other remedy is utilized, the hearing and appeal procedures provided in this section to determine the existence of a nuisance shall not be applicable. 
(h)  Public property. Where property is owned by a public entity other than the City of Alamosa, the assessment of costs provisions contained in this section shall not apply. All other provisions of this section shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1-2008, § 1, 2-6-08; Ord. No. 13-2017 , § 2, 6-7-17; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G13, 10-3-18) 
Editor's note— Former § 11-107. See Editor's Note in § 11-104.  
Secs. 11-106—11-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES RELATING TO WEAPONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 8, 2011, § 1, adopted July 6, 2011, amended the former Art. VII, §§ 11-117—11-121, and enacted a new Art. VII as set out herein. The former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1964, §§ 17-66, 17-67; Ord. No. 21-1999, §§ 13, 14, adopted Nov. 17, 1999; Ord. No. 1-2009, § 1, adopted Jan. 21, 2009. 
State Law reference— Offenses relating to weapons, C.R.S. 18-12-101 et seq.; discharge of firearm in public place prohibited, C.R.S. 18-9-106(e); carrying a concealed weapon, C.R.S. 18-12-105, 18-12-201 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11-116. - Definition of "deadly weapon." 
As used in this article VII, "deadly weapon" means any of the following which in the manner it is used or intended to be used is capable of producing death or serious bodily injury: 
(1)  A firearm, whether loaded or unloaded; 
(2)  A knife; 
(3)  A bludgeon; or 
(4)  Any other weapon, device, instrument, material, or substance, whether animate or inanimate. 
(Ord. No. 8, 2011, § 1, 7-6-11)  
Sec. 11-117. - Carrying concealed weapons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a law enforcement officer in the performance of his or her duty, or any person having a permit to carry a concealed handgun issued pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S. 18-12-210 et seq., to be found carrying concealed upon his or her person any pistol, bowie knife, dagger or other deadly weapon or any stars, num-chucks or other martial arts weapons unless going directly to or from a sanctioned meet or training session. 
(Ord. No. 8, 2011, § 1, 7-6-11; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G14, 10-3-18) 
State Law reference— Carrying a concealed weapon, C.R.S. 18-12-105; Permits for concealed weapons, C.R.S. 18-12-201 et seq.  
Sec. 11-118. - Carrying weapons with intent to assault. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have upon him or her any gun, pistol, knife, dirk, bludgeon or other deadly weapon, with intent to assault any person. 
(Ord. No. 8, 2011, § 1, 7-6-11; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G15, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 11-119. - Firearms, BB guns, air guns, gas operated guns, spring guns, etc.; use prohibited 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a law enforcement officer in the performance of his or her duty, to discharge or use any firearm, air gun, BB gun, gas operated gun, spring gun, or similar type of gun in the city except as exempted below. 
(b)  The following shall not constitute a violation of this article: 
(1)  The discharge of a firearm in defense of person in accordance with C.R.S. 18-1-704 or against an intruder in accordance with C.R.S. 18-1-704.5; 
(2)  The discharge of a firearm for the legitimate sporting use of such weapons within areas specifically designed and lawfully permitted by the City of Alamosa for the discharge or weapons such as shooting ranges, rifle ranges, and shooting galleries; 
(3)  The discharge of a firearm during a legitimate organized educational class or course under adult instruction and supervision within areas specifically designed for the discharge of such weapons; 
(4)  The discharge of a firearm by representatives of service, fraternal, athletic or educational organizations/institutions firing blank cartridges at training sessions, ceremonial occasions of the nature of funeral rights, parades, starting guns at formal athletic meets, or rehearsals for such occasions and similar events; 
(5)  The discharge of a firearm within a structure as part of a legitimate research, testing, or scientific process or investigation; or 
(6)  The discharge of a firearm within the confines of the city's active cattle ranch for predator and wildlife control if authorized in writing by the city manager and chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 8, 2011, § 1, 7-6-11) 
State Law reference— Use of deadly physical force, C.R.S. 18-1-701 et seq.  
Sec. 11-120. - Deadly weapons, liquor establishments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without legal authority, to carry, conceal or display a deadly weapon on the premises of any establishment where malt, vinous or spirituous liquors are sold for consumption on the premises. This section shall not prohibit the display, sale or auction, in an establishment where malt, vinous or spirituous liquors are sold, of unloaded firearms, with trigger locks or other disabling safety mechanism acceptable to the chief of police or the chief's designee, by any not-for-profit organization, where the weapon is not delivered to any purchaser until after the event has terminated, pursuant to special event permit to be issued by the chief of police, or the chief's designee, conditioned upon such security arrangements as the chief, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 8, 2011, § 1, 7-6-11; Ord. No. 1-2019 , § 1, 1-16-19)  
Sec. 11-121. - Confiscation and disposition of deadly weapons. 
(a)  After conviction of a defendant, the court may order the forfeiture of any firearms, deadly weapons and illegal weapons which were used by the defendant during the course of the episode which gave rise to said conviction as an element of sentencing or as condition of probation or of a deferred sentence. 
(b)  Firearms and weapons forfeited under this section, as well as illegal weapons, shall be disposed of by the chief of police, or the chief's designee, as ordered by the court. 
(Ord. No. 8, 2011, § 1, 7-6-11; Ord. No. 1-2018 , § 6, 2-7-18; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G16, 10-3-18)  
Secs. 11-122—11-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES RELATING TO MINORS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Children prohibited from taverns; exceptions, § 10-26; purchases by minors from secondhand dealers prohibited, § 10-166; curfew for minors, § 11-1. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 11-131—11-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OBTAINING, USE, POSSESSION OR PURCHASE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY MINORS 
 
Sec. 11-151. - Definitions. 
As used in sections 11-151 through 11-157 of this division, the following words and phrases are defined as follows: 
Minor means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Smoking means the holding or carrying of a lighted pipe, lighted cigar, or lighted cigarette of any kind, and includes the lighting of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind. 
Tobacco product means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipes, tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, or dipping tobacco. It shall be rebuttably presumed that a substance within a package or container is a tobacco product if the package or container has affixed to it a label which identifies the package or container as containing a tobacco product. 
(Ord. No. 3-1998, 4-15-98; Ord. No. 3A-1998, 4-15-98; Ord. No. 12-1998, § 1, 6-17-98)  
Sec. 11-152. - Unlawful possession of tobacco products by minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess any tobacco product within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to consume or use, either by smoking, ingesting, absorbing, or chewing, any tobacco product within the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase, obtain, or attempt to purchase or obtain any tobacco product within the city. 
(Ord. No. 3-1998, 4-15-98; Ord. No. 3A-1998, 4-15-98; Ord. No. 12-1998, § 1, 6-17-98)  
Sec. 11-153. - Unlawful furnishing of tobacco products to minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly furnish to any minor, by gift, sale, or any other means, any tobacco product. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this section that the person furnishing the tobacco product is presented with a reasonable and relied upon document which identified the minor receiving the tobacco product as being eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 3-1998, 4-15-98; Ord. No. 3A-1998, 4-15-98; Ord. No. 12-1998, § 1, 6-17-98)  
Sec. 11-154. - Vending machines. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell cigarettes or tobacco products by use of vending machine or other coin-operated machine; except that cigarettes may be sold through a vending machine in which only tobacco products are sold, and only through such machines in: 
(1)  Factories, businesses, offices, or other places not opened to the general public; 
(2)  Places to which minors are not permitted access; or 
(3)  Places open to the general public and to which minors are permitted access only where the vending machine is under the direct supervision of the owner of the establishment or an adult employee of the owner. 
(b)  As used in this section, "under direct supervision" means that the vending machine shall be in plain vision of the owner or adult employee during regular business hours. 
(c)  In places where the vending machine is under the direct supervision of the owner of the establishment or an adult employee of the owner, and a minor uses the vending machine to obtain tobacco products, the owner of the establishment and/or the adult employee of the owner under whom the vending machine is under direct supervision shall be presumed to have knowingly furnished and sold a tobacco product to a minor. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this section that the person selling or offering to sell the tobacco products was presented with and reasonably relied upon a document which identified the person purchasing the tobacco product as being eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 3-1998, 4-15-98; Ord. No. 3A-1998, 4-15-98; Ord. No. 12-1998, § 1, 6-17-98)  
Sec. 11-155. - Sale of tobacco products. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any business proprietor, manager, or other person in charge or in control of a business of any kind to engage, employ, or permit any minor to sell tobacco products for such business. 
(b)  As of June 1, 1998, it shall be unlawful for any business proprietor, manager, or other person in charge or control of a business of any kind to stock or display a tobacco product in any way which allows a customer access to such tobacco product without first securing the physical assistance of an adult business employee for each transaction. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to enter a place of business or store engaged primarily in the sale of tobacco products when the minor is not accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. Entry of a minor into a business establishment or shop engaged primarily in the sale of tobacco products shall result in a violation of this section by the minor and the owner of the business establishment or store and/or the adult employee on duty at the business establishment or store. 
(Ord. No. 3-1998, 4-15-98; Ord. No. 3A-1998, 4-15-98; Ord. No. 12-1998, § 1, 6-17-98)  
Sec. 11-156. - Motor vehicle enforcement. 
No driver or passenger in a motor vehicle shall be cited for a violation of sections 11-152 through 11-155 of this division unless the driver of said motor vehicle was stopped by a law enforcement officer for an alleged violation of another ordinance in the Code of Ordinances of Alamosa, Colorado, or the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 3-1998, 4-15-98; Ord. No. 3A-1998, 4-15-98; Ord. No. 12-1998, § 1, 6-17-98)  
Sec. 11-157. - Penalties. 
Minimum penalties for violation of sections 11-152 through 11-155 of this division by a minor shall be as follows: 
(1)  A monetary fine, community service, and/or participation in a tobacco education program. 
(2)  Upon a second violation of sections 11-152 through 11-155 by a minor, the parent(s) or guardian(s) may be penalized. 
(Ord. No. 3-1998, 4-15-98; Ord. No. 3A-1998, 4-15-98; Ord. No. 12-1998, § 1, 6-17-98; Ord. No. 11-2001, § 8, 12-19-01)  
Sec. 11-158. - Purchase of cigarettes and tobacco products by minors prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase any cigarettes or tobacco products. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "tobacco products" shall mean cigars, cheroots, stogies, periques, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco, snuff, snuff flour, cavendish, plug and twist tobacco, fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos, shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco, and other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or for smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking, but does not include cigarettes. 
(Ord. No. 27-1998, § 3, 12-16-98)  
Secs. 11-159—11-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASE OR POSSESSION OF CERTAIN SUBSTANCES BY MINORS 
 
Sec. 11-171. - Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol or marijuana by an underage person. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to possess or consume any substance which is or contains ethyl alcohol. 
(1)  Possession of an ethyl alcohol substance means that a person has or holds any amount of ethyl alcohol in any form anywhere on his or her person, or that a person owns or has custody of ethyl alcohol, or has ethyl alcohol within his or her immediate possession or control. Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person is a strict liability offense. 
(b)  Except as described by Section 14 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution and C.R.S. § 18-18-406.3, a person under twenty-one (21) years of age who possesses marijuana or consumes marijuana anywhere in the State of Colorado commits illegal possession or consumption of marijuana by an underage person. "Possession of marijuana" means that a person has or holds any amount of marijuana anywhere on his or her person or that a person owns or has custody of marijuana or has marijuana within his or her immediate presence and control. Illegal possession or consumption of marijuana by an underage person is a strict liability offense. 
(c)  Prima facie evidence of a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall consist of: 
(1)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and possessed or consumed ethyl alcohol or marijuana anywhere in the city; or 
(2)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with ethyl alcohol intoxication or impairment or marijuana impairment anywhere in the city. 
(d)  The evidentiary provisions and affirmative defenses set forth in C.R.S. §§ 18-13-122 shall apply in all proceedings regarding a violation of subsections (a) and (b), above, and are incorporated herein by reference. 
(e)  Possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol or marijuana shall not constitute a violation of this section if such possession or consumption takes place for religious purposes protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(f)  An underage person shall be immune from prosecution under this section if he or she establishes the following: 
(1)  The underage person called 911 and reported in good faith that another underage person was in need of medical assistance due to alcohol or marijuana consumption; 
(2)  The underage person who called 911 provided his or her name to the 911 operator; 
(3)  The underage person was the first person to make the 911 report; and 
(4)  The underage person who made the 911 call remained on the scene with the underage person in need of medical assistance until assistance arrived and cooperated with medical assistance or law enforcement personnel on the scene. 
(g)  The court, upon sentencing a defendant pursuant to this section may, in addition to any fine, order the defendant to perform up to twenty-four (24) hours of useful public service, and may further order the defendant to submit to and complete an alcohol or evaluation or assessment, an alcohol or drug education program, or an alcohol or drug treatment program at the defendant's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2-2017 , § 5, 2-15-17; Ord. No. 1-2018 , § 7, 2-7-18; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § G13, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 11-172. - Unlawful for underage person to obtain or attempt to obtain alcoholic beverages or marijuana by misrepresentation of age or other method. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain or attempt to obtain any alcohol beverage or marijuana or marijuana product by misrepresentation of age or by any other method in any place where alcohol beverages or marijuana produce are sold when such person is under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2-2017 , § 6, 2-15-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2-2017 , § 6, adopted February 15, 2017, repealed former § 11-172, and subsequently renumbered former § 11-173 as § 11-172. Former § 11-172 pertained to offenses relating to marijuana and marijuana concentrate and derived from Ord. No. 27-1998, adopted December 16, 1998. See § 11-11 for provisions relating to offenses relating to marijuana.  
Chapter 12 - MOBILE HOMES, MOBILE HOME PARKS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-2018 , §§ 2—6, adopted May 2, 2018, repealed the former ch. 12, §§ 12-1 and 12-16—12-41, and reenacted a new ch. 12 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1964, §§ 19-4(2), 19-4(3), 19-46(5)—19-4(12), 19-4(14)—19-4(22), 19-4(24)—19-4(26). 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; specific standards for flood hazard reduction, § 8-52; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10; nuisances, Ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 20; uniform development code, Ch. 21. 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and which has certification required by the United States Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and was constructed is in compliance with the requirements of 42 U.S.C. § 5401, et seq., Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, and the regulations of the Department of Housing and Urban Development that are promulgated thereunder. The phrase "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle, nor does it include a mobile home. 1 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel of land that is divided (or, in the case of the subdivision, platted) into two (2) or more lots for long-term lease or sale, with infrastructure designed for the installation of manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 12-2018 , §§ 2—6, 5-2-18) 
1 The phrase "mobile home" typically refers to a structure similar to a manufactured home, but built before 1976, and not built to HUD standards which became effective in 1976. Unless grandfathered in in an existing mobile home park, mobile homes are not allowed in the City of Alamosa.  
Secs. 12-2—12-15. - Reserved.  
Sec. 12-16. - Location outside park or subdivision prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy a manufactured home for human habitation within the city limits except in a licensed manufactured home park or a manufactured home subdivision, provided that this prohibition shall not include a manufactured home used for an office for temporary use while construction is in progress at such location. 
(Ord. No. 12-2018 , §§ 2—6, 5-2-18)  
Sec. 12-17. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate within the limits of the city any manufactured home park, without first obtaining a license. 
(Ord. No. 12-2018 , §§ 2—6, 5-2-18)  
Sec. 12-18. - Application for license. 
Application for a manufactured home park license shall be filed with the city clerk and issued by the city council upon approval of the application by the city manager. Applications shall be in duplicate in writing, signed by the applicant and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The location and legal description of the manufactured home park; 
(3)  A complete plan of the park showing compliance with section 21-4-805; 
(4)  Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed or to be constructed in the manufactured home park; 
(5)  Such further information as may be requested by the city manager to enable a determination of whether the proposed site will comply with the legal requirements. If the applicant is found to be of good moral character, the proposed manufactured home park is in compliance with all provisions of this article and all other applicable ordinances and statutes after the expiration of ten (10) days, the city council shall approve the application and on completion of the park according to the plans shall issue the license. 
(Ord. No. 12-2018 , §§ 2—6, 5-2-18)  
Sec. 12-19. - Annual license fee. 
The annual license fee for each manufactured home park shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for the first mobile home space and two dollars ($2.00) for each additional manufactured home space. 
(Ord. No. 12-2018 , §§ 2—6, 5-2-18)  
Sec. 12-20. - Posting of license. 
The license shall be conspicuously posted in the office of or on the premises of the manufactured home park at all times. 
(Ord. No. 12-2018 , §§ 2—6, 5-2-18)  
Sec. 12-21. - Revocation of license. 
The city council may, after a hearing, revoke any license to maintain and operate a park when the licensee has violated any provision of this article. After such revocation, the license may be reissued by the city council if the circumstances causing such violation have been remedied or corrected. 
(Ord. No. 12-2018 , §§ 2—6, 5-2-18)  
Sec. 12-22. - Occupancy. 
No manufactured home shall be occupied by a greater number of persons than that for which it is designed. 
(Ord. No. 12-2018 , §§ 2—6, 5-2-18)  
Secs. 12-23—12-33. - Reserved.  
Sec. 12-34. - Animals. 
No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat or other animal shall permit it to run at large or commit any nuisance within the limits of the manufactured home park. 
(Ord. No. 12-2018 , §§ 2—6, 5-2-18)  
Sec. 12-35. - Register of occupants. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a register containing a record of all manufactured home owners and occupants located within the park. The register shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of each occupant; 
(2)  The make, model and year of all manufactured homes; 
(3)  The date of arrival and of departures of each manufactured home. 
(b)  The park shall keep the register available for inspection, at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register records shall not be destroyed for a period of three (3) years following the date of registration. 
(Ord. No. 12-2018 , §§ 2—6, 5-2-18)  
Sec. 12-36. - Supervision. 
A responsible attendant or caretaker, owner or operator shall be in charge at all times to keep the manufactured home park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition and the attendant or caretaker and the licensee shall be answerable for any violation of the provision of this article. Such attendant or caretaker, owner or operator shall be available at any reasonable time to assist the law enforcement officers of the city in conducting an inspection of the park. 
(Ord. No. 12-2018 , §§ 2—6, 5-2-18)  
Sec. 12-37. - Alterations and additions - manufactured homes in manufactured home parks. 
No permanent additions of any kind shall be built onto or become a part of any manufactured homes in any manufactured home park. Skirting of manufactured homes is permissible, but such skirting shall not attach to the manufactured home permanently to the ground, provide a harborage for rodents or create a fire hazard. The wheels of the manufactured home may be removed and jacks or stabilizers may be placed under the frame of the manufactured home to prevent movement on the springs while the manufactured home is parked and occupied. This section is not applicable to manufactured homes in manufactured home subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 12-2018 , §§ 2—6, 5-2-18)  
Chapter 13 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, art. VI. 
Cross reference— Duties of the city attorney and municipal judge, § 2-36; miscellaneous offenses, Ch. 11; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, C.R.S. 13-10-101 et seq.; trial by jury, C.R.S. 13-10-114(2), Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, Rule 223. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 13-1—13-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2001, §§ 9—11, adopted December 19, 2001, repealed former §§ 13-1—13-3 in their entirety, which pertained to municipal judge qualifications, appointment, term; salary and determination of such by ordinance; and authority to name person to serve as substitute; appointment by council on failure of judge to act; determination of compensation. These provisions derived from the 1964 Code, §§ 15-4, 15-6 and 15-7.  
Sec. 13-4. - Clerk of court. 
The city council may appoint a clerk of the municipal court whenever it deems the volume of business done by the court sufficient to justify such appointment. 
(Code 1964, § 15-25)  
Sec. 13-5. - Duty of judge and clerk to keep court register; clerk authority concerning traffic violations. 
The duties of the judge, and any court clerk, shall be to keep a register of the actions in the court including all fees and monies collected and an index thereof; to pay over to the director of finance of the city all fines, penalties and fees received monthly, all to be credited to the general fund; and to prepare and keep a docket for the court in which the judgments in each case shall be noted. The court clerk shall keep reports on an at least monthly basis covering all monies collected by the court, and such report shall state the number of cases filed in the court, how the same were disposed of, and such other matters of information concerning operation of the court as the judge may deem proper or the council may require. The court clerk shall have authority to resolve uncontested traffic violations in accordance with the fine schedule established by ordinance. Such resolved traffic violations shall be included in the reports referenced above. The court clerk shall have such further powers and duties as may be provided by ordinance or by the municipal judge. 
(Code 1964, § 15-26; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § H1, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 13-6. - Jurisdiction of court; powers and authority of judge. 
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases arising under the ordinances or Charter of the City of Alamosa, including those having juveniles as a named party. The municipal judge shall have all judicial powers provided by law relating to the operation of his/her court including, but not limited to, imposition of fines and penalties, enforcement of the court's orders and judgments, punishment of contempt, and the power to compel the attendance of witnesses. Unless superseded by Charter or ordinance the operation of the municipal court, and the conduct of the municipal judge, shall be governed by Colorado law and the rules of the Colorado Supreme Court. 
(Code 1964, § 15-8; Ord. No. 02-2001, §§ 1, 2, 2-21-01; Ord. No. 11-2001, § 12, 12-19-01)  
Sec. 13-7. - Sessions of court. 
There shall be regular sessions of court for the trial of cases, and the municipal judge shall hear and determine complaints for the violation of any city ordinance or Charter where there is probably cause to believe that an offense has been committed, provided that it shall be lawful for the municipal judge to hold a special session of court at any time if in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court a special session is deemed advisable. In so far as it is practicable, traffic cases shall be heard separately from other cases. 
(Code 1964, § 15-18)  
Sec. 13-8. - Municipal court of record established. 
The municipal court in and for the city, organized to hear and try all alleged violations of ordinance provisions of the city, is hereby established as a qualified municipal court of record pursuant to provisions of C.R.S. 13-10-101 et seq. The court shall operate in conformity with the Charter and ordinances of the city, shall keep a verbatim record of the proceedings and evidence of trials by either electronic devices or stenographic means, and the judge of the court shall have been admitted to and currently be licensed in the practice of law in the State of Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 8-1996, § 1, 6-5-96; Ord. No. 11-1998, § 1, 6-3-98) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 8-1996, § 1, adopted June 5, 1996, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of its provisions as § 13-8 herein was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 13-9. - Jurisdiction of court; civil restraining orders. 
The municipal court is authorized to issue temporary and permanent civil restraining orders, pursuant to section 13-14-102(1)(a), C.R.S., as amended. 
A person failing to comply with any order of the court issued pursuant to this section may be found in contempt of court or prosecuted for a violation of a civil restraining order pursuant to section 11-26 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 15-2000, § 1, 12-6-00)  
Secs. 13-10—13-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRIAL BY JURY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Trial by jury, C.R.S. 13-10-114, 13-71-101 et seq., Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, Rules 223, 224. 
 
Sec. 13-21. - Jury selection; municipal court procedures. 
(a)  The clerk of the municipal court shall be the jury commissioner for such court, and any deputy clerk of the municipal court shall be a deputy jury commissioner for such court. 
(b)  The jury commissioner shall keep and maintain a master jury list which may be the same as the state judicial department master jury list. If such state master list is not used, the master list shall be compiled and maintained by the city jury commissioner in the manner set forth in C.R.S. 13-71-107, as amended. Such master list shall be open to the public for examination as a public record. 
(c)  The jury commissioner shall maintain a master jury box into which the commissioner shall place the names or identifying numbers of prospective jurors taken from the master list. The number of jurors to be taken from the master list shall be determined by the judge of the municipal court and the jury commissioner. The names or identifying numbers of prospective jurors to be placed in the master jury box shall be selected by the jury commissioner at random from the master list in the following manner: The total number of names on the master list shall be divided by the number of names to be placed in the master jury box, and the whole number next greater than the quotient shall be the "key number." A "starting number" for making the selection shall then be determined by a random method from the numbers from one (1) to the key number, both inclusive. The required number of the names shall then be selected from the master list by picking in order the first name on the master list corresponding to the starting number and then successively the names appearing in the master list at intervals equal to the key number, recommencing if necessary at the start of the list until the required number of names has been selected. Upon recommencing at the start of the list, or if additional names are subsequently to be selected for the master jury box, names previously selected from the master list shall be disregarded in selecting the additional names. The jury commission may use an electronic or mechanical system or device in carrying out its duties under this subsection. 
(d)  The names of any prospective jurors who are determined by the jury commissioner to be nonresidents of the city shall be forthwith deleted and eliminated from such master jury box. 
(Code 1964, § 15-28(1)—(4); Ord. No. 11-2001, § 13, 12-19-01)  
Sec. 13-22. - Prospective jurors. 
(a)  From time to time and in a manner prescribed by the court, the jury commissioner shall publicly draw at random from the master jury box the names or identifying numbers of as many prospective jurors as the court by order may require. The clerk shall prepare an alphabetical list of the names drawn. Neither the names drawn nor the list shall be disclosed to any person other than pursuant to this article or specific order of the court. 
(b)  The court clerk shall mail to every prospective juror whose name is drawn from the master jury box a juror qualification form accompanied by instructions to fill and return the form by mail to the clerk within ten (10) days after its receipt. The juror qualification form is subject to approval by the court as to matters of form and shall elicit the name, address of residence, and age of the prospective juror, and whether the prospective juror is a citizen of the United States and a resident of the city, is able to read, speak, and understand the English language, has any physical or mental disability impairing his or her capacity to render satisfactory jury service, and whether the prospective juror does not have the right to vote by reason of a criminal conviction. The juror qualification form shall contain the prospective juror's declaration that his or her responses are true to the best of his or her knowledge, and the prospective juror's acknowledgement that a willful misrepresentation of a material fact may be punished by a fine or by imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Notarization of the juror qualification form shall not be required. 
(c)  If the prospective juror is unable to fill out the form, another person may do it for the prospective juror, and shall indicate that he or she has done so and the reason therefor. If it appears there is an omission, ambiguity or error in a returned form, the court clerk shall again send the form with instructions to the prospective juror to make the necessary addition, clarification, or correction and to return the form to the jury commissioner within ten (10) days after its second receipt. 
(d)  Any prospective juror who fails to return a completed juror qualification form as instructed shall be directed by the jury commissioner to appear forthwith before the court clerk to fill out a juror qualification form. At the time of his or her appearance for jury service, or at the time of any interview before the court or clerk, any prospective juror may be required to fill out another juror qualification form in the presence of the court or clerk, at which time the prospective juror may be questioned, but only with regard to his or her responses to questions contained on the form and grounds for the prospective juror's excuse or disqualification. Any information thus acquired by the court or clerk shall be noted on the juror qualification form. 
(e)  A prospective juror who fails to appear as directed by the jury commissioner pursuant to subsection (d) above shall be ordered by the court to appear and show cause for such prospective juror's failure to appear as directed. If the prospective juror fails to appear pursuant to the court's order or fails to show good cause for his or her failure to appear as directed by the jury commissioner, such prospective juror is guilty of criminal contempt and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine or by imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(f)  Any person who willfully misrepresents a material fact on a juror qualification form for the purpose of avoiding or securing service as a juror is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine or by imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1964, § 15-28; Ord. No. 11-2001, § 14, 12-19-01; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § H2, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 13-23. - Determination of qualifications. 
(a)  The court, upon request of the jury commissioner or a prospective juror or on its own initiative, shall determine on the basis of information provided on the juror qualification form or interview with the prospective juror or other competent evidence whether or not the prospective juror is disqualified for jury service. The court clerk shall enter this determination in the space provided on the juror qualification form and on the alphabetical list of names drawn from the master jury box. 
(b)  A prospective juror is disqualified to serve on a jury if the prospective juror: 
(1)  Is not a citizen of the United States, eighteen (18) years old, and a resident of the city; 
(2)  Is unable to read, speak, and understand the English language; 
(3)  Is incapable, by reason of his or her physical or mental disability, of rendering satisfactory jury service, but a person claiming this disqualification may be required to submit a physician's or authorized Christian science practitioner's certificate as to the disability, and the certifying physician or practitioner is subject to inquiry by the court at its discretion; however, no person shall be deemed to be incapable of jury service solely because of impaired vision or hearing in any degree, although the existence of a defect in the visual or auditory functions may be grounds for challenge for cause if the court is satisfied that the challenged person is incapable of performing the duties of a juror in a particular action without prejudice to the substantial rights of the challenging party; 
(4)  Does not have the right to vote by reasons of a criminal conviction; 
(5)  Is then a member of a district court or county court jury panel. 
(Code 1964, § 15-28(6); Ord. No. 27-2018 , § H3, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 13-24. - Selection of qualified jurors. 
(a)  The jury commissioner shall maintain a qualified jury box and shall place therein the names or identifying numbers of all prospective jurors drawn from the master jury box who are not disqualified. 
(b)  Any judge of the municipal court may by order direct the jury commissioner to draw and assign to the court the number of qualified jurors the commissioner deems necessary for the municipal jury panel. Upon receipt of the order and in a manner prescribed by the court, the jury commissioner shall publicly draw at random from the qualified jury box the number of qualified jurors specified. The court clerk thereafter shall cause each person drawn for jury service to be served with a summons either personally or by mail addressed to such person at his or her usual residence, business, or post office address, requiring such person to report for jury service at a specified time and place. 
(c)  Where there is an unanticipated shortage of available jurors drawn from the qualified jury box, the court may require a police officer or the jury commissioner to summon a sufficient number of jurors from bystanders, but either party may show cause why bystanders should not be used, in which case additional jurors may be selected at random by the court clerk from the qualified jury box or in any other manner prescribed by the court. 
(d)  The names of qualified jurors drawn from the qualified jury box shall be made available to the public and the content of the juror qualification forms completed by the jurors shall be made available to parties or their attorneys unless the court determines in any instance in the interest of justice that this information be kept confidential or its use limited in whole or in part. 
(Code 1964, § 15-28(7); Ord. No. 27-2018 , § H4, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 13-25. - Exemption. 
No qualified prospective juror is exempt from jury service. 
(Code 1964, § 15-28(8))  
Sec. 13-26. - Jurors excused from service. 
(a)  The court, or any officer thereof designated by the court, upon request of a prospective juror or on its own initiative, shall determine on the basis of information provided on the juror qualification form or interview with the prospective juror or other competent evidence whether or not the prospective juror should be excused from jury service. The court clerk shall enter this determination in the space provided on the juror qualification form. 
(b)  A person who is not disqualified for jury service may be excused from jury service by the court only upon a showing of undue hardship, extreme inconvenience, or public necessity for a period the court deems necessary, at the conclusion of which the person shall reappear for jury service in accordance with the court's direction. 
(Code 1964, § 15-28(9))  
Sec. 13-27. - Length of service by jurors. 
In any three-year period, a person shall not be required to serve or attend court for prospective service as a petit juror more than ten (10) court days except when necessary to complete service in a particular case.  
Sec. 13-28. - Penalties for failure to perform jury service. 
A person summoned for jury service who fails to appear or to complete jury service as directed may be served with a summons, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, requiring such person to appear or to complete jury service as directed. Should such person not appear in response thereto, he or she may be ordered by the court to appear forthwith and show cause for his or her failure to comply with the summons. If such person fails to show good cause for noncompliance with the summons, he or she is guilty of contempt and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine or by imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1964, § 15-28(11); Ord. No. 11-2001, § 15, 12-19-01; Ord. No. 1-2018 , § 8, 2-7-18; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § H5, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 13-29. - Court rules. 
The municipal court may make and amend rules, not inconsistent with this article, regulating the selection and service of jurors. 
(Code 1964, § 15-28(12))  
Sec. 13-30. - Juror's fees. 
Every person selected to serve on a jury shall be entitled to a per-diem payment in the amount of six dollars ($6.00) per calendar day of actual service during a trial or any part thereof. In the event a person is convicted of any offense by a jury, such fees shall be assessed by the court as costs against such convicted person, as otherwise provided in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 1-1990, § 3, 4-4-90)  
Secs. 13-31—13-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RIGHTS OF ACCUSED 
 
Secs. 13-46—13-49. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2001, §§ 16—19, adopted December 19, 2001, repealed in their entirety former §§ 13-46—13-49, which pertained to and derived from the following: appearance bonds—arrested person's right to tender; maximum amount; approval; provisions as to intoxicated or drugged persons, Code of 1964, § 15-14; same—forfeiture, Code of 1964, § 15-15; same—payment by surety; action against surety for failure to satisfy forfeiture; application and claim against city for return of bond amount, Code of 1964, § 15-16; same—failure of defendant to appear; authority of judge to cite for contempt or issue warrant for arrest or render default judgment, Code of 1964, § 15-17, Ord. No. 1-1990, § 4, 4-4-90, Ord. No. 5-1995, § 4, 3-1-95.  
Sec. 13-50. - Same—Open to public, exception. 
All cases in the municipal court shall be open to the public, provided, however, that where the type of offense charged and the nature of the case are such that it would be to the best interests of the witnesses and/or defendant or defendants to exclude all persons not directly connected with the case, the municipal judge may order that the court be cleared of all persons not so directly connected with the case. This decision shall be solely in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(Code 1964, § 15-19)  
Sec. 13-51. - Same—Oral or written explanation of defendants' rights required. 
At the beginning of each court session, the municipal judge shall explain generally to defendants their rights in municipal court, as well as the general order of trial, provided, however, that this may be done by pamphlet distributed to each defendant. 
(Code 1964, § 15-20)  
Sec. 13-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-1997, § 2, adopted June 18, 1997, repealed former § 13-52 of the Code, which pertained to defendant's right to subpoena witnesses and fee for subpoena and derived from the 1964 Code, § 15-20.  
Sec. 13-53. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2001, § 20, adopted December 19, 2001, repealed in its entirety former § 13-53, which pertained to continuances and derived from the Code of 1964, § 15-22.  
Sec. 13-54. - Failure to pay fine, penalties or costs; authority of judge to suspend fine, grant stay of execution, grant deferred sentences or deferred prosecution. 
Every person against whom any fine, penalty or costs shall be assessed under the ordinances of the city and who shall refuse or neglect forthwith to pay the same on such conviction or upon assessing of such fine, costs or penalty, and where the court record reflects that the defendant has willfully failed to pay such fine, costs or penalty, the court, when appropriate, may, on its own motion or on motion filed by the prosecutor, impose part or all of a suspended sentence, may revoke probation, or may institute proceedings for contempt of court. If the court finds a defendant in contempt of court for willful failure to pay, there shall be no imprisonment in those cases when no imprisonment is provided for in the possible sentence and any term of imprisonment shall otherwise comport with the provisions of C.R.S. § 18-1.3-702 as that statute may be amended from time to time. 
The court shall not find the defendant in contempt of court, nor impose a suspended sentence, nor revoke probation, nor order the defendant to jail for failure to pay unless the court has made findings on the record, after providing notice to the defendant and a hearing, that the defendant has the ability to comply with the court's order to pay a monetary amount due without undue hardship to the defendant or the defendant's dependents and that the defendant has not made a good-faith effort to comply with the order. If the defendant fails to appear at the hearing referenced herein after receiving notice, the court may issue a warrant for his or her arrest for failure to appear. 
The court shall not accept a defendant's guilty plea for contempt of court for failure to pay or failure to comply with the court's order to pay a monetary amount unless the court has made findings on the record that the defendant has the ability to comply with the court's order to pay a monetary amount due without undue hardship to the defendant or the defendant's dependents and that the defendant has not made a good-faith effort to comply with the order. 
The court shall not issue a warrant for failure to pay money, failure to appear to pay money, or failure to appear at any post-sentencing court appearance wherein the defendant was required to appear if he or she failed to pay a monetary amount. The court may issue an arrest warrant or incarcerate a defendant related to his or her failure to pay a monetary amount only through the procedures described in C.R.S. § 18-1.3-702(3)(a) to (d) as that statute may be amended from time to time. 
The municipal judge shall have the power to suspend fines and penalties, but not costs, and to grant stays of execution as is now or may hereafter be provided by general law, but not for a period of time in excess of a reasonable time within which to pay such fines, penalties or costs. 
In addition to all other powers vested in the municipal court by Colorado state law and the Colorado Supreme Court, the municipal judge shall have the authority to grant deferred prosecutions and deferred judgments in all cases within the jurisdiction of the municipal court in those circumstances and upon such terms as the municipal judge deems appropriate. 
(Code 1964, § 15-23; Ord. No. 1-1990, § 2, 4-4-90; Ord. No. 5-1995, § 5, 3-1-95; Ord. No. 1-2018 , § 9, 2-7-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1-2018 , § 9, adopted Feb. 7, 2018, repealed and reenacted § 13-54 to read as herein set out. Historical notation has been retained for reference purposes.  
Sec. 13-55. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2001, § 21, adopted December 19, 2001, repealed in its entirety former § 13-55, which pertained to reduction of sentence and derived from the Code of 1964, § 15-24.  
Sec. 13-56. - Costs to be assessed upon conviction of municipal offenses. 
Every defendant who pleads guilty, nolo contendere, or who enters a plea agreement, or who after trial, is found guilty of a violation of the city Code, shall be assessed costs, including any law enforcement surcharges, by the court, which costs may not be abated or suspended, except for a reasonable time within which to pay the same. The costs to be assessed and the amounts thereof shall be set by resolution of the city council, and may be amended and adjusted from time to time by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 15-27; Ord. No. 1-1990, § 1, 4-4-90; Ord. No. 5-1995, § 7, 3-1-95; Ord. No. 7-1997, § 2, 5-7-97; Ord. No. 13-2016 , § 1, 7-6-16)  
Sec. 13-57. - Right to jury trial. 
(a)  Any defendant charged with a violation of this Code that constitutes a jailable offense shall have the right to demand a trial by jury upon compliance with the provisions of state law and the "Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure." 
(b)  No defendant shall have a right to a trial by jury for any non-criminal traffic infraction, nor for any violation that does not carry the possibility of the imposition of a sentence of incarceration (non-jailable offense). If the defendant is charged with any other jailable offense arising out of the same incident as forms the basis for a charge of a non-jailable offense, the defendant shall have the right to demand and, if such demand is in conformance with applicable law and the "Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure," to receive a trial by jury as to all such offenses, which shall be consolidated for purposes of trial. 
(Ord. No. 5-1995, § 3, 3-1-95; Ord. No. 1-2018 , § 10, 2-7-18)  
Chapter 14 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 3; animal nuisances prohibited, fines, § 3-13(c); buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; burning material in city restricted, § 7-2; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; requirements for building conditions, utilities, refuse disposal and nuisance control in agricultural labor camps, § 10-45; mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks, Ch. 12; buildings declared nuisances, § 16-56. 
State Law reference— Health, C.R.S. 25-1-101 et seq.; nuisances, C.R.S. 16-13-301 et seq.; noise, C.R.S. 25-12-101 et seq.; extraterritorial jurisdiction to abate certain nuisances, C.R.S. 31-15-401. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
Pursuant to parts 1 and 2 of article 16 of title 31, C.R.S., there is hereby adopted by reference the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code promulgated and published by the International Code Council. The International Property Maintenance Code is adopted as if set out at length, except as specifically modified and/or amended in section 14-2 of this article. A copy of the International Property Maintenance Code shall be maintained in the office of the Building Inspector of the City of Alamosa, and may be inspected during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 18, 2010, § 1, 12-1-10; Ord. No. 24-2018 , § 3, 9-5-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18, 2010, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 2010, amended 14-1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 14-1, pertained to conditions constituting, and derived from Code 1964, §§ 13-7, 13-8, 16-7, 17-41.1; Ord. No. 8-2009, § 2, adopted Aug. 5, 2009. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 8-2009, § 2, adopted Aug. 5, 2009, repealed § 14-1(b), which pertained to noise from motor vehicles and derived from Code 1964, §§ 13-7, 13-8, 16-7, 17-41.1. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 19.  
Sec. 14-2. - Deletions, additions, and modifications. 
(a)  Deletions. The 2015 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code is adopted as if set out at length save and except the following articles and/or sections which are declared to be inapplicable to the city and are therefore expressly deleted: 103.5; 111.2 and all its subsections; 111.3; 111.4; 111.5; 302.4; 302.8; 304.3; 
(b)  Modifications. The 2015 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code is adopted as if set out at length, subject to the following additions or modifications: 
1.  Section 101.1 is amended by inserting "The City of Alamosa" for "Name of Jurisdiction." 
2.  Section 102.3 is amended to read 102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with all applicable provisions of the Alamosa Code of Ordinances, including all uniform codes adopted by reference therein. 
3.  The title of Section 103 is hereby amended to read as follows: SECTION 103 APPOINTMENT AND LIABILITY OF CODE OFFICIAL 
4.  Section 103.1 is hereby amended to read "Code Official. The code official shall be the executive official in charge of the interpretation and enforcement of this code." 
5.  Section 103.2 is hereby amended to read "Appointment. The code official shall be appointed by the Chief of Police of the City of Alamosa." 
6.  Section 111.1 is hereby amended by substituting "Planning Commission" for "board of appeals" and "Commission" for "board" wherever those phrases appear in Section 111. 
7.  Section 111.7 is amended such that the first sentence reads "Any party adversely affected or aggrieved by the decision of the Commission shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for judicial review. 
8.  Section 112.4 is hereby amended by stopping the section at "shall be liable to a fine." 
9.  Section 202 is hereby amended by adding the following definitions: 
WATER CLOSET. A toilet. 
LAVATORY. A sink, specifically, a bathroom sink. 
10.  Section 304.14 is hereby amended as follows: the dates April 1 and November 1 are added for the period in which screens are required by the section. 
11.  Section 602.3 is hereby amended by inserting October 1 and May 1 for the dates between which heating is required. 
12.  Section 602.4 is hereby amended by inserting October 1 and May 1 for dates between which heating is required. 
(c)  Appendix A is not hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 18, 2010, § 2, 12-1-10; Ord. No. 24-2018 , § 4, 9-5-18) 
Editor's note— Formerly, Ord. No. 8-2009, § 2, adopted Aug. 5, 2009, repealed § 14-2, which pertained to loudspeakers and derived from Code 1964, § 16-9.  
Sec. 14-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18, 2010, § 3, adopted Dec. 1, 2010, repealed § 14-3, which pertained to officers responsible, entry to inspect and derived from Code 1964, § 16-1.  
Sec. 14-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18, 2010, § 3, adopted Dec. 1, 2010, repealed § 14-4, which pertained to abatement procedure; notice to owner; action by city, collection of expenses and derived from Code 1964, § 16-3.  
Sec. 14-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-2000, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2000, repealed § 14-5, which pertained to peddling, soliciting, hawking, etc., uninvited—declared nuisance, and derived from the Code of 1964, § 16-11.1.  
Sec. 14-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-2000, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2000, repealed § 14-6, which pertained to peddling, soliciting, hawking, etc., uninvited—unlawful penalty, and derived from the Code of 1964, § 16-11.2.  
Secs. 14-7—14-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MOTOR VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference— Abandoning vehicles on public property prohibited, C.R.S. 42-4-1803 removal and disposal of abandoned vehicles, C.R.S. 42-4-1801 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle left unattended on private property for a period of forty-eight (48) hours or longer without the consent of the owner or lessee of such property, or the owner's or lessee's legally authorized agent; 
(2)  Any motor vehicle left unattended on public property, including any portion of a street or alley right-of-way, within the limits of the city for a period of forty-eight (48) hours or longer; 
(3)  Any motor vehicle stored in an impound lot at the request of its owner or the owner's agent or a law enforcement agency and not removed from the impound lot according to the agreement with the owner or agent or within forty-eight (48) hours of the time the law enforcement agency notifies the owner or agent that the vehicle is available for release upon payment of any applicable charges or fees; if a law enforcement agency requested the storage, the provisions governing public tows of this section apply as of the time of abandonment, and such law enforcement agency shall be deemed the responsible law enforcement agency. Otherwise, the private tow provisions of this article apply as of the time of abandonment. 
Appraisal means a bona fide estimate of reasonable market value made by any motor vehicle dealer licensed in this state or by any employee of the state patrol, or of any sheriff's or police department whose appointment for such purpose has been reported by the head of the appointing agency to the executive director of the department of motor vehicles. 
Disabled motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which is stopped or parked, either attended or unattended, upon a public right-of-way and which is, due to any mechanical failure or any inoperability because of a collision, a fire or any other such damage, temporarily inoperable under its own power. 
Impound lot means a parcel of real property which is owned or leased by a government or operator at which motor vehicles are stored under appropriate protection. 
Operator means a person or a firm licensed by the public utilities commission as a towing carrier. 
Private property means any real property which is not public property. 
Private tow means any tow of an abandoned motor vehicle not requested by a law enforcement agency. 
Public property means any real property having its title, ownership, use or possession held by the federal government, the state or any county, municipality as defined in C.R.S. 31-1-101(6), or other governmental entity of this state. 
Public tow means any tow of an abandoned motor vehicle requested by a law enforcement agency. 
Responsible law enforcement agency means: 
(1)  In the case of a public tow, the law enforcement agency authorizing the original tow of an abandoned motor vehicle, whether or not the vehicle is towed to another law enforcement agency's jurisdiction; 
(2)  In the case of a private tow, the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the private property where the motor vehicle becomes abandoned. 
(Code 1964, § 16-16(a); Ord. No. 10-1986, § 16-16.01, 7-18-86; Ord. No. 5-2003, § 1, 5-21-03) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 42-4-1802.  
Sec. 14-22. - Report of abandoned motor vehicles—Owner's opportunity to request hearing—Public tow. 
(a)  The responsibility of the law enforcement agency is as follows: 
(1)  Upon having an abandoned motor vehicle towed, the responsible law enforcement agency shall ascertain, if possible, whether or not the motor vehicle has been reported stolen, and, if so reported, such agency shall recover and secure the motor vehicle and notify its rightful owner and terminate the abandonment proceedings under this article. The responsible law enforcement agency shall have the right to recover from the owner its reasonable costs to recover and secure the motor vehicle. 
(2)  As soon as possible, but in no event later than three (3) working days after having an abandoned motor vehicle towed, the responsible law enforcement agency shall report the same to the department by first-class or certified mail, or by personal delivery, which report shall be on a form prescribed and supplied by the department, and shall contain the information required by C.R.S. 42-4-1604(1)(c). 
(b)  The responsible law enforcement agency, upon its receipt of the department's report required under C.R.S. 42-4-1604 shall determine, from all available information and after reasonable inquiry, whether or not the abandoned motor vehicle has been reported stolen, and, if so reported, such agency shall recover and secure the motor vehicle and notify its rightful owner and terminate the abandonment proceedings under this article. The responsible law enforcement agency shall have the right to recover from the owner its reasonable costs to recover and secure the motor vehicle. 
(c)  The responsible law enforcement agency, within ten (10) working days of the receipt of the report from the department required by C.R.S. 42-4-1604(2) shall notify by certified mail, the owner of record, if ascertained, and any lien holder, if ascertained, of the fact of such report and the claim, if any, of a lien under section 14-26, and shall send a copy of such notice to the operator. The notice shall contain information that the identified motor vehicle has been reported to the department, the location of the motor vehicle and the location from which it was towed, and that, unless claimed within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the notice was sent as determined from the postmark on the notice, the motor vehicle is subject to sale. Such notice shall also inform the owner of record of his or her opportunity to request a hearing concerning the legality of the towing of the abandoned motor vehicle, and the responsible law enforcement agency to contact for that purpose. Such request shall be made in writing to the municipal court clerk within ten (10) days of the postmarked date of sending such notice. Such hearing shall be conducted in accordance with section 14-23. 
(d)  The notice provided for in subsection (c) above shall be given on such forms as are provided or made available for use by local law enforcement agencies by the state department of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 10-1986, § 16-16.02, 7-18-86; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § I1, 10-3-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 42-4-1804.  
Sec. 14-23. - Conduct of hearing. 
(a)  Within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of a written demand for a hearing, the city clerk shall schedule such a hearing at the next available court date before the municipal judge. Saturdays, Sundays, and city holidays are to be excluded from the calculation of the forty-eight-hour period. 
(b)  The sole issue before the municipal court shall be whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. 
(c)  Probable cause to impound shall mean such a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary care and prudence to believe that there was sufficient breach of local, state or federal law to grant legal authority for the removal of the vehicle. 
(d)  The municipal judge shall conduct the hearing consistent with the municipal court rules of procedure. The person demanding the hearing shall carry the burden of establishing that such person has the right to possession of the vehicle. The police department shall carry the burden of establishing that there was probable cause to impoundment the vehicle in question. At the conclusion of the hearing, the municipal judge shall prepare a written decision. A copy of such decision shall be provided to the person demanding the hearing and the registered owner of the vehicle (if not the same person requesting the hearing). The court's decision in no way affects any criminal or ordinance violation proceeding in connection with the impoundment in question and any criminal charges or charges involving other ordinance violations involved in such proceeding may only be challenged in the appropriate court. The decision of the municipal judge is final. 
(e)  Failure of the registered or legal owner to request or attend a scheduled post-seizure hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. 
(f)  The municipal judge shall only determine that as to the vehicle in issue, either there was probable cause to impound the vehicle or there was no such probable cause. 
(g)  In the event the municipal judge determines that there was no probable cause, the court shall prepare and date a certificate of such finding, copies of which shall be given to the possessor of the vehicle and to the responsible law enforcement agency. Upon receipt of the possessor's copy of such certificate, the custodian of the stored vehicle shall release the vehicle to its possessor. 
(h)  Upon a finding of no probable cause, towing and storage fees shall be paid by the city in accordance with arrangement made between the city and the operator. If the possessor fails to present such certificate to the operator having custody of the vehicle within twenty-four (24) hours of its receipt, excluding such days when the operator is not open for business, the possessor shall assume liability for all subsequent storage charges. Such certificates shall advise the possessor of such requirement. 
(Ord. No. 10-1986, § 16-16.03, 7-18-86; Ord. No. 1-2018 , § 11, 2-7-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 42-4-1804.  
Sec. 14-24. - Abandonment of motor vehicles—Private tow. 
(a)  No person shall abandon any motor vehicle upon private property other than upon such person's own property. Any owner or lessee, or owner's or lessee's agent authorized in writing, may have an abandoned motor vehicle removed from his or her property by having it towed and impounded by an operator. 
(b)  Any operator having in his or her possession any abandoned motor vehicle from a private tow shall immediately notify the chief of police, or the chief's designee, as to the name of the operator and the location of the impound lot where the vehicle is located and a description of the abandoned motor vehicle, including the make, model, and year, the number, issuing state, and expiration of the license plate, and the vehicle identification number. Upon such notification, the law enforcement agency shall ascertain, if possible, whether or not the vehicle has been reported stolen and, if so reported, such agency shall recover and secure the motor vehicle and notify its rightful owner and terminate the abandonment proceedings under this article. The responsible law enforcement agency shall have the right to recover from the owner its reasonable costs to recover and secure the vehicle. 
(c)  Reports shall be required as follows: 
(1)  Any operator shall, as soon as possible, but in no event later than seventy-two (72) hours after the receipt of determination that such motor vehicle has not been reported stolen, report the same to the state department of revenue by first-class or certified mail, or by personal delivery, which report shall be on a form prescribed and supplied by the state department of revenue. 
(2)  The report shall contain the following information: 
a.  The fact of possession, including the date possession was taken, the location of storage of the abandoned motor vehicle and the location from which it was towed, and the identity of the law enforcement agency determining that the vehicle was not determined stolen; 
b.  The identity of the operator possessing the abandoned motor vehicle, together with the operator's business address and telephone number and the carrier number assigned by the public utilities commission; and 
c.  A description of the abandoned motor vehicle, including the make, model, color, and year, the number, issuing state, and expiration date of the license plate, and the vehicle identification number and a list of the names and addresses of any known drivers. 
(d)  Within five (5) working days of the receipt of a report required by the state department of revenue under C.R.S. 42-4-1505(4) the operator shall notify the certified mail or by personal delivery to the owner of record and any lien holder. The operator shall send a copy of the notice by certified mail or by personal delivery to the responsible law enforcement agency in which the abandoned motor vehicle is located. Such notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  That the identified motor vehicle has been reported abandoned to the department; 
(2)  The claim, if any, of a lien under C.R.S. 42-4-1607; 
(3)  The location of the motor vehicle and the location from which it was towed; and 
(4)  That, unless claimed within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the notice was sent as determined from the postmark on the notice, the motor vehicle is subject to sale. 
(e)  The above notice shall be made on the notice forms approved or provided by the state department of revenue. 
(Code 1964, § 16-16(b), (c); Ord. No. 10-1986, § 16-16.04, 7-18-86; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § I2, 10-3-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 42-4-1804.  
Sec. 14-25. - Appraisal of abandoned motor vehicles—Sale. 
(a)  Public tow abandoned motor vehicles or motor vehicles abandoned in an impound lot subsequent to a public tow shall be appraised and sold by the responsible law enforcement agency at a public or private sale held not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days after the date the notice required by section 14-22 was mailed. 
(b)  Private tow abandoned motor vehicles or motor vehicles abandoned in a motor vehicle lot subsequent to a public tow shall be appraised and sold by the operator in a commercially reasonable manner at a public or private sale held not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days after the date the notice required by section 14-24 above was mailed. 
(c)  If the appraised value of an abandoned motor vehicle sold pursuant to this section is two hundred dollars ($200.00) or less, the sale shall be made only for the purpose of junking, scrapping or dismantling such motor vehicle, and the purchaser thereof shall not, under any circumstances, be entitled to a state certificate of title. The operator or responsible law enforcement agency making the sale shall cause to be executed and delivered a bill of sale, together with a copy of the report described in section 14-22(c) for public towing of abandoned motor vehicles, or section 14-24(d), for private abandoned motor vehicles, to the person purchasing such motor vehicle. The bill of sale shall state that the purchaser acquires no right to a certificate of title for such vehicle. The operator or responsible law enforcement agency making the sale shall promptly submit a report of sale, or a copy of the bill of sale, to the state department of revenue and shall deliver a copy of such report of sale to the purchaser of the motor vehicle. 
(d)  If the appraised value of an abandoned motor vehicle sold pursuant to this section is more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), the sale may be made for any intended use by the purchaser thereof. The operator or responsible law enforcement agency making the sale shall cause to be executed and delivered a bill of sale, together with a copy of the report described in section 14-22(c), for public towing of abandoned motor vehicles, or section 14-24(d), for private tow of abandoned motor vehicles, and an application for a certificate of title signed by a legally authorized representative of the operator or responsible law enforcement agency conducting the sale, to the person purchasing such motor vehicle. The purchaser of the abandoned motor vehicle shall be entitled to a certificate of title as provided by C.R.S. 42-4-1606(4). 
(Ord. No. 10-1986, § 16-16.05, 7-18-86) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, C.R.S. 42-4-1804.  
Sec. 14-26. - Liens upon towed vehicles. 
Whenever an operator recovers, removes or stores a motor vehicle upon instructions from the owner of record thereof or any other legally authorized person in control of such motor vehicle, from the owner or lessee of real property, upon which a motor vehicle is legally parked, or from any duly authorized law enforcement agency or peace officer who has determined that such motor vehicle is an abandoned motor vehicle, such operator shall have a possessory lien upon such motor vehicle and its attached accessories or equipment for all costs of recovery, towing, and storage as authorized in Section 42-4-1610(2)(a) C.R.S. Such lien shall be a first and prior lien on the motor vehicle, and such lien shall be satisfied before all of the charges against such motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 10-1986, § 16-16.06, 7-18-86) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, C.R.S. 42-4-1806.  
Sec. 14-27. - Perfection of lien. 
The lien provided for in section 14-26 shall be perfected by taking physical possession of the motor vehicle and its attached accessories or equipment and by sending to the state department of revenue within three (3) working days of the time possession was taken a notice containing the information required in the report to be made under the provisions of section 14-22(c) or 14-24(d). In addition, such report shall contain a declaration by the operator that a possessory lien is claimed for all past, present, and future changes, up to the date of redemption and that the lien is enforceable and may be foreclosed pursuant to the provisions of section 14-28. 
(Ord. No. 10-1986, § 16-16.07, 7-18-86) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, C.R.S. 42-4-1807.  
Sec. 14-28. - Foreclosure of lien. 
Any motor vehicle and its attached accessories and equipment subject to the possessory lien provided for in section 14-26 and not redeemed by the last-known owner of record or lien holder after such holder or lien holder has been sent notice of such lien by the operator shall be sold in accordance with the provisions of section 14-25. 
(Ord. No. 10-1986, § 16-16.8, 7-18-86) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, C.R.S. 42-4-1808.  
Sec. 14-29. - Proceeds of sale. 
(a)  If the sale of any motor vehicle and its attached accessories and equipment under the provisions of section 14-25 produces an amount less than or equal to the sum of all charges of the operator who has perfected his or her lien, then the operator shall have a valid claim against the owner of record for the full amount of such charges, less the amount received upon the sale of such motor vehicle. Such charges shall be assessed in the manner provided for in paragraph (1) of subsection (b) below. 
(b)  If the sale of any motor vehicle and its attached accessories and equipment under the provisions of section 14-25 produces an amount greater than the sum of all charges of the operator who has perfected its lien: 
(1)  The proceeds shall first satisfy the operator's charges. 
(2)  Any balance then remaining shall be paid to the responsible law enforcement agency to satisfy the cost of notices, having an appraisal made, advertising and selling the motor vehicle, and any other costs of the responsible law enforcement agency including administrative costs, taxes, fines, and penalties due. 
(3)  Any balance then remaining shall be paid: First, to any lien holder of record as such lienholder's interest may appear upon the records of the Colorado department of revenue; second, to any owner of record as such owner's interest may so appear; and then to any person submitting proof of his or her interest in such motor vehicle upon the application of such lien holder, owner, or person. If such payments are not requested within one hundred twenty (120) days of the sale of the abandoned motor vehicle, the balance shall be transmitted to the city's director of finance, who shall credit the same to the city's general fund. 
(Ord. No. 10-1986, § 16-16.9, 7-18-86; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § I3, 10-3-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, C.R.S. 4 42-4-1809.  
Sec. 14-30. - Transfer and purge of certificates of title. 
Upon the sale of a motor vehicle which is abandoned and removed and sold in accordance with the provisions of this article, the responsible law enforcement agency shall provide such documents as are within its control and as are required under C.R.S. 42-4-1611, the purchaser thereof may use such documents and otherwise comply with the provisions of the statute to obtain a new certificate of title to the purchased motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 10-1986, § 16-16.10, 7-18-86) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, C.R.S. 42-4-1810.  
Sec. 14-31. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to include or apply to the driver of any disabled motor vehicle who temporarily leaves such vehicle on the paved or improved and main-traveled portion of a street or alley right-of-way, subject, when applicable, to the emergency lighting requirements set forth in C.R.S. 42-4-227. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to include or apply to authorized emergency motor vehicles while such vehicles are actually and directly engaged in, coming from or going to an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 10-1986, § 16-16.12, 7-18-86) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 46-4-1812.  
Sec. 14-32. - Private towing and storage contracts. 
The city hereby exercises its power, pursuant to C.R.S. 42-4-1614 and directs the contracts, subject to the approval of city council, shall be negotiated and made with operators for the removal, storage, and disposal of abandoned motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 10-1986, § 16-16.13, 7-18-86) 
State Law reference— Local regulations, C.R.S. 46-4-1813.  
Sec. 14-33. - Junked, wrecked or inoperable vehicles on private property. 
(a)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
(1)  Antique vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle valued principally because of its early date of manufacture, design, historical interest or as a collector's item or licensed as an antique vehicle by the State of Colorado, or other state with similar license provisions. 
(2)  Inoperable vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle not capable of being promptly started and driven under its own power upon a street or highway. 
(3)  Property shall mean any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
(4)  Street or highway shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(5)  Vehicles shall mean a vehicle propelled by a source of power other than human power, which source is contained within or on the vehicle itself, such vehicle being designed to travel along the ground by the use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, but not be limited to: automobiles, airplanes, trucks, motorcycles, motor scooters, tractors, buggies and wagons. The term "vehicle" shall not include "antique vehicle," as defined in this section. 
(b)  Abandonment of vehicles. No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city, and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
(c)  Leaving of wrecked vehicles on street. No person shall leave any partially dismantled, wrecked, inoperable or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the city. 
(d)  Junked or inoperative vehicles and trailers on private property. The city hereby declares that the keeping of any wrecked, partially wrecked, junked or inoperative trailer or vehicle, or parts thereof on any property within the city is a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner of any such vehicle, trailer or parts, or any person who is in charge or in control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, to permit or allow any wrecked, partially wrecked, junked or inoperative vehicle, trailer or parts thereof to remain on such property. This section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle, trailer or parts in an enclosed building, in a storage place or depository maintained by the city for impounded vehicles, or completely concealed from public view by adequate fencing or landscaping. 
(e)  Investigation and notice of violation. The chief of police or the chief's designee is hereby authorized to investigate any vehicle left at any place within the city and which reasonably appears to be in violation of this section or lost, stolen or unclaimed. If after investigation there is probable cause for believing a violation of this section exists, the person making the investigation shall serve a notice of such violation upon the owner or occupant of the premises on which such vehicle is located, advising such person of the violation and ordering its removal within ten (10) days from the date of the notice. Such notice may be served by personal delivery or by mailing the same by certified or registered mail to the last known address of the owner or to the address of the premises, if occupied. No summons and complaint shall be issued for any violation of this section which occurs on private property until the expiration of ten (10) days from the date of the notice of violation. In the event that the owner of the vehicle or the person in possession of the premises on which such vehicle is located cannot be found for a period of fourteen (14) days, then in that event the summons and complaint alleging the violation of this section may be issued against the vehicle, describing the same by make, year and model. The chief of police or the chief's designee is hereby authorized to go on private property for the purpose of making an investigation for any violation of this section for the purpose of determining ownership and condition of any vehicle reasonably appearing to be in violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 8-1989, § 1, 7-19-89; Ord. No. 2-1990, § 3, 5-16-90; Ord. No. 17-1999, § 1, 10-6-99; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § I4, 10-3-18)  
Secs. 14-34—14-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WEEDS, NOXIOUS VEGETATION, TRASH, AND RUBBISH[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2-2015, § 1, adopted February 4, 2015 , amended art. III, §§ 14-51—14-57, in its entirety. Former art. III pertained to weeds, noxious vegetation, diseased and infested trees, trash and rubbish and was derived from Code 1964, §§ 12-1—12-4; Ord. No. 3-1989, §§ 2—4, adopted June 21, 1989; Ord. No. 1-1993, §§ 1—4, adopted February 3, 1993; Ord. No. 15-1995, §§ 1, 2, adopted September 20, 1995 and Ord. No. 19-1997, § 1, adopted December 17, 1997. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; subdivisions, Ch. 17; zoning, Ch. 21 
 
Sec. 14-51. - Removal required. 
(a)  It is made the duty of every owner, every tenant and every person in possession of any real property in the city to provide for and cause the removal of weeds, noxious vegetation, trash, and rubbish of all kinds from such property and along any street and sidewalk adjoining the same and to the middle of each public street, alley, or other public right-of-way. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, any plant identified on the State of Colorado Department of Agriculture Noxious Weed List A (subject to eradication wherever found), maintained by the Colorado Department of Agriculture pursuant to C.R.S. § 35-5.5-108 shall be considered noxious. Any plant identified on the State of Colorado Department of Agriculture Noxious Weed List B or C may be considered noxious if specifically identified as noxious by rule promulgated by the director of the city department of parks and recreation after public hearing. 
(c)  Except in areas of the city zoned Agricultural, where this definition shall not be applicable, any non-ornamental vegetation that has bloomed or reached a height of eight (8) inches shall be considered noxious for the purposes of this article whether or not it appears on the noxious weed list referenced above. No thistle or knapweed species contained on noxious weed list A, B, or C may be considered ornamental vegetation. 
(d)  It is hereby declared to be a nuisance to fail to comply with the provisions of this section 14-51. 
( Ord. No. 2-2015, § 1, 2-4-15 ; Ord. No. 4-2016 , § 1, 2-17-16)  
Sec. 14-52. - Failure to remove; notice; pre-abatement hearing, abatement. 
(a)  In the event of the failure of the owner, tenant or person in possession of any such real property in the city to remove the weeds, noxious vegetation, trash and rubbish, as provided in section 14-51, in addition to any citation that may issue pursuant to the provisions of section 14-56, the city manager or the city manager's designee shall give written notice of violation upon the property owner whose property is being kept contrary to the provisions of this article. Said notice shall specifically describe the nature of the violation and shall include a statement that if the weeds, noxious vegetation, trash or rubbish are not removed from the property within seven (7) days of the date of service, if service is by personal delivery, or within ten (10) days, if service is by mail and/or posting, the removal may be done by the city, and the whole cost thereof will be assessed against the property. The notice shall also advise the property owner that the owner may appeal the determination of a nuisance as contained in the notice of violation to the city manager by filing with the city manager a written request for hearing stating the reason for the appeal within that same time period provided for abatement. 
(b)  In the event a hearing is requested, the city manager shall set the hearing to be held within fourteen (14) days of the date of the request. The owner may appeal in person and with counsel, if so desired, and such hearing shall be duly recorded. After the hearing, the city manager shall make a determination in writing of whether the nuisance exists, and mail such determination to the property owner by regular mail at the owner's last known address, with a copy e-mailed in the event the owner has provided an email address. If a nuisance is found to exist, the property owner shall abate it within seven (7) days of the date of mailing of the city manager's written determination. The city manager's determination of any such appeal shall have no probative value in any court proceeding on any citation that may have been issued for the violation, except that, if the city manager determines a nuisance does not exist, any such court proceeding shall be dismissed. If the owner is dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager, the owner shall have the right to have the decision reviewed pursuant to Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, provided that such a review is sought within the time and in the manner provided by law. The decision of the city manager shall not be stayed pending any review except as provided by Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(c)  Service of the notice of violation may be obtained in one (1) or more of the following manners: 
(1)  By personally delivering a copy of the notice to the property owner, or the owner's agent, if known. 
(2)  By mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail, postage pre-paid, to the property owner. 
(3)  By posting the property conspicuously with the notice. In the event the property is posted, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed, by regular mail, postage pre-paid, to the property owner at such owner's last known address as contained in the records of the county assessor's office. 
"Property owner" shall be defined, for the purposes of section 14-52, as the individual listed, as of the date of the notice, in the records of the county assessor's office, as the current owner of the property. 
(d)  The cost reimbursable to the city under subpart (a) shall be increased by an additional amount, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), determined by the city manager or the city manager's designee, for costs of inspection, documentation, service of notice, and other incidental costs related to the enforcement of this section against an offending property owner. This assessment shall be a lien against each lot or tract of land from which the weeds, noxious vegetation, trash or rubbish were removed and shall have priority over all other liens, except general taxes and prior special assessments. 
( Ord. No. 2-2015, § 1, 2-4-15 )  
Sec. 14-53. - Notice of assessment for abatement; appeal. 
(a)  The city manager or the city manager's designee shall cause a written notice of the assessment for costs of abatement to be mailed by certified mail to the owner of the property, at the owner's last address shown by the county assessor's records. Such notice shall state the amount assessed, the description and street address of the property assessed and that the owner may, within fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice, request in writing a hearing before the city manager of the owner's objections to the assessment. 
(b)  In the event such a hearing is requested, the city manager shall schedule the same to be held within fourteen (14) days of the request for a hearing. The objector may appeal in person and with counsel, if so desired, and such hearing shall be duly recorded. The city manger shall either modify, affirm, or reverse such assessment after the hearing. Any owner of real estate dissatisfied with the decision of city manager shall have the right to have the decision reviewed pursuant to Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, provided that such a review is sought within the time and in the manner provided by law. 
( Ord. No. 2-2015, § 1, 2-4-15 )  
Sec. 14-54. - Failure to pay final assessment; collection. 
In case such final assessment is not paid within thirty (30) days after the same has been assessed, or within thirty (30) days after the final decision by the city manager after the hearing referenced above, whichever occurs later, the city clerk shall certify the amount of the assessment to the county officer having custody of the tax list, for placement of the assessment upon the tax list for the current or next upcoming year, and such officer shall thereafter collect the same in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with an additional ten (10) percent administrative processing fee thereon; and all the laws of the state for the assessment and collection of the general taxes, including the laws for the sale of property for taxes and redemption thereof, apply to and have full force and effect for the collection of all such assessments. Any amount so collected shall be remitted to the city finance director by the county officer who is collecting. 
( Ord. No. 2-2015, § 1, 2-4-15 )  
Sec. 14-55. - Hazardous trees, shrubs, and plants 
(a)  It is hereby declared a nuisance to keep, harbor or fail to abate the adverse condition of a hazardous tree, shrub or other plant within the city. It is hereby made the duty of every owner, every tenant and every person in possession of any real property in the city to remove or abate the adverse condition of a hazardous tree, shrub or other plant from his, her or its private property and from along any public way adjoining the same and to the middle of each public right-of-way contiguous thereto. 
(b)  "Hazardous tree, shrub or other plant," as used herein, shall mean: 
(1)  Any tree, plant or shrub that is diseased, infected, infested with insects, parasites or fungus, when such disease, infection or infested condition may reasonably be expected to affect other healthy trees, plants or shrubs within the city; and 
(2)  Any tree, shrub or plant that is dead or dying, or that contains dead or dying limbs which may pose a danger to the life, health or property of any person, when such hazardous tree, shrub or plant is located on the premises of such owner, tenant and possessor, or within the adjacent, contiguous public way up to the center of said contiguous public way. 
(c)  It is hereby declared a nuisance for an owner or occupant of private property to allow any branches of trees, shrubs, bushes or any other plant material growing on such property to: 
(1)  Overhang streets or alleys in such a manner that the branches interfere with the safe and unobstructed movement of vehicles on any street or alley, or overhang the first fourteen (14) feet of space above any street or alley; 
(2)  Encroach upon any public sidewalk or overhang the first eight (8) feet of space above any public sidewalk; 
(3)  Overhang, or encroach into public rights-of-way in such a manner as to visually obstruct motorists' views of traffic signs, traffic signals or oncoming traffic; or 
(4)  Become overgrown and unkempt as to be a nuisance to neighboring property owners. 
( Ord. No. 2-2015, § 1, 2-4-15 )  
Sec. 14-56. - Abatement. 
It is hereby declared unlawful to fail to abate a nuisance declared pursuant to this article. Such failure shall be subject to the procedure and charges set forth in sections 14-52, 14-53, and 14-54, and shall be subject to the penalties provided generally for offenses in this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2-2015, § 1, 2-4-15 )  
Sec. 14-57. - Director authorized to inspect. 
The city manager or the city manager's designee is hereby authorized, with reasonable cause, to enter in and upon private property within the city to inspect any trees, shrubs, plants, trash, rubbish, or parts thereof, and to inspect any dead plant materials, or parts thereof, to ascertain the condition of such trees, shrubs, plants, rubbish and trash, and dead plant materials or parts thereof, to determine whether or not there exists a nuisance, as declared in this article. 
( Ord. No. 2-2015, § 1, 2-4-15 )  
Secs. 14-58—14-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - UNREASONABLE NOISE 
 
Sec. 14-71. - Unreasonable noise prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions: The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
(1)  Unreasonable noise shall mean any sound of such level and duration as to be or tend to be injurious to human health or welfare, or which would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, but excludes all aspects of the employer-employee relationship concerning health and safety hazards within the confines of a place of employment. 
(2)  Continuous shall mean continuing for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. 
(b)  With regard to the operation of motor vehicles, and without limiting the generality of subsection (a)(1) above, unreasonable noise shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The continuous or repeated sounding of any horn or signal device of a motor vehicle, except as a danger signal. 
(2)  The operation of any motor vehicle in a manner which causes excessive noise as a result of an unlawful, defective or modified exhaust system, or as a result of unnecessary rapid acceleration, deceleration, revving the engine or tire squeal. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any unreasonable noise; and no person shall knowingly permit such noise upon any premises or in or upon any motor vehicle owned or possessed by such person or under such person's control or operation. 
(d)  Law enforcement officers are empowered to make a prima facie determination as to whether a noise is unreasonable, which determination may be based upon, but need not be limited to, a consideration of the following factors: 
(1)  The time of day; 
(2)  The size of any gathering of persons creating or contributing to the noise; 
(3)  The presence or absence of noise amplification equipment; and 
(4)  Any other factors tending to show the magnitude and/or disruptive effect of the noise. 
(e)  In any prosecution charging a violation of this section, proof that the owner or tenant of the premises upon which the unreasonable noise occurred was present at the time of the violation shall constitute prima facie evidence that such person was in control of the premises and knowingly permitted the violation to occur. 
(f)  This section 14-71 shall not apply to law enforcement officers or emergency responders in the performance of their duty. 
(Ord. No. 8-2009, § 1, 8-5-09)  
Chapter 15 - PERSONNEL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Department of personnel, art. XIII; personnel board, art. XIII, § 3. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; duties of the city attorney and municipal judge, § 2-36; animal control enforcement personnel, § 3-8; fire department, § 7-16 et seq.; municipal judge, § 13-1. 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Personnel director. 
Pursuant to Article XIII, section 1 of the Charter, the head of the department of personnel is the personnel director, who shall be the city manager. The personnel director has the powers and duties specified in said section of the Charter. 
(Code 1964, § 2-51) 
Charter reference— Classified and unclassified service, art. XIII, § 5.  
Sec. 15-2. - Personnel rules and regulations and pay plan for city officers and employees. 
The personnel rules and regulations and salaries and compensation of the officers and employees of the city are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Cross reference— Copies to be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, § 1-16.  
Sec. 15-3. - Monthly payroll period. 
The annual salaries of the employees and officers of the city shall be prorated and paid every two (2) weeks, except those of the city council, mayor, attorneys, and judges, whose salaries shall be payable monthly. 
(Code 1964, § 2-35; Ord. No. 9-2016 , § 1, 4-20-16)  
Sec. 15-4. - Certain matters relating to compensation of city employees to be governed by personnel regulations. 
The following matters relating to compensation of city employees shall be governed by and in accordance with the personnel regulations of the city: 
(1)  Overtime compensation; 
(2)  Cash awards to employees; 
(3)  Pay in lieu of vacation time; 
(4)  Clothing allowances; 
(5)  Payment of leave upon death of employee; 
(6)  Pay in lieu of sick leave at termination of employment or death; and 
(7)  Continuation of limited salary after on-the-job injuries. 
(Code 1964, § 2-36)  
Sec. 15-5. - Elected or appointed officials retirement plan participation. 
Elected or appointed officials of the City of Alamosa shall, within thirty (30) days after taking office, elect to become a member of the Public Employee Retirement Association pursuant to Section 24-51-101 et seq. (10B C.R.S. 1988), or in default thereof, shall subject any and all compensation received as a result of performance of his or her official duties to the FICA withholding requirements established under the Social Security Act. 
(Ord. No. 13-1991, § 1, 12-18-91) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-1991, § 1, adopted December 18, 1991, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as § 15-5 was at the discretion of the editor. The provisions of this section shall take effect January 1, 1992. 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-36 et seq.  
Chapter 16 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Public works and improvements, art. XV; department of parks and recreation, art. XVI; public library, art. XVII. 
Cross reference— Comprehensive plan adopted, § 2-131; animals, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; occupation of streets by builders restricted, § 4-2; house numbering required, § 4-61; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; burning material in city restricted, § 7-2; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; flammable liquid storage tanks prohibited in public streets, etc., except by special permission of city council, § 7-40(b); damage to public or private trees by animals prohibited, § 11-97; mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks, Ch. 12; street requirements in mobile home parks, § 12-38; removal of weeds, noxious vegetation, trash and rubbish required, § 14-51; subdivisions, Ch. 17; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 20; zoning, Ch. 21; off-street parking and loading requirements, § 21-171 et seq. 
State Law reference— Public improvements, C.R.S. 31-25-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Standard construction specifications—Authority to adopt. 
(a)  The director of the department of public works is hereby authorized to adopt, and amend as from time to time as the director deems appropriate, Standard Construction Specifications that shall govern the maintenance and construction of all streets, sidewalks, storm sewers, waterlines and sanitary sewers and other public ways, places and utilities located or to be located in the city. A copy of the most recent Standard Construction Specifications shall be maintained on the city's website and in the department of public works, and shall be made available to members of the public at a charge no greater than necessary to cover costs of copying. 
(b)  All construction work by any person in and of any street, sidewalk, storm sewer, waterline, sanitary sewer, or other public way, place, or utility shall be in conformance with the Standard Construction Specifications adopted by the director of the department of public works. The landowner shall have a duty to remove all nonconforming construction which may have occurred in violation of this chapter within three (3) days after being notified by the city of the nonconformance. If the landowner fails to cause such removal within three (3) days, the city shall remove the same, and the landowner shall be responsible for the actual costs to the city of such removal. Such costs shall be assessed and recovered in the manner provided by sections 14-53 and 14-54. 
(c)  Any notice required to be given by this section shall be in writing and shall be mailed to the owner or lessee by ordinary first-class or certified mail at such owner's or lessee's address as shown by the assessor's records, and such notice shall be effective upon mailing. 
(Ord. No. 1-1987, 1-17-86; Ord. No. 19-2017 , § 1, 8-2-17)  
Sec. 16-2. - Excavations in streets, alleys, public grounds; permit required; hindering, obstructing repair; penalty for violation. 
No person shall dig any hole, ditch or drain, or make any excavation in or otherwise tear up or destroy in any manner or for any purpose any public street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter or other public ground without first obtaining a permit therefor from the office of the city clerk. No such permit shall be issued without a prior application for such permit being made on forms to be provided by the city clerk, and any permits issued for excavation shall be in accordance with those standards and provisions which shall be promulgated and revised by the director of public works, from time to time, and which shall be effective upon approval by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 17-16; Ord. No. 4-1987, § 1, 1-15-87) 
Cross reference— Codes to be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, § 1-16.  
Sec. 16-3. - Littering streets with tacks, etc. 
It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or place in any street or alley within the city any nails, tacks, crockery, scrap iron, glass, tin, wire or other article liable to cause the puncture of the tires of bicycles, tricycles, motorcycles or automobiles and other vehicles having rubber tires. 
(Code 1964, § 17-40)  
Secs. 16-4—16-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Riding or driving animals on sidewalks prohibited, § 3-11; removal of animal wastes from sidewalks required, § 3-75. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-21. - Snow and ice removal—Required; time. 
It shall be the duty of all persons within the corporate limits of the city to keep the sidewalks in front of and adjacent to the tenements and grounds occupied by them clear of snow and ice, and after any fall of snow such person shall remove the same from the sidewalks within twenty-four (24) hours after such snowfall. 
(Code 1964, § 17-57)  
Sec. 16-22. - Same—Responsibility in multiple-occupancy. 
Wherever houses or other buildings shall be occupied by several tenants, it shall be the duty of the person or persons occupying the story or stories nearest the sidewalks to clean the snow and ice from the same. 
(Code 1964, § 17-58)  
Sec. 16-23. - Same—Responsibility for vacant premises. 
Where any premises, or parts of premises, are not occupied in any manner, it shall be the duty of the owner thereof to comply with the requirements of sections 16-21, 16-22 and 16-24. 
(Code 1964, § 17-59)  
Sec. 16-24. - Same—Nonresident owners. 
If the owner of any such premises so unoccupied shall be a nonresident of the city or absent from the city, any resident agent who shall have charge of such premises shall comply with the requirements of sections 16-21 through 16-23. 
(Code 1964, § 17-60)  
Secs. 16-25—16-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 16-36. - Construction material designated. 
Except as otherwise permitted by the city council upon such terms and conditions as it may set, all sidewalks hereafter constructed in front or abutting upon any lot, lots or land in the city shall be made of concrete and constructed in accordance with section 16-1. 
(Code 1964, § 18-11)  
Sec. 16-37. - Grades, supervision. 
All walks, curbs and gutters shall conform to established grade to be furnished by the city manager or the city engineer and shall be constructed under the supervision of such manager or engineer or other inspector appointed by the city council who shall have power to compel a strict compliance with the terms and specifications of the City of Alamosa Standard Construction Specifications. 
(Code 1964, § 18-14; Ord. No. 19-2017 , § 2, 8-2-17)  
Sec. 16-38. - Order to construct, repair, etc.; notice to owner; performance by city. 
The city council shall from time to time as it shall deem necessary, order by resolution the condemnation, construction, building, repairing or extension of sidewalk or sidewalks, on any street, streets, avenue or avenues or portion thereof, and when so ordered to be extended, built or repaired, the same shall be constructed in manner and form provided by this article, and it shall be the duty of the city council to cause notice to be given the owner or owners of such lot, lots or land in front of where such sidewalk is to be extended, constructed, built or repaired. Such notice shall estimate the dimensions of the walk to be extended, constructed, built or repaired, and a description of the lot, lots or lands where it is to be made, and shall be served upon the owner of such lot, lots or lands fifteen (15) days before the time when the construction, extension or repairing of such walk is to be commenced, if served within the city. If the owner of such lot, lots or lands cannot be found within the city, then such owner shall have thirty (30) days' notice, which shall be sent to the owner by registered letter addressed to such owner's last known post office address, and shall also be served upon the occupant of the land if the land is occupied. At the expiration of such fifteen (15) and thirty (30) days' notice respectively, if such sidewalk shall not have been extended, built, constructed or repaired according to the provisions of this article by the owner or owners, the city council shall cause such sidewalk to be made, extended, constructed or repaired at the expense of the owner of such lot, lots or lands, and the same shall be charged and be a charge and lien upon the lot, lots or lands in front of which such walk or walks are made, to be collected as provided by law. 
(Code 1964, § 18-15; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § J1, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 16-39. - Assessment of cost—Hearing on objections. 
Whenever a sidewalk has been so constructed, extended or repaired, the city council shall by resolution assess the cost of such extension, construction or repairing of such sidewalk to the lot, lots or lands abutting thereon. After such assessment has been made by the city council, the city clerk shall give the owner of such lot, lots or lands ten (10) days' written notice of the same, which notice shall be served personally upon such owner by the chief of police if such owner can be found within the city, and shall also be published in a newspaper published in the city, and which notice shall contain the cost of such improvement and the description of the lot, lots or lands upon which are so assessed and date at which a special or regular meeting of the city council will be held and request the owner of such lot, lots or lands to appear before the city council at such time for the purpose of making such objections as such owner may have to the justness and correction of the amount assessed. If the owner cannot be found within the city, such notice shall be further served upon such owner by sending a copy of such notice by registered letter addressed to his or her last known post office address. 
(Code 1964, § 18-16; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § J2, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 16-40. - Same—Collection. 
If the charges shall not be paid by the owner within thirty (30) days after such time of hearing provided for in the last preceding section, then the city clerk shall certify the amount of the charge and assessments within ten (10) percent of the amount, as penalty therein, to the assessor or county treasurer, or other officer of the county then having charge and custody of the county tax list, to be placed upon the tax list for the current year and to be collected as other taxes are collected and as provided by law. 
(Code 1964, § 18-17)  
Sec. 16-41. - Maintenance by abutting property owner, liability of owner for damages. 
All sidewalks shall be kept in good repair by the abutting property owners, and if through the failure, neglect or refusal of any such property owner to keep the sidewalk in front of such owner's premises or property in good repair and any person shall be injured and the city incur any liability therefor, the city shall have a right to recover from such property owner the amount of any judgment and costs it may be required to pay for such failure or negligence. 
(Code 1964, § 18-18; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § J3, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 16-42. - When sidewalks to be added or upgraded. 
(a)  With respect to a parcel of property that otherwise under this chapter is required to have or maintain a sidewalk, but for whatever reason is legally not in compliance with such requirement, upon the making of improvements to the abutting property by construction having a value equal to or greater than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), the property owner shall cause the initial construction, repair or replacement of sidewalks along the public streets, as otherwise required in this chapter. 
(b)  Provision (a) of this section shall not be a defense to a violation of the requirement to establish or maintain sidewalks as otherwise required in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-2001, § 1, 12-19-01)  
Secs. 16-43—16-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OBSTRUCTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances, Ch. 14. 
 
Sec. 16-56. - Buildings, posts, etc.; declaration of nuisance; notice to remove. 
(a)  Unless erected by the city or being maintained pursuant to a written variance granted as provided in subsection (b) below, no buildings, posts, fences or structures of any kind shall be erected, maintained or permitted to remain in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other property of the city. Every such building, post, fence or structure so erected, maintained or permitted to remain as aforesaid is hereby declared to be a nuisance to be abated by removal or demolition by the owner of such structure or improvement or the person who has erected or maintains the same. Such removal or demolition shall be accomplished by such party within twenty (20) days after the giving of notice of such requirement by the city building inspector. If such removal or demolition is not completed within such period of time, the city shall have the right to cause such removal or demolition to be accomplished and the cost thereof to be assessed against the adjoining land of such owner or person who has caused the same to be erected or maintained, in accordance with the provisions of the uniform building code adopted in section 4-21. 
(b)  As to any such buildings, posts, fences or other structures now existing and being maintained on city property, the owner thereof or person maintaining the same may petition the board of zoning adjustment for a variance authorizing the continuance of such encroachment. Such board shall have the power to grant a variance in the form of a revocable permit for such encroachment which permit shall be revocable by the city by its city council at any time upon sixty (60) days' notice being given to the permit holder, such notice to be given in the same manner as provided in paragraph (a) above. 
(c)  The procedure for application for a variance under this section and the board's procedure in acting upon any such application shall be the same as the regular procedure provided for variances as in other cases. The board of zoning adjustments shall have the power to grant variances under this section only where all of the following conditions are found to exist: 
(1)  The variance would not authorize any use other than a use enumerated as a use by right in the district; 
(2)  That an unnecessary hardship to the owner would occur if the provisions of subsection (a) above were literally followed; 
(3)  That the structure for which a variance is sought was not constructed by the applicant with knowledge that it was in violation of applicable ordinances; and 
(4)  That the variance would not injure the value or use of surrounding area properties or prevent reasonable access to or use of adjacent city properties. 
(Code 1964, § 18-19)  
Sec. 16-57. - Merchandise, etc.—Distance of projecting allowed. 
No person shall place upon or suffer to be placed upon or keep upon any sidewalk in the city any goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or description for display, sale, trade or use, unless the same is located within forty-eight (48) inches from the exterior building line of the place of business offering such goods, wares, or merchandise for sale, except during organized events by specific groups who have obtained city permission. In all cases, a pathway of not less than forty-eight (48) inches shall be maintained on the sidewalk at all times. 
(Code 1964, § 18-20; Ord. No. 5-2004, § 1, 10-6-04)  
Sec. 16-58. - Same—Pathway required, time allowed. 
No person receiving or delivering goods, wares or merchandise in the city shall place or keep upon, or suffer to be placed or kept upon, any sidewalk of the city any goods, wares or merchandise which such person may be receiving or delivering without leaving a passageway clear upon such sidewalk where such goods may be, at least three (3) feet wide for the use of foot passengers; and no person or persons receiving or delivering such goods shall suffer the same to be or remain on such sidewalk, subject, nevertheless, to the foregoing restrictions, for a longer period than twelve (12) hours. 
(Code 1964, § 18-21; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § J4, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 16-59. - Auctions, permission required. 
Any person who shall sell, or attempt to sell, or shall cry for sale, at public auction in the city, without a written permission from the mayor, and then only in the streets and places to be designated in such permission, any goods, chattels or personal property whatever, to any person upon the sidewalks or streets within the city, so as to collect a crowd or body of people upon the sidewalks or streets whereby the free passage thereof of any person is prevented or hindered, shall be deemed guilty as the author of a nuisance and obstructing the sidewalks and streets. 
(Code 1964, § 18-22)  
Secs. 16-60—16-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CEMETERIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal cemeteries, C.R.S. 31-25-701 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16-76. - Designation, setting apart, purpose. 
The Alamosa Municipal Cemetery which was conveyed to the city pursuant to the resolution of the city council adopted May 2, 1923, is hereby designated as the Alamosa Municipal Cemetery and is hereby set apart and shall be maintained forever for the burial of the dead. 
(Code 1964, § 6-1)  
Sec. 16-77. - Adoption of map. 
The map prepared and certified by the city engineer under date of August 5, 1987 which is on file in the city clerk's office is hereby accepted and adopted as the official map for the Alamosa Municipal Cemetery. 
(Code 1964, § 6-2; Ord. No. 7, 1987, § 1, 8-19-87)  
Sec. 16-78. - Cemetery interment agreements; purchase of spaces. 
Upon payment to the city of the full purchase price of the interment rights to a lot or niche, a cemetery interment agreement executed by the city clerk or designated representative shall be delivered to the purchaser. The interment agreement shall contain a description of the space and its purchase price, and a designation of the person to be buried there. 
(Code 1964, § 6-3; Ord. No. 4, 2011, § 1, 3-16-11)  
Sec. 16-79. - Perpetual care. 
All interment rights to lots in the Alamosa Municipal Cemetery shall be sold with endowment for perpetual care only and at prices set by city council resolution. 
(Code 1964, § 6-4; Ord. No. 4, 2011, § 2, 3-16-11)  
Sec. 16-80. - Fund, establishment, control, use. 
There is hereby created a fund which is designated as "Alamosa Cemetery Endowment Fund." Such fund shall be kept by the trustee thereof hereinafter provided, apart from all other funds of the city and shall be invested by the trustee in such securities as the city council shall by resolution direct or approve. The director of finance is hereby designated as the trustee of such funds. All monies and securities at any time in such funds shall be under the joint control and custody of the trustee, the mayor and the city clerk, who shall jointly and severally be personally liable for the full and faithful care and accounting for all monies and securities at any time in such funds. Such fund shall be used only for the endowment for perpetual care of lots or parcels of grounds in the cemetery. 
(Code 1964, § 6-5)  
Sec. 16-81. - Sales and fees. 
(a)  Setting prices and fees. All prices for the sale of interment rights to cemetery spaces and all fees for openings, closings, disinterments, and all other prices, fees and charges shall be set by city council resolution and reviewed annually. Adjustments may be made in such prices, fees and charges, following review, by city council resolution. 
(b)  Use of monies received. All amounts received by the city from the sale of interment rights to plots and columbarium niches shall be paid into and used as a part of the cemetery endowment fund of the city. All amounts received by the city for the opening and closing of graves shall be paid into and used as a part of the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 6-6; Ord. No. 7-2002, §§ 1—5, 4-3-02; Ord. No. 4, 2011, § 3, 3-16-11)  
Sec. 16-82. - Use conditions. 
Interment rights to burial lots or columbarium niches in the cemetery shall be sold subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Only one (1) memorial shall be erected on any single grave lot or any full size lot; 
(2)  No foot markers shall be erected; 
(3)  No corner markers shall be erected to extend aboveground; 
(4)  There shall be no coping or other lot or grave enclosures; 
(5)  The interment rights in any lot or space may not be resold, nor may the designated beneficiary of the space set forth in the interment agreement be changed. Interment rights may be transferred to heirs or devisees. A person wishing to relinquish his or her interment rights to a lot must present the parks department with his or her cemetery deed or interment agreement. The original owner of the interment rights to the lot, or, if the owner is deceased or unable to be found, the designated beneficiary of the space, shall be reimbursed the amount originally paid therefor; 
(6)  Mausoleums or vaults shall be erected only under special permit from the city council; 
(7)  The city shall not be liable for damages for injury from mowing the lawn about any monument or marker that is not of rough granite base for a distance of at least four (4) inches aboveground; 
(8)  No interment or interment service will be allowed on Sundays or on city observed holidays. Closure dates will be posted and local funeral homes notified of the dates. Saturday interments will require additional fees due to overtime. 
(Code 1964, § 6-8; Ord. No. 4, 2011, § 4, 3-16-11)  
Sec. 16-83. - Rules and regulations, may be promulgated. 
The city council shall have power to make such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article, fixing the charge for the digging and filling of graves and the service of the employees of the cemetery incident to burial and for the disinterment and removal or reburial of bodies and for the care, control, management, beautification, ornamentation and preservation of the cemetery. 
(Code 1964, § 6-9)  
Sec. 16-84. - Burial of dead human bodies limited to cemeteries. 
Dead human bodies, defined as lifeless human bodies or parts of bodies or bones thereof from the state of which it reasonably may be concluded that death recently occurred, may not be buried on any property within the city other than property validly permitted and operated as a cemetery. It is unlawful for any person, whether as owner, tenant, licensee, permittee, occupant of any property within the city to bury or to permit the burial of dead human bodies anywhere other than in a cemetery validly permitted and operating. Nothing about this section prohibits the burial of properly cremated human remains on property within the city. 
( Ord. No. 10-2015, § 1, 7-15-15 )  
Secs. 16-85—16-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2008, § 2, adopted Nov. 5, 2008, repealed Art. V, §§ 16-100—16-103, which pertained to arboreal advisory committee and derived from Ord. No. 3-1989, § 5, adopted June 21, 1989; Ord. No. 08-2007, § 1, adopted May 16, 2007. 
 
Secs. 16-100—16-200. - Reserved.  
Chapter 18 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; director of finance, § 2-101 et seq.; financial matters, § 2-117 et seq.; zoning, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Taxation, C.R.S. 31-20-101 et seq., 39-1-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RETAIL SALES AND USE TAX[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Sales and use tax, C.R.S. 29-2-101 et seq.; 39-26-101 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-16. - Words and phrases defined. 
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the following meaning: 
Automotive vehicle means any vehicle or device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, or any device used or designed for aviation or flight in the air. Automotive vehicle includes, but is not limited to, motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers, or mobile homes. Automotive vehicle shall not include devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Business means all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, direct or indirect. 
Charitable organization means any entity which: (1) has been certified as a nonprofit organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and (2) is an organization which exclusively, and in a manner consistent with existing laws and for the benefit of an indefinite number of persons or animals, freely and voluntarily ministers to the physical, mental, or spiritual needs of persons or animals, and thereby lessens the burden of government. 
City means the municipality of Alamosa, Colorado. 
Commercial shipping materials means materials that do not become part of the finished product to the purchaser which are used exclusively in the shipping process. Commercial shipping materials include but are not limited to containers, labels, pallets, banding material and fasteners, shipping cases, shrink wrap, bubble wrap or other forms of binding, padding or protection. 
Community organization means a nonprofit entity organized and operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare, primarily engaged in promoting the common good and general welfare of the community, so long as: 
(1)  No part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual; 
(2)  No substantial part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence legislation; and 
(3)  Which does not participate in, or intervene in (including the publishing or distributing of statements), any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office. 
Construction materials means tangible personal property which, when combined with other tangible personal property, loses its identity to become an integral and inseparable part of a structure or project including public and private improvements. Construction materials include, but are not limited to, such things as: asphalt, bricks, builders' hardware, caulking material, cement, concrete, conduit, electric wiring and connections, fireplace inserts, electrical heating and cooling equipment, flooring, glass, gravel, insulation, lath, lead, lime, lumber, macadam, millwork, mortar, oil, paint, piping, pipe valves and pipe fittings, plaster, plumbing fixtures, putty, reinforcing mesh, road base, roofing, sand, sanitary sewer pipe, sheet metal, site lighting, steel, stone, stucco, tile, trees, shrubs and other landscaping materials, wall board, wall coping, wallpaper, weather stripping, wire netting and screen, water mains and meters, and wood preserver. The above materials, when used for forms, or other items which do not remain as an integral and inseparable part of completed structure or project are not construction materials. 
Consumer means any person in the city who purchases, uses, stores, distributes or otherwise consumes tangible personal property or taxable services, purchased from sources inside or outside the city. 
Contractor means any person who shall build, construct, reconstruct, alter, expand, modify, or improve any building, dwelling, structure, infrastructure, or other improvement to real property for another party pursuant to an agreement. For purposes of this definition, contractor also includes subcontractor. 
Cover charge means a charge paid to a club or similar entertainment establishment which may, or may not, entitle the patron paying such charge to receive tangible personal property, such as food and/or beverages. 
Engaged in business in the city means performing or providing services or selling, leasing, renting, delivering or installing tangible personal property for storage, use or consumption, within the city. Engaged in business in the city includes, but is not limited to, any one (1) of the following activities by a person: 
(1)  Directly, indirectly, or by a subsidiary maintains a building, store, office, salesroom, warehouse, or other place of business within the taxing jurisdiction; 
(2)  Sends one (1) or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons into the taxing jurisdiction to solicit business or to install, assemble, repair, service, or assist in the use of its products, or for demonstration or other reasons; 
(3)  Maintains one or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons on duty at a location within the taxing jurisdiction; 
(4)  Owns, leases, rents or otherwise exercises control over real or personal property within the taxing jurisdiction; or 
(5)  Makes more than one delivery into the taxing jurisdiction within a twelve (12) month period by any means other than a common carrier. 
Farm closeout sale means full and final disposition of all tangible personal property previously used by a farmer or rancher in farming or ranching operations which are being abandoned. 
Farm equipment means any farm tractor, as defined in Section 42-1-102(33), C.R.S., any implement of husbandry, as defined in Section 42-1-102(44), C.R.S., and irrigation equipment having a per unit purchase price of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Farm equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, attachments and bailing wire, binders twine and surface wrap used primarily and directly in any farm operation. Farm equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, parts that are used in the repair or maintenance of the farm equipment described in this paragraph, all shipping pallets, crates, or aids paid for by a farm operation, and aircraft designed or adapted to undertake agricultural applications. Farm equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, dairy equipment. Except for shipping pallets, crates or aids used in the transfer or shipping of agricultural products, farm equipment does not include: 
(1)  Vehicles subject to the registration requirements of Section 42-3-103, C.R.S., regardless of the purpose for which such vehicles are used; 
(2)  Machinery, equipment, materials, and supplies used in a manner that is incidental to a farm operation; 
(3)  Maintenance and janitorial equipment and supplies; and 
(4)  Tangible personal property used in any activity other than farming, such as office equipment and supplies and equipment and supplies used in the sale or distribution of farm products, research, or transportation. 
Farm Operation means the production of any of the following products for profit, including, but not limited to, a business that hires out to produce or harvest such products: 
(1)  Agricultural, viticultural, fruit, and vegetable products; 
(2)  Livestock; 
(3)  Milk; 
(4)  Honey; and 
(5)  Poultry and eggs. 
Finance director means the finance director of the City of Alamosa, Colorado, or such other person designated by the city; finance director shall also include such person's designee. 
Garage sales means sales of tangible personal property, except automotive vehicles, occurring at the residence of the seller, where the property to be sold was originally purchased for use by members of the household where such sale is being conducted. The term includes, but is not limited to, yard sales, estate sales, and block sales. 
Gross sales means the total amount received in money, credit, property or other consideration valued in money for all sales, leases, or rentals of tangible personal property or services. 
License means a City of Alamosa sales and/or use tax license. 
Lodging services means the furnishing of rooms or accommodations by any persons, partnership, association, corporation, estate, representative capacity or any other combination of individuals by whatever name known to a person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room or space in a hotel, inn, bed and breakfast, residence, apartment hotel, lodging house, motor hotel, guest house, guest ranch, recreational vehicle (RV) Park; manufactured home park or similar establishment, for a period of less than thirty (30) days under any concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Manufacturing means the operation or performance of an integrated series of operations which places a product, article, substance, commodity, or other tangible personal property in a form, composition or character different from that in which it was acquired whether for sale or for use by a manufacturer. The change in form, composition or character must result in a different product having a distinctive name, character or use from the raw or prepared materials. 
Motor fuel means gasoline, casing head or natural gasoline, benzol, benzene and naphtha, gasohol and any other liquid prepared, advertised, offered for sale, sold for use or used or commercially usable in internal combustion engines for the generation of power for the propulsion of motor vehicles upon the public highways. The term does not include fuel used for the propulsion or drawing of aircraft or railroad cars or railroad locomotives. 
Newspaper means a publication, printed on newsprint, intended for general circulation, and published regularly at short intervals, containing information and editorials on current events and news of general interest. The term newspaper does not include: magazines, trade publications or journals, credit bulletins, advertising inserts, circulars, directories, maps, racing programs, reprints, newspaper clipping and mailing services or listings, publications that include an updating or revision service, or books or pocket editions of books. 
Online garage sales means sales of tangible personal property, except automotive vehicles, occurring online, where the property to be sold was originally purchased for use by the seller or members of the seller's household. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by court or otherwise, or any group or combination acting as a unit. 
Preprinted newspaper supplements shall mean inserts, attachments or supplements circulated in newspapers that: (1) are primarily devoted to advertising; and (2) the distribution, insertion, or attachment of which is commonly paid for by the advertiser. 
Prescription drugs for animals means a drug which, prior to being dispensed or delivered, is required by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. Sect. 301, et. seq., as amended, to state at a minimum the symbol "Rx Only", and is dispensed in accordance with any order in writing, dated and signed by a licensed veterinarian specifying the animal for which the medicine or drug is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. 
Prescription drugs for humans means a drug which, prior to being dispensed or delivered, is required by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. Sect. 301, et. seq., as amended, to state at a minimum the symbol "Rx Only", and is dispensed in accordance with any written or electronic order dated and signed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, or given orally by a practitioner and immediately reduced to writing by the pharmacist, assistant pharmacist, or pharmacy intern, specifying the name and any required information of the patient for whom the medicine, drug or poison is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. 
Price or purchase price means the aggregate value measured in currency paid or delivered or promised to be paid or delivered in consummation of a sale, without any discount from the price on account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, and exclusive of any direct tax imposed by the federal government or by this article, and, in the case of all retail sales involving the exchange of property, also exclusive of the fair market value of the property exchanged at the same time and place of the exchange, if: (1) Such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business, or (2) Such exchanged property is a vehicle and is exchanged for another vehicle and both vehicles are subject to licensing, registration, or certification under the laws of this state, including, but not limited to, vehicles operating upon public highways, off-highway recreation vehicles, watercraft, and aircraft. Any money or other consideration paid over and above the value of the exchanged property is subject to tax. 
Price or purchase price includes: 
(1)  The amount of money received or due in cash and credits. 
(2)  Property at fair market value taken in exchange but not for resale in the usual course of the retailer's business. 
(3)  Any consideration valued in money, whereby the manufacturer or someone else reimburses the retailer for part of the purchase price and other media of exchange. 
(4)  The total price charged on credit sales including finance charges which are not separately stated at the time of sale. An amount charged as interest on the unpaid balance of the purchase price is not part of the purchase price unless the amount added to the purchase price is included in the principal amount of a promissory note; except the interest or carrying charge set out separately from the unpaid balance of the purchase price on the face of the note is not part of the purchase price. An amount charged for insurance on the property sold and separately stated at the time of sale is not part of the purchase price. 
(5)  Installation, applying, remodeling or repairing the property, delivery and wheeling-in charges included in the purchase price and not separately stated. 
(6)  Transportation and other charges to effect delivery of tangible personal property to the purchaser. 
(7)  Indirect federal manufacturers' excise taxes, such as taxes on automobiles, tires and floor stock. 
(8)  The gross purchase price of articles sold after manufacturing or after having been made to order, including the gross value of all the materials used, labor and service performed and the profit thereon. 
Price or purchase price shall not include: 
(1)  Any sales or use tax imposed by the State of Colorado or by any political subdivision thereof. 
(2)  The fair market value of property exchanged if such property is to be sold thereafter in the retailers' usual course of business. This is not limited to exchanges in Colorado. Out of state trade-ins are an allowable adjustment to the purchase price. 
(3)  Discounts from the original price if such discount and the corresponding decrease in sales tax due is actually passed on to the purchaser, and the seller is not reimbursed for the discount by the manufacturer or someone else. An anticipated discount to be allowed for payment on or before a given date is not an allowable adjustment to the price in reporting gross sales. 
Prosthetic devices for humans means any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for human use which replaces a body part or aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed, manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular patient; and is prescribed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts. Prosthetic devices include, but are not limited to, prescribed auditory, ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental, or orthopedic devices or appliances, and oxygen concentrators with related accessories. 
Purchase or sale means the acquisition for any consideration by any person of tangible personal property, other taxable products or taxable services that are purchased, leased, rented, sold, used, stored, distributed, or consumed. These terms include capital leases, installment and credit sales, and property and services acquired by: 
(1)  Transfer, either conditionally or absolutely, of title or possession or both to tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services; 
(2)  A lease, lease-purchase agreement, rental or grant of a license, including royalty agreements, to use tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services; 
(3)  Performance of taxable services; or 
(4)  Barter or exchange for other tangible personal property, other taxable products, or services. 
The terms purchase and sale do not include: 
(1)  A division of partnership assets among the partners according to their interests in the partnership; 
(2)  The transfer of assets of shareholders in the formation or dissolution of professional corporations, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(3)  The dissolution and the pro rata distribution of the corporation's assets to its stockholders, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(4)  A transfer of a partnership or limited liability company interest; 
(5)  The transfer of assets to a commencing or existing partnership or limited liability company, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(6)  The repossession of personal property by a chattel mortgage holder or foreclosure by a lienholder; 
(7)  The transfer of assets from a parent company to a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least eighty (80) percent by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the subsidiary company; 
(8)  The transfer of assets from a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least eighty (80) percent by the parent company to a parent company or to another subsidiary which is owned at least eighty (80) percent by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the parent corporation or the subsidiary which received the assets; 
(9)  The transfer of assets between parent and closely held subsidiary companies, or between subsidiary companies closely held by the same parent company, or between companies which are owned by the same shareholders in identical percentage of stock ownership amounts, computed on a share-by-share basis, when a tax imposed by this article was paid by the transferor company at the time it acquired such assets, except to the extent that there is an increase in the fair market value of such assets resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating, or physical changing of the assets by the transferor company. To such an extent any transfer referred to in this sub-paragraph (9) shall constitute a sale. For the purposes of this sub-paragraph (9), a closely held subsidiary corporation is one (1) in which the parent company owns stock possessing or membership interest at least eighty (80) percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote and owns at least eighty (80) percent of the total number of shares of all other classes of stock. 
Resident means a person who resides or maintains one or more places of business within the city, regardless of whether that person also resides or maintains a place of business outside of the city. 
Retail sales means all sales except wholesale sales. 
Retailer means any person selling, leasing, renting, or granting a license to use tangible personal property or services at retail. Retailer shall include, but is not limited to, any: 
(1)  Auctioneer; 
(2)  Salesperson, representative, peddler or canvasser, who makes sales as a direct or indirect agent of or obtains such property or services sold from a dealer, distributor, supervisor or employer; 
(3)  Charitable organization or governmental entity which makes sales of tangible personal property to the public, notwithstanding the fact that the merchandise sold may have been acquired by gift or donation or that the proceeds are to be used for charitable or governmental purposes; 
(4)  Retailer-contractor, when acting in the capacity of a seller of building supplies, construction materials, and other tangible personal property. 
Retailer-contractor means a contractor who is also a retailer of building supplies, construction materials, or other tangible personal property, and purchases, manufactures, or fabricates such property for sale (which may include installation), repair work, time and materials jobs, and/or lump sum contracts. 
Return means any form prescribed by the city/town administration for computing and reporting a total tax liability. 
Sale see definition under "Purchase" or "Sale," above. 
Sales tax means the tax that is collected or required to be collected and remitted by a retailer on sales taxed under this Code. 
Storage means any keeping or retention of, or exercise dominion or control over, or possession of, for any length of time, tangible personal property not while in transit but on a stand still basis for future use when leased, rented or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the city from any person or vendor. 
Tangible personal property means personal property that can be one (1) or more of the following: seen, weighed, measured, felt, touched, stored, transported, exchanged, or that is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. 
Tax means the use tax due from a consumer or the sales tax due from a retailer or the sum of both due from a retailer who also consumes. 
Tax deficiency or deficiency means any amount of tax, penalty, interest, or other fee that is not reported and/or not paid on or before the date that any return or payment of the tax is required under the terms of this Code. 
Taxable sales means gross sales less any exemptions and deductions specified in this Code. 
Taxable services means services subject to tax pursuant to this Code. 
Taxpayer means any person obligated to collect and/or pay tax under the terms of this Code. 
Telecommunications service means the service of which the object is the transmission of any two-way interactive electronic or electromagnetic communications including but not limited to voice, image, data and any other information, by the use of any means but not limited to wire, cable, fiber optical cable, microwave, radio wave, Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), or any combinations of such media, including any form of mobile two-way communication. Telecommunications service does not include separately stated non-transmission services which constitute computer processing applications used to act on the information to be transmitted' to their exemption language. 
Use means the exercise, for any length of time by any person within the city of any right, power or dominion over tangible personal property or services when rented, leased or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the city from any person or vendor or used in the performance of a contract in the city whether such tangible personal property is owned or not owned by the taxpayer. Use also includes the withdrawal of items from inventory for consumption. 
Use tax means the tax paid or required to be paid by a consumer for using, storing, distributing or otherwise consuming tangible personal property or taxable services inside the city. 
Wholesale sales means a sale by wholesalers to retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other wholesalers for resale and does not include a sale by wholesalers to users or consumers not for resale; latter types of sales shall be deemed to be retail sales and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-2(a)—(m), (r); Ord. No. 12-1991, § 1, 12-18-91; Ord. No. 7-1998, § 1, 5-6-98; Ord. No. 11-1999, § 1, 7-21-99; Ord. No. 14-2018 , § 1, 5-16-18; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 14, 4-17-19) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, C.R.S. 39-26-102.  
Sec. 18-17. - Central register. 
(a)  In order to initiate a central register of sales and use tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales tax collection, the finance director of the city shall file with the Colorado Municipal League prior to the effective date of this section a copy of the city sales and use tax ordinance reflecting all provisions in effect on the effective date of this section. 
(b)  In order to keep current the central register of sales and use tax ordinance for municipalities that administer local sales tax collection, the finance director of the city shall file with the Colorado Municipal League prior to the effective date of any amendment a copy of each sales and use tax ordinance amendment enacted by the city. 
(c)  Failure of the city to file such ordinance or ordinance amendment pursuant to the section shall not invalidate any provision of the sales and use tax ordinance of any amendment thereto. 
(Ord. No. 12-1991, § 11, 12-18-91)  
Secs. 18-18—18-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of retail sales as the same is defined in this article, without first having obtained a license therefor, which license shall be granted and issued by the director of finance and shall be in force and effect until the 31st day of December of the year in which it is issued, unless sooner revoked. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-3; Ord. No. 12-1991, § 2, 12-18-91; Ord. No. 6-2018 , § 1, 3-7-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 39-26-103.  
Sec. 18-32. - Application for license. 
Each license granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be granted or renewed only upon application submitted using forms provided by the director of finance stating the name and address of the person desiring such a license, the name of such business and the location, including the street number of such business, and such other facts as the director of finance may require. It shall be the duty of each such licensee on or before January first of each year during which the law remains in effect, to obtain a renewal thereof if the licensee remains in retail business or is liable to account for the tax provided in this chapter. For each license issued, a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be paid. A further fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be paid for each year or fraction thereof for which license is renewed. 
(1)  In case business is transacted at two or more separate places by one (1) person, a separate license for each place of business shall be required. 
(2)  Each license shall be numbered and shall show the name, residence, and place and character of business of the licensee and shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which it is issued. No license shall be transferable. 
(3)  The director of finance has the authority to deny any applications or renewal of an existing license or to suspend or revoke an existing license under any of the following conditions: 
a.  The license was obtained by fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements. 
b.  The licensed activity is a public nuisance as defined by ordinance or statute. 
c.  The license was issued in error. 
d.  Upon grounds provided by any other city application requirement, ordinance, State Statute, Federal Law, or regulation of the city, state, or Federal government pertaining to conduct of the business. 
e.  The applicant is in default of any indebtedness or other obligation due the city. 
f.  The proposed use of any premises for which the license is sought is not authorized by the Unified Development Code, building, housing or other regulations. 
(d)  Hearing upon denial or revocation. In the event the director of finance denies issuance of, renewal of, or revokes a license pursuant to the provisions in subsection c, above, the applicant or licensee may file a written notice of appeal of such denial or revocation to the city manager within fourteen (14) days of the effective date of the denial or revocation. The city manager shall conduct a hearing within fourteen (14) days of the date of filing the notice of appeal. After hearing, the city manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend licenses, to extend the time for compliance, and to change, modify or rescind any action or order of the director of finance. No business may be carried on under a revoked license during the pendency of an appeal unless upon a stay of the revocation issued by the city manager upon such security as the city manager considers appropriate. Any finding and order of the city manager revoking the license of any person shall be subject to review by the Alamosa County district court upon application of the aggrieved party. The procedure for review shall be as provided for by rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(e)  No license shall be required for any person engaged exclusively in the business of selling commodities which are exempt from taxation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 6-2018 , § 2, 3-7-18)  
Sec. 18-33. - Administrative action no bar. 
No civil or administrative action shall bar or prevent prosecution in Municipal Court for any violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 6-2018 , § 2, 3-7-18)  
Secs. 18-34—18-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SALES TAX 
 
Sec. 18-46. - Levied, property and services taxed. 
There is hereby levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax in the amounts stated in section 18-48 as follows: 
(1)  On the purchase price paid or charged upon all retail sales, excluding, however, such articles as are otherwise exempted in this article. 
(2)  Upon telecommunications service, whether furnished by public or private corporations or enterprises, for all intrastate telecommunications service. 
(3)  For gas and electric service, whether furnished by municipal, public or private corporations or enterprises, for gas and electricity furnished and sold for domestic and commercial consumption and not for resale. "Service" within this provision includes, but is not limited to, the charge for delivery by a vendor otherwise covered by this section 18-46, even if said vendor did not sell the product or commodity delivered. 
(4)  Upon the amount paid for all meals and cover charges, if any, furnished in any restaurant, eating house, hotel, drug store, club, resort, or other such place at which meals or food are regularly sold to the public. 
(5)  On the amount paid for lodging services. 
(Code 1964, §§ 17½-2(q), (s), 17½-4; Ord. No. 12-1991, § 3, 12-18-91; Ord. No. 23-1995, § 1, 1-3-96; Ord. No. 14-1997, § 1, 10-1-97; Res. No. 15-1999, § 1, 6-2-99; Res. No. 19-2003, § 1, 9-3-03; Res. No. 20-2005, § 1, 8-17-05; Ord. No. 14-2018 , § 2, 5-16-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 39-26-104.  
Sec. 18-47. - Vendor liable for tax. 
Every retailer, also herein called "vendor," shall, irrespective of the provisions of section 18-48, be liable and responsible for the payment of an amount equivalent to two (2) percent of all sales made by such vendor of commodities or services as specified in section 18-46, and shall on or before the date for filing of monthly returns specified by the Colorado Department of Revenue, make a return to the Colorado Department of Revenue for the preceding calendar month and remit an amount equivalent to said two (2) percent of such sales to the Colorado Department of Revenue, less two (2) percent of such tax, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover the vendor's expense in the collection and remittance of the tax. Such returns of the taxpayer, or his duly authorized agent, shall contain such information and be made in such manner and upon such forms as the director of the Colorado Department of Revenue may prescribe. The Colorado Department of Revenue may extend the time for making returns and paying the taxes due under such reasonable rules and regulations as it may prescribe. The burden of proving that any retailer is exempt from collecting the tax on any goods sold and paying the same to the city, or from making such returns, shall be on the retailer or vendor under such reasonable requirements of proof as the may prescribe. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-5; Ord. No. 14-1988, § 3, 11-16-88; Ord. No. 10-1989, § 3, 10-4-89; Ord. No. 2-1992, § 1, 4-15-92; Ord. No. 16-2000, § 1a., 12-6-00; Ord. No. 15-2007, § 1, 1-9-08; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 1, 4-17-19) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 39-26-105.  
Sec. 18-48. - Schedule of sales tax. 
There is hereby imposed a tax upon all sales of commodities and services specified in section 18-46 in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  On sales amounting to nineteen cents ($0.19) to and including one dollar and eighteen cents ($1.18), a tax of one cent ($0.01). On all higher sales one cent ($0.01) shall be added in each bracket of one dollar ($1.00) of additional selling price. In addition to the foregoing sales tax, on sales amounting to nineteen cents ($0.19) to and including one dollar and eighteen cents ($1.18), there shall be tax of one-half cent ($0.005). On all higher sales one-half cent ($0.005) shall be added in each bracket of one dollar ($1.00) of additional selling price. Said additional one-half cent ($0.005) tax ("recreation tax") shall be used exclusively for recreation and recreational facilities. In addition to the foregoing sales tax, on sales amounting in nineteen cents ($0.19) to and including one dollar and eighteen cents ($1.18), there shall be a tax of one-half cent ($0.005) ("wastewater treatment facility tax"). On all higher sales one-half cent ($0.005) shall be added in each bracket of one dollar ($1.00) of additional selling price. Said one-half cent ($0.005) wastewater treatment facility tax shall cease automatically at 11:59:59 p.m. on December 31, 1999, and shall be used as follows: If needed, the first four million ($4,000,000.00), in the aggregate generated by this incremental portion of the sales tax, together with the comparable incremental portion of the use tax, during the years 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999, shall be expended exclusively for wastewater treatment plant expansion and renovation, with any additional revenues to be placed, in while or in part, at the discretion of city council, in the general fund for use restricted to street and road improvements, or in whole or in part, in the enterprise fund cash reserves and used, at the discretion of city council, in any manner consistent with the limitations of such funds. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (3) below retailers shall add the tax imposed hereby, or the average equivalent thereof, to the sale price or charge, showing such tax as a separate and distinct item, and when added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge and shall be a debt from the consumer or user to the retailer until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the manner as other debts. The retailer shall be entitled as collecting agent to the city to apply and credit the amount of this collection against the two (2) percent rate to be paid by such retailer under the provisions of section 18-47, remitting any excess collections over two (2) percent, less than the five (5) percent collection expense allowance, to the Colorado Department of Revenue in the retailer's next monthly sales tax return. 
(3)  Any retailer selling malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by the drink may include in the sales price the tax levied under this article. The schedule set forth in subsection (a) above shall be used by such retailer in determining amounts to be included in such sales price. 
(4)  In addition to the foregoing use tax, on storage and acquisition charges or costs from nineteen cents ($0.19) to and including one dollar and eighteen cents ($1.18), both inclusive, a tax of one-half cent ($0.005), and on all storage and acquisition charges or costs higher than one dollar and eighteen cents ($1.18), a tax of one-half cent ($0.005) shall be added to each bracket of one dollar ($1.00) of such higher charges of costs, with the revenues from said additional one-half cent ($0.005) to be used exclusively for recreation and recreational facilities. 
(5)  No retailer selling malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by the drink shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the tax levied by this chapter is not considered as an element in the sales price to the consumer. 
(6)  The amount subject to tax shall not include the amount of any sales or use tax imposed by article 26 of title 39, C.R.S. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-6; Ord. No. 6-1988, § 1, 6-15-1988; Ord. No. 14-1988, §§ 1—3, 11-16-88; Ord. No. 10-1989, §§ 1, 3, 10-4-89; Ord. No. 9-1991, § 1, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 9-1992, § 1, 10-7-92; Ord. No. 16-2000, § 1b., 12-6-00; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 2, 4-17-19)  
Sec. 18-49. - Collection and administration by Colorado Department of Revenue. 
Pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S. §§ 29-2-106(4)(a)(I), the Colorado Department of Revenue shall collect and administer the sales tax provided for in this division 3 of chapter 18 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Alamosa. Except as expressly provided otherwise in this division 3, the provisions of article 26 of title 39, C.R.S., and rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Revenue pursuant thereto, shall govern the collection and administration of sales taxes authorized under this division 3. Any action that may be taken by the finance director under the terms of this division 3 of chapter 18 may, but need not necessarily, also be taken by the Colorado Department of Revenue. 
(Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 3, 4-17-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 3, adopted April 17, 2019, repealed § 18-49 in its entirety and reenacted a new § 18-49 to read as set out herein. Former § 18-49 pertained to rules and regulations authorized, and derived from Code 1964, § 17½-7.  
Sec. 18-50. - Tax cannot be absorbed. 
It shall be unlawful for any retailer to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any consumer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof imposed by this article will be assumed or absorbed by the retailer or that it will not be added to the selling price of the property sold or, if added, that any part thereof will be refunded. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 39-76-108.  
Sec. 18-51. - Reports of vendor. 
The director of finance may by rule permit: 
(1)  Taxpayers whose monthly tax collected is less than ten dollars ($10.00) to make returns and pay taxes at intervals not greater than every twelve (12) months. 
(2)  Taxpayers whose monthly tax collected is less than thirty dollars ($30.00) to make returns and pay taxes at intervals not greater than every three (3) months. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-9) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 39-26-109.  
Sec. 18-52. - Retailers with multiple locations or with no permanent location within the City of Alamosa. 
A retailer doing business in two (2) or more places or locations, taxable under this article may file each return covering all such business activities engaged in within the city. For a retailer with no permanent place of business within the city, the place at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined by the provisions of article 26 of title 39, C.R.S., and by rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Revenue. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-10; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 4, 4-17-19) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.R.S. 39-26-110.  
Sec. 18-53. - Credit sales. 
Whenever an article is sold under a conditional sales contract whereby the seller retains title as security for all or part of the purchase price, or whenever the seller takes a chattel mortgage on the article to secure all or part of the purchase price, the total tax based on the total selling price shall become immediately due and payable. This tax shall be charged and collected by the seller. No refund or credit shall be allowed to either party to the transaction in case of repossession. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-11) 
State Law reference— C.R.S. 39-76-111.  
Sec. 18-54. - Remittance of excess tax. 
If any vendor during the reporting period shall collect as a tax an amount in excess of two (2) percent of such vendor's total taxable sales, such vendor shall remit to the Colorado Department of Revenue, the full net amount of the tax imposed in this chapter and show such excess. The retention by the retailer or vendor of any excess of tax collections over two (2) percent of the total taxable sales of such retailer or vendor, or the intentional failure to remit punctually to the Colorado Department of Revenue, the full amount required to be remitted by the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-12; Ord. No. 14-1988, § 3, 11-16-88; Ord. No. 10-1989, § 3, 10-4-89; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 5, 4-17-19)  
Sec. 18-55. - Items and sales exempt from tax. 
(a)  There shall be exempt from taxation under the provisions of this article the following: 
(1)  All sales to the United States Government, to the state, its departments and institutions and the political subdivisions thereof including this city in their governmental capacities only; 
(2)  All sales made to charitable organizations and community organizations in the conduct of their regular charitable functions and activities; 
(3)  All sales which the city is prohibited from taxing under the constitution or laws of the United States or the state or the Charter or ordinances of the city; 
(4)  All sales of cigarettes, provided that this exemption in no way or manner affects the present city tax on cigarettes or any future tax on cigarettes; 
(5)  All sales of drugs disbursed in accordance with a prescription and all sales of prosthetic devices for humans; 
(6)  All sales of motor fuel upon which there has accrued or has been paid the motor fuel tax prescribed by the Colorado Motor Fuel Tax of 1933 and amendments thereof. 
(7)  All sales and purchases of meat cattle, sheep, lambs, swine and goats; all sales and purchases of mares and stallions for breeding purposes and all farm close-out sales shall be exempt from taxation under this article and the storage, use or consumption of such property shall be exempt from taxation under this article; 
(8)  All sales and purchases of feed for livestock or poultry, all sale and purchases of seeds, and all sales and purchases of orchard trees shall be exempt from taxation and the storage, use or consumption of such property shall be exempt from taxation under this chapter; 
(9)  All articles purchased by nonresidents for delivery by a common carrier or by the conveyance of the vendor or by mail outside of the city; 
(10)  Sales of construction materials to a contractor or construction company to be used outside the city where such materials are used in the purchaser's construction business outside of the city even though such materials are delivered to the purchaser within the city provided such contractor making such purchase or the vendor selling such materials shall execute and file with the director of finance at least monthly a certificate provided by the director of finance showing the total of such sales so made for use outside the city for such period and such information as the director of finance may reasonably require and, provided further, that every such contractor or vendor signing such certificates shall so maintain his or her records as to show the location and address of such out-of-the-city jobs; 
(11)  Sales of automotive vehicles to nonresidents of the city, where such vehicles are registered outside the city, even though the delivery of the vehicles is made to the purchaser within the city; 
(12)  Sales to and purchases of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing, compounding for sale, profit or use, any article, substance or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product or service which is manufactured, compounded, or furnished and the commercial shipping materials used by said person; 
(13)  Sales and purchases of electricity, coal, fuel oil, gas or coke for use in processing, manufacturing, mining, refining, irrigation, building construction, telecommunication services, street and railroad transportation services and all industrial uses, and newsprint and printers' ink for use by publishers of newspapers and commercial printers shall be deemed to be wholesale sales and shall be exempt from taxation under this article. 
(14)  All sales and purchases of newspapers and preprinted newspaper supplements. 
a.  All sales of farm equipment. 
b.  Any farm equipment under lease or contract if the fair market value of such equipment is at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and the equipment is rented or leased for use primarily and directly in any farm operation. The lessor shall obtain a signed affidavit from the lessee or renter affirming that the farm equipment will be used primarily and directly in a farm operation. 
(16)  Garage sales and online garage sales. 
(17)  Sales of personal property on which a specific ownership tax has been paid or is payable, when such sales meet both of the following conditions: 
(I)  The purchaser is a nonresident of or has his principal place of business outside of the city; and 
(II)  Such personal property is registered or required to be registered outside the limits of the city under the laws of this state of Colorado. 
(18)  Sales of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by another statutory or home rule city and county, city, or town equal to or in excess of that sought to be imposed by the City of Alamosa. A credit shall be granted against the sales tax imposed by the City of Alamosa with respect to such transaction equal in amount to the lawfully imposed local sales or use tax previously paid by the purchaser or user to the previous statutory or home rule city and county, city, or town. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the sales tax imposed by the City of Alamosa. 
(19)  Sales of food purchased with food stamps. For the purposes of this subsection (19), "food" shall have the same meaning as provided in 7 U.S.C. sec. 2012 (g), as such section exists on October 1, 1987, or is thereafter amended. 
(20)  Sales of food purchased with funds provided by the special supplemental food program for women, infants, and children, 42 U.S.C. sec. 1786. For the purposes of this subsection (20), "food" shall have the same meaning as provided in 42 U.S.C. sec. 1786, as such section exists on October 1, 1987, or is thereafter amended. 
(Code 1964, §§ 17½-2(n), (o), 17½-13; Ord. No. 12-1991, §§ 4—7, 12-18-91; Ord. No. 11-1999, §§ 2, 3, 7-21-99; Ord. No. 14-2018 , § 3, 5-16-18; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 6, 4-17-19)  
Sec. 18-56. - Disputes and refunds. 
Should a dispute arise between the purchaser and seller as to whether or not any such sale is exempt from taxation hereunder, nevertheless the seller shall collect and the purchaser shall pay such tax and the seller shall thereupon issue to the purchaser a receipt or certificate showing the names of the seller and purchaser, the items purchased, the date, price, amount of tax paid, and a brief statement of the claim of exemption. The purchaser thereafter may apply to the Colorado Department of Revenue for a refund of such taxes, and the question of exemption shall be determined by the Colorado Department of Revenue, subject to review by the courts. It shall be a violation of this article for any seller to fail to collect or any purchaser to fail to pay the tax levied by this article, and on sales on which exemption is disputed. 
(Code 1964, §§ 17½-2(p); 17½-14; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 7, 4-17-19)  
Sec. 18-57. - Confidential nature of returns; use. 
(a)  Except in accordance with judicial order or as otherwise provided in this chapter, the director of finance, his or her agents, clerks and employees shall not divulge any information gained from any return filed under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The officials charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the director of finance in an action under the provisions of this article to which the director or the city is a party, or on behalf of any party to an action or proceeding under the provisions of this article or to punish a violator thereon when the report of facts shown by such report is directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events the court may require the production of, and may admit in evidence, so much of the returns, or of the facts shown thereby, as are pertinent to the action or proceeding and no more. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person, or such person's duly authorized representative, of a copy of any return or report filed in connection with such person's tax, nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof, nor to prohibit the inspection by the city attorney of the city, or any other legal representative of the city, of the report or return of any person who shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom an action or proceeding is contemplated or has been instituted under this article. 
(d)  Reports and returns shall be preserved for three (3) years and thereafter until the director of finance, with approval of the city manager orders them destroyed. 
(e)  Any city officer or employee, or any member of the office of, or officer, or employee of the director of finance, who shall divulge any information classified under this article as confidential, in any manner, except in accordance with proper judicial order or otherwise as provided by law, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-15; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 15, 4-17-19)  
Sec. 18-58. - Interest on deficiency. 
As soon as practicable after the return is filed, the director of finance shall examine it. If it then appears that the correct amount of tax to be remitted is greater or less than that shown in the return to be due, the tax shall be recomputed. If the amount paid exceeds that, which is due, the excess shall be refunded or credited against any subsequent remittance from the same persons. If the amount paid is less than the amount due, the difference, together with interest thereon at the rate of one (1) percent per month from the time the return was due, shall be paid by the vendor ten (10) days after written notice and demand to such vendor from the director of finance. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-16; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 16, 4-17-19)  
Sec. 18-59. - Deficiency due to negligence. 
If any part of the deficiency is due to negligence or intentional disregard of authorized rules and regulations with knowledge thereof, but without intent to defraud, there shall be added ten (10) percent of the total amount of the deficiency, and interest in such cases shall be collected at the rate of two (2) percent per month on the amount of the deficiency from the time the return was due, from the person required to file the return, which interest and addition shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand to such person by the director of finance. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added fifty (50) percent of the total amount of the deficiency, and in such case, the whole amount of the tax unpaid, including the additions, shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand by the director of finance and an additional two (2) percent per month on the amount shall be added from the date the return was due until paid. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-17; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 17, 4-17-19)  
Sec. 18-60. - Investigations, hearings, audits. 
For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return, or for the purposes of determining the amount of tax due from any person, the Colorado Department of Revenue may hold investigations and hearings concerning any matters covered by this article, and may examine any relevant books, papers, records or memoranda of any such person and may require the attendance of such person, or any officer or employee of such person, or of any person having knowledge of such sales, and may take testimony and require proof of his information. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-17; Ord. No. 12-1991, § 8, 12-18-91; Ord. No. 10-2002, §§ 1, 2, 5-1-02; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 8, 4-17-19)  
Secs. 18-61—18-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 9, adopted April 17, 2019, repealed §§ 18-61—18-63, which pertained to subpoena for witnesses; compelling attendance of witnesses and production of evidence; and depositions, and derived from Code 1964, §§ 17½-19—17½-21.  
Sec. 18-64. - Records of sales, other books. 
It shall be the duty of every person engaged or continuing in business in this city, for the transaction of which a license is required under this article, to keep and preserve suitable records of all sales made by such person and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for the collection of which he or she is liable. It shall be the duty of every person to keep and preserve for a period of three (3) years all invoices of goods and merchandise purchased for resale and all such books, invoices and other records shall be open for examination at any time by the director of finance or the director's duly authorized agent. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-22; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 18, 4-17-19)  
Sec. 18-65. - Tax lien. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall be a first and prior lien upon the goods and business fixtures of or used by any retailer under lease, title retaining contract or other contract arrangement, excepting stock of goods sold or for sale in the ordinary course of business, and shall take precedence on all such property over other liens or claims of whatsoever kind or nature. Any retailer who shall sell out his or her business or stock of goods, or shall quit business, shall be required to make out the return as provided in this chapter within ten (10) days after the date such retailer sold his or her business or stock of goods, or quit business. Such retiring retailer's successor in business shall be required to withhold sufficient of the purchase money to cover the amount of said taxes due and unpaid until such time as the former owner shall produce a receipt from the director of finance showing that the taxes have been paid, or a certificate that no taxes are due. If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods shall fail to withhold the purchase money as above provided and the taxes shall be due and unpaid after the ten-day period allowed, such purchaser, as well as the vendor, shall be personally liable for the payment of the taxes unpaid by the former owner. Likewise, anyone who takes any stock of goods or business fixtures of or used by any retailer under lease, title retaining contract or other contract arrangement, by purchase, foreclosure sales, or otherwise, takes same subject to the lien for any delinquent sales tax owed by such merchant, and shall be liable for the payment of all delinquent sales taxes of such prior owner, not, however, exceeding the value of property so taken or so acquired. 
(b)  Whenever the business or property of any taxpayer subject to this article shall be placed in receivership, bankruptcy, or assignment for the benefit of creditors, or seized under distraint for property taxes, all taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this article and for which the retailer is in any way liable under the terms of this article shall be a prior and preferred claim against all the property of the taxpayer, except as to preexisting claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor or purchaser whose rights shall have attached prior to the filling of the notice as provided in section 18-66 on the property of the taxpayer, other than the goods, stock in trade and business fixtures of such taxpayer, and no sheriff, lessor, assignee or other officer shall sell the property of any person subject to this article under process or order of any court, without first ascertaining from the director of finance, the amount of any taxes payable under this article, and that there be paid the amount of the taxes out of the proceeds of said sale before making payment of any monies to any judgment creditor or other claims of whatsoever kind or nature except the costs of the proceedings and other preexisting claims or liens as above provided. For the purposes of this section the term taxpayer shall include retailer. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-23; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 19, 4-17-19)  
Sec. 18-66. - Recovery of taxes, penalties and interest. 
(a)  All sums of money paid by the purchaser to the retailer as taxes imposed by this article shall be and remain public money, the property of the city, in the hands of such retailer, and such retailer shall hold the same in trust for the sole use and benefit of the city until paid to the Colorado Department of Revenue as provided in this article, and for failure to pay the same to the Colorado Department of Revenue, such retailer shall be punished for a violation of this article. 
(b)  If any person neglects or refuses to make a return and payment of the tax as required by this article, the Colorado Department of Revenue may enforce the payment of such tax as provided in article 26 of title 39, C.R.S, and the rules and regulations of the Colorado Department of Revenue. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-24; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 10, 4-17-19)  
Secs. 18-67—18-69. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 11, adopted April 17, 2019, repealed §§ 18-67—18-69, which pertained to protests; petition of taxpayers; decisions of director of finance; appeals; and manner of giving notices; place of hearings, and derived from Code 1964, §§ 17½-25—17½-27; and Ord. No. 12-1991, § Dec. 18, 1991.  
Sec. 18-70. - License and tax additional. 
The license and tax imposed by this article shall be in addition to all other licenses and taxes imposed by law, except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-28)  
Sec. 18-71. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any retailer or vendor to refuse to make any return provided to be made under this article or to make any false or fraudulent return or false statement on any return or fail and refuse to make payment of any taxes collected or due to the city, or in any manner evade the collection of payment of the tax, or any part thereof, or for any person or purchaser to fail or refuse to pay such tax, or evade the payment thereof, or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation of this article. Any corporation making a false return containing a false statement shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have jurisdiction to enforce this section. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who shall knowingly and willfully sign, swear to or verify any false statement or certificate shall be guilty of the offense of perjury and on conviction thereof shall be punished in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-29; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 12, 4-17-19)  
Sec. 18-72. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-1997, § 4, adopted June 18, 1997, repealed former § 18-72 of the Code, which pertained to penalty provisions and derived from the 1964 Code, § 17½-30.  
Sec. 18-73. - Administration. 
The administration of this article is hereby vested in the director of finance, who shall prescribe forms and reasonable rules and regulations in conformity with this article, for the making of returns, for claiming exemption, for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the taxes imposed hereunder, and for the proper administration and enforcement hereof. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-31)  
Sec. 18-74. - Claims for recovery. 
The intent of this section is to streamline and standardize procedures related to situations where tax has been remitted to the incorrect municipality. It is not intended to reduce or eliminate the responsibilities of the taxpayer or vendor to correctly pay, collect, and remit sales and use taxes to the city. 
(a)  As used herein, "claim for recovery" means a claim for reimbursement of sales and use taxes paid to the wrong taxing jurisdiction. 
(b)  When it is determined by the Colorado Department of Revenue of the city that sales and use tax owed to the city has been reported and paid to another municipality, the city shall promptly notify the vendor that taxes are being improperly collected and remitted, and that as of the date of the notice the vendor must cease improper tax collections and remittances. 
(c)  The city may make a written claim for recovery directly to the municipality that received tax and/or penalty and interest owed to the city, or, in the alternative, may institute procedures for collection of the tax from the taxpayer or vendor. The decision to make a claim for a recovery lies in the sole discretion of the city. Any claim for recovery shall include a properly executed release of claim from the taxpayer and/or vendor releasing its claim to the taxes paid to the wrong municipality, evidence to substantiate the claim, and a request that the municipality approve or deny in whole or in part, the claim within ninety (90) days of its receipt. The municipality to which the city submits a claim for recovery may, for good cause, request an extension of time to investigate the claim, and approval of such extension by the city shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(d)  Within ninety (90) days after receipt of a claim for recovery, the city shall verify to its satisfaction whether or not all or a portion of the tax claimed was improperly received, and shall notify the municipality submitting the claim in writing that the claim is either approved or denied in whole or in part, including the basis for the decision. If the claim is approved in whole or in part, the city shall remit the undisputed amount to the municipality submitting the claim within thirty (30) days of approval. If a claim is submitted jointly by a municipality and a vendor or taxpayer, the check shall be made to the parties jointly. Denial of a claim for recovery may only be made for good cause. 
(e)  The city may deny a claim on the grounds that it has previously paid a claim for recovery arising out of an audit of the same taxpayer. 
(f)  The period subject to a claim for recovery shall be limited to the thirty-six (36) month period prior to the date the municipality that was wrongly paid the tax receives the claim for recovery. 
(Ord. No. 12-1991, § 9, 12-18-91; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 13, 4-17-19)  
Secs. 18-75—18-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - USE TAX 
 
Sec. 18-86. - Use tax levied. 
There is hereby imposed and there shall be collected from every person in this city a tax or excise for the privilege of storing, use or consuming in this city any article of tangible personal property at retail. Such tax shall be payable and shall be collected by the director of finance in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  On storage or acquisition charges or costs from one cent ($0.01) to and including eighteen cents ($0.18), no tax; 
(2)  On storage or acquisition charges or costs from nineteen cents ($0.19) to and including one dollar eighteen cents ($1.18), both inclusive, a tax of one cent ($0.01); 
(3)  On all storage or acquisition charges or costs higher than one dollar eighteen cents ($1.18), one cent ($0.01) shall be added for each bracket of one dollar ($1.00) of such higher charges or costs. 
(4)  In addition to the foregoing use tax, on storage and acquisition charges or costs from nineteen cents ($0.19) to and including one dollar and eighteen cents ($1.18), both inclusive, a tax of one-half cent ($0.005), and on all storage and acquisition charges or costs higher than one dollar and eighteen cents ($1.18), a tax of one-half cent ($0.005) shall be added for each bracket of one dollar ($1.00) of such higher charges or costs, with the revenues from said additional one-half cent ($0.005) to be used exclusively for recreation and recreational facilities. In addition to the foregoing use tax, on sales amounting to nineteen cents ($0.19) to and including one dollar and eighteen cents ($1.18), there shall be a tax of one-half percent. On all higher sales one-half cent ($0.005) shall be added in each bracket of one dollar ($1.00) of additional selling price. This additional one-half cent ($0.005) tax shall cease automatically after December 31, 1991, and the proceeds from such additional tax are hereby restricted for the following uses: the lesser of eight hundred thousand dollars ($800,000.00) or the actual wastewater treatment plan expansion and renovation costs are hereby earmarked for wastewater treatment plant expansion and renovation; any additional revenues may, at the discretion of council, be used for the wastewater treatment plan expansion and renovation, or otherwise shall be restricted to use in any manner permitted through the Enterprise Fund, including, but not limited to, the Enterprise Fund Cash Reserves. 
(5)  In addition to the foregoing use tax, on storage and acquisition charges or costs from nineteen cents ($0.19) to and including one dollar and eighteen cents ($1.18), both inclusive, a tax of one-half cent ($0.005) ("wastewater treatment facility tax"), and on all storage and acquisition charges or costs higher than one dollar and eighteen cents ($1.18), a tax of one-half cent ($0.005) shall be added for each bracket of one dollar ($1.00) of such higher charges or costs, with the revenues from said additional one-half cent ($0.005) wastewater treatment facility tax to be used as follows: If needed, the first four million ($4,000,000.00) generated in the aggregate by this incremental portion of the use tax, combined with the comparable incremental portion of the sales tax, during the years 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999, shall be exclusively expended for wastewater treatment plant expansion and renovation, with any additional revenues to be placed, in whole or in part, at the discretion of city council, in the general fund for use restricted to street and road improvements, or, in whole or in part, in the enterprise fund cash reserves and used, at the discretion of city council, in any manner consistent with the limitations of such funds. The wastewater treatment facility use tax increment shall cease automatically at 11:59:59 p.m. on December 31, 1999. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-33; Ord. No. 5-1987, 5-20-80; Ord. No. 6-1988, § 2, 6-15-88; Ord. No. 10-1989, § 2, 10-4-89; Ord. No. 9-1991, § 2, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 9-1992, § 2, 10-7-92)  
Sec. 18-87. - Exemptions from use tax. 
The use tax imposed by sections 18-86 through 18-97, inclusive, of this article shall not apply: 
(1)  To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property the sale of which is subject to the retail sales tax imposed under the other terms of this article; 
(2)  To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property purchased for resale in this city, either in its original form or as an ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product in the regular course of a business; 
(3)  To the storage, use or consumption of motor fuel upon which there has accrued or has been paid the motor fuel tax prescribed under the laws of the state; 
(4)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into this city by a person not residing in the city for such person's own storage, use or consumption while temporarily within this city; 
(5)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property, the sale or use of which is subject to an excise tax under the laws of the United States or the state where such excise tax amounts to more than twelve and one-half (12½) percent of the sale price under these laws; or to the storage, use or consumption of such property by the United States government, or by the state or its institutions, or its political subdivisions; or by religious or charitable corporations in the conduction of their regular religious or charitable functions; 
(6)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing, compounding for sale, profit or use, any article, substance or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the production or service which is manufactured, compounded, or furnished and the container, label, or the furnished shipping case thereof; 
(7)  To the storage, use or consumption of electricity, coal, coke, fuel oil or gas for use in processing, manufacturing, mining, refining, irrigation, building construction, telegraph, telephone and radio communication, street and railroad transportation service and all industrial use; 
(8)  To the storage, use or consumption of printers ink and newsprint; 
(9)  To the storage, use or consumption of cigarettes, fermented malt beverages, and malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
a.  To the storage, use, or consumption of farm equipment. 
b.  To any farm equipment under lease or contract if the fair market value of such equipment is at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and the equipment is rented or leased for storage, use, or consumption primarily and directly in any farm operation. The lessor shall obtain a signed affidavit from the lessee or renter affirming that the farm equipment will be stored, used, or consumed primarily and directly in a farm operation. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-34; Ord. No. 11-1999, § 4, 7-21-99; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 20, 4-17-19)  
Sec. 18-88. - Use tax return required; collection. 
(a)  Every person subject to the provisions of sections 18-86 through 18-97, inclusive, of this chapter, who has not paid the tax imposed hereby to a retailer, on or before the fifteenth day of each month, shall make to the director of finance on forms prescribed by the director, a return showing in detail the tangible personal property stored, used or consumed by such person within the city in the preceding calendar month which is subject to the tax herein imposed and on which the tax has not been paid to a retainer. Such return shall be accompanied by a remittance of the tax shown thereon to be due. 
The director of finance may by rule permit: 
(1)  Taxpayers whose monthly tax collected is less than fifty dollars ($50.00) to make returns and pay taxes at intervals not greater than every twelve (12) months. 
(2)  Taxpayers whose monthly tax collected is less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) to make returns and pay taxes at intervals not greater than every three (3) months. 
(b)  Every retailer maintaining an office or place of business in this city, and every agent within the city of any retailer not maintaining an office or place of business in this city and making sales of tangible personal property for storage, use or consumption in the city, and not exempted as in this article provided, at the time of making such sale or taking the orders therefor or if the storage, use or consumption of such tangible personal property is not then taxable hereunder, then at the time such storage, use or consumption becomes taxable hereunder, shall collect the tax imposed by section 18-86 from the purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt thereof, which receipt shall identify the property, the date sold or the date ordered, and that the tax was collected and paid. The taxes required to be collected by such retailer or agent from such purchaser, shall be displayed separately from the advertised price listed on the forms or advertising matter, on all sales checks, orders, sales slips or other proof of sales. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for such retailer or agent to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by such retailer or agent, or that it will not be added to the selling price of the property sold, or if added, that it or any part thereof will not be refunded. The tax required to be collected by such retailer or agent, shall be remitted to the city in like manner as otherwise provided in this article for the remittance of sales tax collected by retailers, and all such retailers or agents, collecting the tax imposed by section 18-86 shall make return on forms provided by the director of finance at such times and in such manner as is provided for the making of returns in the payment of sales taxes. The procedure for assessing and collecting said taxes from such retailers or agents, or from the user when not paid to a retailer or agent, shall be the same as provided in the chapter for the collection of sales tax, including collection by distraint warrant, and the taxes due and owing from any retailer or agent for the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property, shall bear interest and be subject to the same penalties as are provided in this article for nonpayment or delinquencies of sales taxes. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-35; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 21, 4-17-19)  
Sec. 18-89. - Lien for use tax. 
The tax shall be a first and prior lien on the tangible personal property stored, used or consumed, subject only to valid mortgage or other liens of record on and prior to the recording of notice as required in section 18-66, and when such tax is collected by retailers or agents, shall be a first and prior lien, the same as is provided for sales taxes in section 18-65. Upon default of payment thereof, the director of finance, after demand upon the person owing such tax, may bring an action in attachment in his or her name as director of finance in attachment and seize any property to secure the payment of said tax, interest and penalties. In any such proceeding, no bond shall be required of the director of finance, nor shall any constable or sheriff require from the director of finance an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of levy, and no constable or sheriff shall be liable in damages when acting in accordance with such writs. The remedies provided in this section shall be in addition to the all other remedies. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-36; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 22, 4-17-19)  
Sec. 18-90. - Failure to make use tax returns, pay tax, evade tax. 
Any person who shall willfully fail or refuse to make the return required in section 18-88, or who shall make a false or fraudulent return, or who shall willfully fail to pay any tax owing by such person, and any person who shall aid or abet another in an attempt to evade such tax shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and subject to a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each such offense. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-37; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 23, 4-17-19)  
Sec. 18-91. - Interest on unpaid use tax; collection by suit. 
Any tax due and unpaid under sections 18-86 through 18-97, inclusive, of this article shall be a debt to the city and shall draw interest at the rate of two (2) percent per month from the time when due until paid. The director of finance may recover at law the amount of such tax and interest in a suit instituted by the city attorney in the name of the director of finance, and this remedy shall be in addition to all other remedies. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-38)  
Sec. 18-92. - Definitions for use tax. 
The term person as used in sections 18-86 through 18-97, inclusive, means an individual, corporation, partnership, firm, joint venture, association, estate, trust, receiver, or any other group acting as a unit and the plural as well as the singular number. The term storage or storing means any keeping or retention of, or exercise of dominion or control over, tangible personal property in this city. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-39)  
Sec. 18-93. - Use tax on motor vehicles and trailers. 
Any person whose principal residence is in the city who shall purchase any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, mobile home, mobile machinery or self-propelled construction equipment whether new or used outside the corporate limits of the city for use within this city, shall immediately and prior to registering and obtaining a license therefor, make a return showing such transaction to the director of finance and thereupon pay to the city the use tax applicable thereto as provided in this article, and failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this article. All such motor vehicles, trailers, semitrailers, mobile homes, mobile machinery or self-propelled construction equipment purchased outside the corporate limits of the city for use in this city shall be registered with the county clerk and recorder, and any person who shall register any such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, mobile home, mobile machinery or self-propelled construction equipment in any other county in this state or elsewhere shall be deemed in violation of this article and any such registration shall constitute prima facie evidence of an attempt to evade payment of such tax. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-40; Ord. No. 3-1999, § 1, 3-3-99; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 24, 4-17-19)  
Sec. 18-94. - Administration of use tax; rules and regulations. 
The administration of sections 18-86 through 18-97, inclusive, is vested in the director of finance, who may prescribe forms and rules and regulations for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-41; Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 25, 4-17-19  
Sec. 18-95. - Limitations. 
The taxes for any period, together with the interest thereon and penalties with respect thereto, imposed by this article shall not be assessed, nor shall any notice of lien be filed or distraint warrant issued, or suit for collection be instituted or any other action to collect the same be commenced more than three (3) years after the date on which the tax was or is payable; nor shall any lien continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, notice of lien with respect to which has been filed prior to the expiration of such period, in which cases such lien shall continue only for one (1) year after the filing of notice thereon. In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade, the tax, together with interest and penalties thereon, may be assessed or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may be begun at any time. Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the director of finance may agree in writing to an extension thereof, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-42)  
Sec. 18-96. - Effective date. 
The taxes provided for in this article shall become effective on the first day of January, 1981. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-44)  
Sec. 18-97. - Errors not exceeding one dollar. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the city retail sales and use tax ordinance, if an error in any sales or use tax return and in the payment accompanying the same does not exceed one dollar ($1.00) the city clerk may waive the collection of the deficiency amounting to less than one dollar ($1.00) and shall not be obligated to return any overage paid amounting to less than one dollar ($1.00) unless requested in writing. 
(Code 1964, § 17½-46)  
Secs. 18-98—18-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TELEPHONE UTILITY COMPANIES 
 
Sec. 18-116. - Levy of tax; amount. 
There is hereby levied on and against each telephone utility company operating within the city a tax on the occupation and business of maintaining a telephone exchange and lines connected therewith in the city and of supplying local exchange telephone service to the inhabitants of the city. The quarter annual amount of tax levied hereby shall be equal to one dollar and twenty-five cents ($1.25) per telephone account for which local exchange telephone service is provided within the corporate limits of the city on the effective date as provided in section 18-117, and upon each quarter annual anniversary of the effective date. 
(Code 1964, § 18½-21)  
Sec. 18-117. - Effective date of article. 
The tax levied by this article shall commence on January 1, 1979, and shall be due and payable in four (4) quarter annual installments. Each such installment shall be due within thirty (30) days after the end of each quarter year, with the first such installment due on or before April 30, 1979. 
(Code 1964, § 18½-22)  
Sec. 18-118. - Statement required to be filed quarterly. 
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date as provided in section 18-117, each telephone utility company subject to this article shall file with the city clerk, in such form as the clerk may require, a statement showing the total telephone accounts for which local exchange telephone service was provided within the corporate limits of the city on the effective date. Such statement shall be filed within thirty (30) days after each quarter annual anniversary of the effective date showing such accounts on the anniversary date. 
(Code 1964, § 18½-23)  
Sec. 18-119. - Failure to comply with article provisions; penalties. 
(a)  Failure to pay tax. If any telephone utility company subject to the provisions of this article shall fail to pay the taxes as provided in this article, the full amount thereof shall be due and collected from such company, and the same together with an addition of ten (10) percent of the amount of taxes due shall be and hereby is declared to be a debt due and owing from such company to the city. The city attorney of the city, upon direction of the board of trustees, shall commence and prosecute to final judgment and determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect the debt in the name of the people of the state. 
(b)  Failure to file statement. If any officer, agent or manager of a telephone utility company which is subject to the provisions of this article shall fail, neglect, or refuse to make or file the quarterly annual statement of accounts provided in section 18-118, the officer, agent, manager or person shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), provided that each day after the statement shall become delinquent during which the officer, agent, manager or person shall so fail, neglect, or refuse to make and file such statement shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1964, § 18½-24)  
Sec. 18-120. - Right of city to inspect records; copies. 
The city, its officers, agents or representatives shall have the right at all reasonable hours and times to examine the books and records of the telephone utility companies which are subject to the provisions of this article and to make copies of the entries or contents thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 18½-25)  
Sec. 18-121. - Local purpose of tax. 
The tax provided in this article is upon occupations and businesses in the performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those functions relating to interstate commerce. It is expressly understood that none of the terms of this article be construed to mean that any telephone utility company is issued a franchise by the city. 
(Code 1964, § 18½-26)  
Sec. 18-122. - Tax in lieu of other taxes, etc. 
The tax provided in this article shall be in lieu of all other payments by or fees and taxes on any telephone utility subject to the provisions of this article, other than ad valorem taxes, and in addition shall be in lieu of any free service furnished to the city by any telephone utility. 
(Code 1964, § 18½-27)  
Chapter 19 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Comprehensive plan adopted, § 2-131; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; miscellaneous offenses, Ch. 11; mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks, Ch. 12; municipal court, Ch. 13; conditions constituting nuisances, § 14-1; junked, wrecked and abandoned motor vehicles, § 14-21 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; subdivisions, Ch. 17; zoning, Ch. 21; off-street parking and loading requirements, § 21-171 et seq. 
State Law reference— Regulation of vehicles and traffic, C.R.S. 42-4-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Vehicles prohibited in the Cottonwoods. 
(a)  All of the property heretofore annexed to the city by Ordinance No. 18, 1971, which property has heretofore sometimes been referred to as the "Wilderness Area" is hereby designated and named "The Cottonwoods." 
(b)  No person shall take or drive any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor bike or motorized vehicle of any kind in or upon said property above described or ride on or in or use any such vehicle in or on any part of the property. 
(c)  Signs giving notice of such prohibition shall be posted at the main entrances to such property. 
(Code 1964, § 17-68)  
Sec. 19-2. - Off-highway vehicles. 
(a)  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, off-highway vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle which is designed to travel on wheels or tracks in contact with the ground, which is designed primarily for use off of the public highways, and which is generally and commonly used to transport persons for recreational purposes. 
(b)  No off-highway vehicle may be operated upon any public street, alley, park, levee, or other public way in the City of Alamosa except in the following cases: 
(1)  When a public utility, governmental entity, or other entity specifically authorized by the City of Alamosa is using an off-highway vehicle on a public way for purposes within the city's authorization; and 
(2)  During lawfully conducted special events which have been approved by the city to include use of off-highway vehicles on a public way . 
(Ord. No. 14-2002, § 1, 7-10-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-2001, § 1, adopted December 19, 2001, repealed former § 19-2, which pertained to authorization of posting of signs, and derived from the Code of 1964, § 19-13.2. Subsequently, Ord. No. 14-2002, § 1, adopted July 10, 2002, added a new § 19-2, as set forth herein.  
Sec. 19-3. - Use of engine brakes prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to use an engine brake, except in case of emergency. For purposes of this section, an "engine brake" is a braking mechanism which is powered by the exhaust of the vehicle's engine, typically by means of a device to divert the exhaust from the vehicle's engine from its non-braking exhaust system for use in braking. Such a device is commonly referred to as a "Jake brake," and is recognizable by the sudden, loud roar from an engine upon braking when the "Jake brake" is engaged. Observation, upon the braking of a vehicle, of a sudden, loud, engine-centered, braking noise, uncharacteristic when wheel brakes are utilized, shall be prima facie evidence that an engine brake was utilized by the driver of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1-2000, § 1, 1-19-00; Ord. No. 9-2009, § 5, 9-2-09)  
Secs. 19-4—19-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-2003, adopted July 2, 2003, adopted by reference the 2003 edition of the Model Traffic Code, and adopted amendments thereto. Former §§ 19-21—19-29 have been deleted, and §§ 1—3, 5, and 8 of Ord. No. 07-2003 have been included as new §§ 19-21—19-25, as set forth herein. Former §§ 19-21—19-29 pertained to adoption of and amendments to past editions of the Model Traffic Code, and derived from the following: Code 1964, §§ 19-1—19-3, 19-3.1, and 19-13.1; Ord. No. 11-1986, adopted September 4, 1986; Ord. No. 20-1986, adopted December 17, 1986; Ord. No. 4-1988, adopted May 18, 1988; Ord. No. 4-1992, adopted June 17, 1992; Ord. No. 5-1995, §§ 1 and 2, adopted March 1, 1995; Ord. No. 3-1996, §§ 1—3, adopted February 21, 1996; Ord. No. 6-1996, § 1, adopted September 4, 1996; Ord. No. 9-1997, §§ 2 and 3, adopted June 18, 1997; Ord. No. 2-1998, § 1, adopted March 4, 1998; Ord. No. 20-1998, § 1, adopted September 16, 1998; Ord. No. 11-2001, § 22, adopted December 19, 2001; and Ord. No. 12-2001, §§ 2—4, adopted December 19, 2001. 
 
Sec. 19-21. - Adoption of Model Traffic Code. 
Pursuant to parts 1 and 2 of article 16 of title 31 and part 4 of article 15 of title 30, C.R.S., there is hereby adopted by reference Articles I and II, inclusive, of the 2010 edition of the "Model Traffic Code" promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, EP 700., Denver, CO 80222. The subject matter of the Model Traffic Code relates primarily to comprehensive traffic control regulations for the city. The purpose of this article and the Code adopted herein is to provide a system of traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the state and the nation. Three (3) copies of the Model Traffic Code adopted herein are now filed in the office of the Clerk of the City of Alamosa, Colorado, and may be inspected during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 07-2003, § 1, 7-2-03; Ord. No. 9-2009, § 1, 9-2-09; Ord. No. 5-2010, § 1, 6-2-10)  
Sec. 19-22. - Deletions. 
The 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code is adopted as if set out at length save and except the following articles and/or sections which are declared to be inapplicable to the city and are therefore expressly deleted: Section 1409(9). 
(Ord. No. 07-2003, § 2, 7-2-03; Ord. No. 9-2009, § 2, 9-2-09; Ord. No. 5-2010, § 2, 6-2-10)  
Sec. 19-23. - Additions or modifications. 
The 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code is subject to the following additions or modifications: 
(1)  Section 225(3) of the Model Traffic Code is hereby to read in its entirety as follows: 
(3) Any person who violates subsection (1) of this section commits a class B traffic infraction. Any person who violates subsection (1.5) of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars. 
(2)  Section 1204(6) of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
(6) On any street or at any place within this municipality where an official sign is posted giving notice of stopping, standing or parking restrictions or prohibitions, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any manner in violation of the provisions contained on such sign or signs, except where necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, or except for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers when such standing does not obstruct, impede, or endanger any traffic. 
(3)  Section 1205 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by the addition of the following subsection (4) and the renumbering of the existing subsection (4) to be subsection (5), to wit: 
(4) On the streets which have been approved and signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings within a marked parking space and with the right front wheel of the vehicle against the curb or within six (6) inches thereof. No vehicle shall be parked in any angled parking space having space markings in such a manner that the vehicle extends beyond the length of the painted space markings or beyond length limitations as indicated on appropriate signs. 
(5) Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class B traffic infraction. 
(4)  Section 1208(1)(b) of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
(1) (b) As used in this section, "person with a disability" has the meaning provided for such term in C.R.S. section 42-3-204(1) and includes any person who has qualified for and obtained disabled veteran special license plates with the identifying feature for a person with a physical impairment affecting mobility under C.R.S. section 42-3-213(5)(a)(II). 
(5)  Section 1412(10) of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by the following addition: 
(d) No bicycles in central business area. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the central business area of the City of Alamosa, which area, for the purposes of this section, shall comprise the sidewalks adjacent to the following streets: Those parts of Ross, Edison, San Juan, State, Hunt and Denver Avenues lying between the north sidewalk adjacent to Fourth Street and the south sidewalk adjacent to Sixth Street; and those parts of Fourth, Main and Sixth Streets lying between the west sidewalk adjacent to Ross Avenue and the east sidewalk adjacent to Denver Avenue. 
(e) No adults riding bicycles on sidewalks along certain streets. No person over the age of 16 shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk adjacent to State Street between Seventeenth Street and First Street; adjacent to Fourth, Main, or Sixth Street between Ross Avenue and West Avenue, or adjacent to First Street between Cole Park and Victoria Street unless accompanying and within 30 feet of a child under the age of 17. 
(Ord. No. 07-2003, § 3, 7-2-03; Ord. No. 02-2006, § 1, 5-5-06; Ord. No. 9-2007, § 1, 6-20-07; Ord. No. 9-2009, § 3, 9-2-09; Ord. No. 5-2010, § 3, 6-2-10; Ord. No. 22-2018 , §§ 1, 2, 8-1-18)  
Sec. 19-24. - Application. 
This article shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park and to every other public way or public place or public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of the city, the use of which the city has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. The provisions of sections 1401, 1402, and 1413 of the adopted Model Traffic Code, respectively concerning reckless driving, careless driving, eluding a police officer, and accidents and accident reports shall apply not only to public places and ways but also throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-2003, § 5, 7-2-03; Ord. No. 5-2010, § 4, 6-2-10)  
Sec. 19-25. - Interpretation. 
This article shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to conform with the state's uniform system for the regulation of vehicles and traffic. Article and section headings of the article and adopted Model Traffic Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. 
(Ord. No. 07-2003, § 8, 7-2-03; Ord. No. 5-2010, § 7, 6-2-10)  
Secs. 19-26—19-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING 
 
Sec. 19-41. - Parking of certain vehicles, time limit on streets; extension into street. 
(a)  No person shall park, place, locate or keep any manufactured housing, motor home, mobile home, camper, trailer, recreational vehicle, or any other trailer designed to be pulled by a motor vehicle, upon any public street, alley, park or way of the city for a period of time exceeding seventy-two (72) hours; and no such trailer, trailer house or recreational vehicle shall be parked upon any such street of the city so as to extend outward into the street a distance in excess of ten (10) feet measured at right angles to the curb. The restrictions delineated in this subsection (a) are subject to such additional regulations in subsections (b) of this section 19-41. 
(b)  No person shall park, place, locate or keep any truck tractor drawing a semitrailer, upon any public street, alley, park or way of the city in residentially zoned areas of the city, provided that such truck tractors may make necessary stops not exceeding five (5) minutes in length, or emergency stops, and may make stops for the purpose of making deliveries. 
(c)  No person shall park a vehicle upon a street, alley, highway, or other public right-of-way for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing, painting or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(3)  Displaying advertising. 
(Code 1964, § 19-5; Ord. No. 2-1996, § 1, 1-17-96; Ord. No. 4-1998, § 1, 4-1-98)  
Sec. 19-42. - Vehicles hauling flammable merchandise; where parking permitted. 
No truck hauling flammable merchandise on any street in the city shall be parked on any street of this city except within the central business district or along any state highway, provided that such trucks may make necessary temporary stops not exceeding five (5) minutes in length, or emergency stops, and may make stops for the purpose of making deliveries, at other points within the city limits. 
(Code 1964, § 19-12)  
Sec. 19-43. - Additional parking restrictions. 
(a)  All night parking prohibited; limitations. Except for licensed or certified medical care providers or any other person(s) responding to an emergency call, no person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes during the period of time between two o'clock a.m., and five o'clock a.m. (2:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m.), of any day on a street segment which is signed to prohibit all-night parking. 
(b)  Parking in alleys prohibited; limitations. 
(1)  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley, except during the necessary and expeditious loading and unloading of merchandise or freight, and except for licensed or certified medical care providers or any other person(s) acting in a similar role in responding to an emergency call. 
(2)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within any public or private street, highway, or alley in such position as to block the driveway, garage, or alley entrance to any property abutting such public street, highway, or alley. 
(c)  Presumption established; municipal court hearings. In any prosecution charging a violation of any parking regulation or provision for stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle, encompassed by the Code of Ordinances of the City of Alamosa, including codes adopted by reference, proof that the vehicle alleged in the offense to be the vehicle in violation of such a provision was such vehicle, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such alleged violation the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 03-2006, § 1, 7-5-06)  
Secs. 19-44—19-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RAILROADS 
 
Sec. 19-61. - Blocking streets. 
All railroad companies shall make up their trains on grounds owned by them, and any agent or employee of any railroad company in charge of any engine, car or train of cars shall not suffer or permit any engine, car or train of cars to stand upon or cross any street of the city at the intersection of any street with such railroad during a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes. 
(Code 1964, § 17-53)  
Chapter 20 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Department of municipal public utilities, art. X; franchises and public utilities, art. IX; control of water, art. X, § 4; utility rates and finances, art. X, § 5. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; service charge on checks or bank drafts returned to city, § 2-117; financial matters, § 2-117 et seq.; comprehensive plan adopted, § 2-131; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; requirements for building conditions, utilities, refuse disposal and nuisance control in agricultural labor camps, § 10-45; mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks, Ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; subdivisions, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference— Municipal utilities, C.R.S. 31-15-707 et seq.; public improvements, C.R.S. 31-15-701 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - WASTEWATER SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to generate sufficient revenue to pay from the service charge for usage of the Alamosa wastewater system all costs of the operation and maintenance of the complete wastewater system. To the extent reasonably accomplishable, the costs shall be allocated to the users of the system in proportion to each user's contribution to the total loading of the treatment works and collection system. To insure a proportional distribution of the operation and maintenance costs to each user or user-class, a non-exclusive delineation of factors to be included as criteria for determining the usage charges are as follows: Strength, bio-chemical oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), volume, and delivery flow-rate characteristics shall be considered and included in the bases for determining the users' respective charges. The other provisions in this article shall be construed consistently with this stated purpose. 
(Ord. No. 8-1995, § 1, 5-3-95)  
Sec. 20-2. - Determining the total annual cost of operation and maintenance. 
The city engineer or designee shall determine the total annual cost of the operation of the wastewater treatment system and the total annual costs of maintaining said system. Such determinations shall include not only the variable operating costs, but also the costs reasonably projected to maintain the capacity and performance of the system during its expected service life, consistently with its initial design and construction. The total annual costs of operation and maintenance shall include, but shall not be limited to, labor, repairs, equipment replacement (including sinking funds), routine upkeep, maintenance, necessary modifications to the system, power, sampling, laboratory tests, and a reasonable contingency fund. 
(Ord. No. 8-1995, § 1, 5-3-95)  
Sec. 20-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 20-2016 , § 1, adopted December 7, 2016, repealed § 20-3, which pertained to determining each user's wastewater contribution percentage and derived from Ord. No. 8-1995, adopted May 3, 1995.  
Sec. 20-4. - Determining a surcharge for users with excess BOD and TSS. 
The city shall assess a surcharge for all non-residential users discharging wastes with bio-chemical oxygen demand (BOD) and total suspended solids (TSS) strengths greater than those of the typical residential user. For purposes of this section, normal strength wastes are considered to be two hundred (200) milligrams per liter BOD and one hundred forty (140) milligrams per liter TSS. An atypical, non-residential user's BOD and TSS strengths shall be determined by laboratory analysis of the user's discharge performed by the city at such intervals and times as the city deems appropriate. The surcharge rate structure for such above-normal strength waste dischargers will be sufficient to cover the costs of treating such user's above normal strength wastes. Said users shall pay an additional surcharge as set forth below in section 20-5, for each twenty-five (25) milligrams per liter of BOD over the normal strength wastes as defined above, and for each ten (10) milligrams per liter of TSS over the normal strength wastes as defined above. 
(Ord. No. 8-1995, § 1, 5-3-95; Ord. No. 20-2016 , § 2, 12-7-16)  
Sec. 20-5. - Determining each user's wastewater service charge. 
Each user's wastewater charge will be assessed by applying the applicable volumetric rate per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water, or fraction thereof, used plus a flat monthly rate, plus any applicable BOD or TSS surcharge as set forth below for the period of time from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2023. In making such assessment, the city may classify industrial, commercial, and other non-residential establishments as a residential user, provided that the wastes for these establishments are equivalent to the wastes from the average residential user with respect to volume, BOD and TSS. 
Sewer 
January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 
User Class 	Flat Rate 	Volumetric 
Charge (per 
1,000 
Gallons) 	BOD Surcharge 
for each 
25 mg/l > 200 mg/l 	TSS Surcharge 
for each 
10 mg/l > 140 mg/l 
Residential 	$6.67 	$3.15 		
Commercial 	$9.45 	$3.15 	$0.44 	$0.31 
Industrial 	$9.45 	$3.15 	$0.44 	$0.31 
 
January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 
User Class 	Flat Rate 	Volumetric Charge (per 1,000 
Gallons) 	BOD Surcharge 
for each 
25 mg/l > 200 mg/l 	TSS Surcharge 
for each 
10 mg/l > 140 mg/l 
Residential 	$7.14 	$3.37 		
Commercial 	$10.11 	$3.37 	$0.47 	$0.34 
Industrial 	$10.11 	$3.37 	$0.47 	$0.34 
 
January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021 
User Class 	Flat Rate 	Volumetric Charge (per 1,000 
Gallons) 	BOD Surcharge 
for each 
25 mg/l > 200 mg/l 	TSS Surcharge 
for each 
10 mg/l > 140 mg/l 
Residential 	$7.64 	$3.61 		
Commercial 	$10.82 	$3.61 	$0.51 	$0.36 
Industrial 	$10.82 	$3.61 	$0.51 	$0.36 
 
January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2022 
User Class 	Flat Rate 	Volumetric Charge (per 1,000 
Gallons) 	BOD Surcharge 
for each 
25 mg/l > 200 mg/l 	TSS Surcharge 
for each 
10 mg/l > 140 mg/l 
Residential 	$8.25 	$3.90 		
Commercial 	$11.68 	$3.90 	$0.55 	$0.39 
Industrial 	$11.68 	$3.90 	$0.55 	$0.39 
 
January 1, 2023 to December 31, 2023 
User Class 	Flat Rate 	Volumetric Charge (per 1,000 
Gallons) 	BOD Surcharge 
for each 
25 mg/l > 200 mg/l 	TSS Surcharge 
for each 
10 mg/l > 140 mg/l 
Residential 	$8.91 	$4.21 		
Commercial 	$12.62 	$4.21 	$0.59 	$0.42 
Industrial 	$12.62 	$4.21 	$0.59 	$0.42 
 
Each user's volumetric charge will be based on the average of their November, December, January, and February water use for the immediately preceding year unless adjusted by the city for exceptional circumstances. Any such adjustments will be reflected on the first full month's bill along with notification of the change. This will minimize the impact of irrigation on the calculation of volume used as the basis for the sewer use volumetric charges. 
(Ord. No. 8-1995, § 1, 5-3-95; Ord. No. 12-1995, 3-15-95; Ord. No. 4-2009, § 1, 4-15-09; Ord. No. 20-2016 , § 3, 12-7-16; Ord. No. 30-2018 , § 1, 11-7-18)  
Sec. 20-6. - Wastewater facilities replacement fund. 
A reserve fund, the wastewater facilities replacement fund is hereby established within the wastewater utility fund for the purpose of providing sufficient funds for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, and appurtenances during the useful life of the wastewater treatment facilities so as to maintain the capacity and performance levels for which such facilities were designed and constructed. 
(Ord. No. 8-1995, § 1, 5-3-95)  
Sec. 20-7. - Payment of the user's wastewater service charge and penalties. 
(a)  All water and sewer fees shall be charged against the property served and against the owner thereof, and if for any reason any sums owing therefor become delinquent, all provisions for collection of delinquent payments, hereunder may be pursued against the owners of the serviced property, notwithstanding that the occupant or actual user of such services may be other than the owner of the property. 
(b)  If any user of the sewer system shall neglect, fail or refuse to pay the rates and charges fixed by section 20-5 for use of the system, such user and the premises occupied by him or her shall not be disconnected from the system, but the charges due from any such person and delinquent upon October first of any year shall be certified by the city clerk to the county within ten (10) days after such date, together with a statement showing the names of the delinquent users and the description of the real property served by sewer connection for which charges fixed by section 20-5 are delinquent. Such charges shall thereupon become a lien upon such real property and may be collected in the manner provided by state statute. Charges imposed upon real property which are not subject to taxation or lien under the constitution or laws of this state by reason of its ownership, character, or use, may be collected by any appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 8-1995, § 1, 5-3-95)  
Sec. 20-8. - Review of each user's wastewater service charge. 
If a significant user, such as an industry, has completed in-plant modifications which would change that user's wastewater contribution percentage, the user can present to the city's public works director such factual information and the public works director shall then determine if the user's wastewater contribution percentage is to be changed. The city shall notify the user of its findings as soon as possible. The user may appeal the director's decision pursuant to the provisions of section 20-58. 
(Ord. No. 8-1995, § 1, 5-3-95; Ord. No. 4-2009, § 1, 4-15-09; Ord. No. 20-2016 , § 4, 12-7-16)  
Sec. 20-9. - Wastes prohibited from discharge to the wastewater treatment system. 
(a)  The discharge of any substance containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly, or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of municipal systems, or to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in or have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  Each user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge of the city wastewater treatment works shall be obligated for such increased costs, and shall be subject to penalties for violation of this section as provided in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 8-1995, § 1, 5-3-95)  
Sec. 20-10. - Sewer service connection fees. 
(a)  As an expense of connection to a sewer service line, a sewer service connection fee shall be paid, subject to the exceptions delineated below, which sewer service connection fee shall be the aggregate of the tapping fee and plant investment fee delineated below: 
Size of Connection 
(in inches) 	Tapping Fee* 	Plant Investment Fee 
 4 	$ 500.00 	$ 500.00 
 6 	750.00 	1,250.00 
 8 	1,000.00 	3,000.00 
10 	1,500.00 	4,500.00 
12 	2,000.00 	7,000.00 
*The tapping fee includes only the tap into the city line. 
 
(b)  The property owner shall pay the city's cost for running the service line to the city line. Other than the connection fee, as specified above, for one (1) unit, no connection fee shall be charged for structures or complexes of structures which contain more than one (1) dwelling or commercial unit and which are served by a single connection; each connection in excess of one (1) connection, however, shall require payment of the full applicable fee designated above, regardless of the number of structures, complexes of structures, dwellings or commercial units. 
(c)  If the sewer service has been installed and paid by a party approved in advance by the city, the tapping fee shall not apply. Upon the installation of a replacement line where a service connection fee has been previously paid, the plant investment fee shall not apply, and the tapping fee shall be limited to the actual cost of labor, equipment, and materials, as determined by the city, to install the service line. The sewer connection fees delineated above may be altered by agreement between the city and the tap recipient in accordance with terms, conditions, and upon the standards set by the city council, from time to time, by resolution.  
Secs. 20-11—20-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
 
Sec. 20-16. - Name of system. 
(a)  The waterworks constructed by the city and used to supply the city and its inhabitants with water, shall be known as the "Alamosa Waterworks." 
(b)  Such waterworks and all things pertaining thereto shall be under the control of the city council, who shall direct the maintenance and operation thereof, and the construction of all additions thereto, and in all cases not particularly provided for by ordinance, shall determine in what manner and upon what terms water may be taken from the water system by any water consumer and the character of the connections and appliances which may be made or used therefor. 
(Code 1964, § 20-1)  
Sec. 20-17. - Water system property; injury, tampering, trespass. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or in anywise damage any property or appliances constituting or being a part of such waterworks, or any fences, guards, rails, boxes, covers, buildings, or water tower constructed and used to protect the waterworks or any part thereof. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person except the superintendent of water, or those employed by the superintendent or authorized by the city council, to operate the waterworks to trespass upon the waterworks or the grounds upon which the same are constructed, to tap or make connection therewith or in any manner to interfere with the waterworks or the property or the appliances constituting the waterworks or any part thereof, or to meddle or interfere with any pipe, valve or appliances used regulating the flow of water in the waterworks, or any part thereof, or to change or alter the position of any valve or appliance regulating the flow of water in any pipe line of the waterworks. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or meddle with or attempt to alter or change the flow of any well or wells which are a part of the waterworks or in any way connected therewith. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, place, dump or deposit in any pipe, reservoir, well, filter, or any part whatsoever of the waterworks, any substance or material which will in any manner injure or obstruct the same or any material or substance which will contaminate or pollute or which would tend to contaminate or pollute the water in the waterworks or in any pipe, reservoir, filter, sedimentation basin, well, or any appliance forming a part of the waterworks, or in any manner to obstruct the waterworks or pollute the water therein. 
(Code 1964, § 20-2; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § K1, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 20-18. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  All fire hydrants shall be under the control and shall be kept in repair by the superintendent of water and shall be tested frequently to see if the same are in order. In case of fire the members of the fire department and such other persons as the superintendent of water shall authorize, shall have free access to the fire hydrants. No other person shall open or operate any fire hydrants without permission of the superintendent of water, or draw water therefrom, or destroy the approach thereto. 
(b)  Wrenches for fire hydrants shall be furnished by the superintendent to the fire department, whether the department be a voluntary or paid department, for the use of its members and to such other persons as the superintendent may deem proper, and no person to whom any wrench is so furnished shall permit the same to be taken from the place of deposit, or to be used by any other person for any other purpose than that authorized by the superintendent. 
(Code 1964, § 20-3)  
Sec. 20-19. - Only superintendent of waterworks and licensed plumbers authorized to tap or make pipeline connections; provisions for permit applications by consumers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than the superintendent of the water department or a plumber holding a current license issued by the city to tap or make any connection with any pipeline or water main forming a part of the city waterworks. 
(b)  Any person desiring to have a tap made to the pipes or mains of the city water system or any connection therewith to use water therefrom, shall make application in writing for a permit to do so to the public works director, agreeing to pay such rates for the use of water as may be then or thereafter established by the city council, and also agreeing to conform to and to be governed by such rules and regulations that may from time to time be adopted by the city council for the government and control of the city waterworks system or any part thereof. Such application shall also state the nature or character of the tap or connection; the location by lot, block and street number thereof; the number of taps; the premises upon which the water is sought to be used; the character and size of the premises; and the nature and purpose for which the water is to be used. Every application shall be accompanied by the applicable plant investment fee. If the application is complete and the proposed tap and use conform to applicable rules and regulations, the city clerk shall issue a permit for such tap. 
(Code 1964, § 20-4; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § K2, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 20-20. - Signing, records, copies. 
(a)  All permits shall be issued and signed by the public works director or the director's designee and shall set forth the name of the person for whose benefit they shall be granted, the date thereof, the point on the water main at which the tapping is to be done, the size and number of taps and stopcock, the premises to which the water is to be conducted, the use to be made of the water and the number and character of the appliances through which the same is to be used. 
(b)  The public works director shall keep a record of all permits issued in a book or books kept for such purpose, and shall cause to be made the connections therein provided. 
(Code 1964, § 20-5; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § K3, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 20-21. - Connection with service pipe from other premises prohibited. 
No connection with the waterworks or use of water therefrom shall be made through any extension of a service pipe serving any other premises. 
(Code 1964, § 20-7)  
Sec. 20-22. - Taps installed subsequent to permit issuance; specifications regulated by city; connected at consumer expense; become city property. 
(a)  Every tap inserted in or connected with the service pipes shall have an orifice of a diameter prescribed by the city; the service pipe shall be connected with such tap by copper pipe, and the service pipe shall extend from the main to the curbline, at which point shall be placed a stopcock with a cover, or if there be no curbline, then at such point as the superintendent of water shall direct, so that the same shall be accessible to the superintendent of water for the purpose of turning on or shutting off water by means thereof. 
(b)  Upon the issuance of a permit for a tap as provided in this article, it shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to have such tap made at his or her own expense. The city may install such taps and waterlines at the request of water consumers for such charges as the city council may from time to time establish by resolution. All such taps and waterlines shall meet the specifications set by the city, and all taps, service lines, stopcocks, and appliances from the water main to and including the stopcock shall become the property of the city. 
(c)  Every tap shall be of brass, all service pipes shall be of copper, and all materials and work shall meet with city specifications. 
(Code 1964, § 20-8; Ord. No. 10-1988, 10-5-88; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § K4, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 20-23. - Issuance of permit in violation of article provisions deemed unlawful; other violations enumerated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the public works director to issue any permit for any connection with the waterworks other than in the manner provided by this article; or for the superintendent of water to permit any tap or connection to be installed or made before a permit has been issued, or contrary to or in excess of the provisions of such permit. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by ordinance to make a connection with any water pipe or main of the waterworks, or for any person to put in any tap or connection contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any water consumer to use water through any tap, fire hydrant, or service connection with the water main contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or to turn on water to his or her premises after the water has been shut off. 
(Code 1964, § 20-10; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § K5, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 20-24. - Liability for payment of water assessments; penalties for delinquencies and other violations of chapter. 
(a)  The liability for payment of the water charges and assessments for the use of city water under this chapter is hereby made the joint and several obligation of the person(s) entitled to possession of the premises served by the water at the time of usage, and of the owner of the property served. 
(b)  If any person responsible for payment of the charges or assessments from the use of municipal water shall neglect, fail or refuse to pay for the use of said water and all of the charges therefor or shall otherwise violate any of the provisions of this chapter, such person and the property served may, at the direction of the finance director or city council, be deprived of the use of water from the Alamosa Waterworks until fines assessed by the municipal court and all costs, including costs of connection and disconnection, damages and all water rents and charges of every kind shall be paid and until such offense or offenses shall have ceased. 
(c)  The rates specified in section 20-31 shall be paid on a pro rata monthly basis and shall be due and payable on the first day of each month. If not paid during the month in which they become due, they shall become delinquent. Assessments delinquent upon October 1 of each year shall be certified by the finance director to the county within ten (10) days after such date, together with a statement showing the names of the owners delinquent and the description of the real property served for which assessments fixed by section 20-31 are delinquent. Such assessments shall thereupon become a lien upon such real property and shall be collected in the manner provided by state statute. Assessments imposed upon real property which is not subject to taxation or lien under the constitution or laws of the state by reason of its ownership, character or use, may be collected by any appropriate action in the County Court or District Court of Alamosa County. 
(d)  For purposes of the delinquency and enforcement provisions of this chapter, all locations to which city water is provided with respect to an owner ("owner-user") or with respect to a person entitled to possession of the premises served by city water at the time of usage ("possessor-user") shall be aggregated and thus treated as one water account of that owner-user and of that possessor-user. The default of an owner-user or of a possessor-user at one location shall be deemed a default at all locations for which the defaulting owner-user or defaulting possessor-user is liable for the usage charges. 
(Code 1964, § 20-11; Ord. No. 5-1992, §§ 1, 2, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 20-25. - Maintenance and repair of fixtures. 
(a)  The owner and user of any premises for which a connection is made and a stopcock with box and cover placed as aforesaid shall keep such stopcock with box and cover placed as aforesaid in good condition at such owner's or user's expense and so that the superintendent of water shall be able to turn and shut off water from the service pipes at any time. From the stopcock to, in and upon his or her premises the owner and user shall provide his or her own pipe and plumbing which shall be constructed and placed so as to comply with all ordinances governing plumbing and shall, at such owner's or user's expense, at all times keep all pipes, fixtures and appliances on his or her premises tight and in good working order, so as to prevent waste of water. 
(b)  In case any pipe or fixture shall break or become imperfect or so as to waste water, the owner or user shall forthwith repair the same and keep the same in repair. 
(c)  In case the superintendent of water shall ascertain that any plumbing or fixtures on any premises are so defective as to waste any water or are being used so as to waste any water, the superintendent shall notify the owner or user of water to forthwith repair the same or remedy the situation; and if the owner or user fails to repair the same, the superintendent may forthwith shut off the water from such premises, and the same shall remain shut off until such plumbing and fixtures are repaired or such situation remedied. 
(Code 1964, § 20-12; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § K6, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 20-26. - Application and establishment of account required for turning water on; administrative fees; optional deposit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any plumber or other persons to turn on or cause to be turned on water to any premises, whether improved or not, unless such water is turned on at the direction of the superintendent of water after application for use of water has been made to the finance director and after approval has been granted by the superintendent of water; provided, however, this provision shall not prohibit turning water temporarily off to allow for repairs and restoring service after repairs are completed. 
(b)  The application for turning on water shall include, but not be limited to, a statement by the applicant that the applicant has read and is familiar with and will abide by and accept all provisions in the City Code, whether then in effect or subsequently adopted, regarding utility services provided by the city as conditions precedent to the initiation and maintenance of utility service to the applicant from the city. Such an application will be required for all requests for new services, whether or not the applicant is a new owner, new occupant, the premises are new to city services, or the location for the intended service was previously served by the city water system. 
(c)  In the event the applicant has not previously had an account with the city, or in the event the applicant was delinquent in payment of any utilities account with the city three (3) or more times within the preceding thirty-six (36) months, the water superintendent may require a deposit not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), which deposit shall be returned to the water user, without interest, after the water user has paid timely for utility services for twelve (12) consecutive months or upon cessation of the utilities account, whichever occurs first. 
(d)  For turning on the delivery of water to any premises, except as provided in paragraph (a) above, or when the shutoff was for the purpose of the city making repairs or improvements to the city's water delivery system, the water superintendent shall not approve the commencement of such water service until a turn-on service charge has been paid to the finance director and all delinquent water assessment liens upon the real property to be served have been satisfied. At the time water service is requested, the city shall inform the requesting person when the request can be honored within the then-existing commitments of the water superintendent. In the event the service turn-on is during normal city office hours, such water shall not be turned on until a charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) has been paid to the finance director; in the event the turn-on of service is to be done after hours, upon the request of the requesting party, such turning on of service shall not occur until the requesting person has paid a turn-on service charge of thirty dollars ($30.00) to the finance director. 
(Code 1964, § 20-14; Ord. No. 1-1991, § 1, 2-6-91; Ord. No. 5-1992, § 3, 8-5-92)  
Sec. 20-27. - Use of unmetered water unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from the city water system on any premises if the flow of such water is not metered. If the superintendent of water determines that unmetered water from the city water system is being used on any premises, the superintendent shall shut off all water to the premises until proper meters have been installed. 
(Code 1964, § 20-16; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § K7, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 20-28. - Service charge for shutoff notice and a prerequisite to turn water on after service is continued. 
(a)  The superintendent of water, when required to serve a shutoff notice for the water for any cause other than making repairs or improvements to the premises or city's water delivery system, shall result in an administrative fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to be imposed and collected, in addition to any turn-on fees or costs, as part of, and in the same manner as, the water rates for usage, as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  The superintendent of water, after having caused the shutoff of water for nonpayment of charges, shall not allow the same to be turned on again until arrearages for usage fees have been paid, together with all costs, other charges, fines, penalties, and administrative fees specified in this article. 
(Code 1964, § 20-17; Ord. No. 1-1991, § 2, 2-6-91)  
Sec. 20-29. - Repairs to system, turning off water. 
The city council reserves the right to cause the water to be shut off from any street main when they deem if necessary for repairing the same or making connections or extensions of the same, or for the purpose of clearing the same, or for any necessary work in repairing the pipe line or other appliances or connections of the waterworks, and in case of repair on the pipe line or in case of scarcity or for any other reason may temporarily restrict the use of water, and if need be for any reason may forbid sprinkling and otherwise regulate the time, place and manner of use of water and purpose for which the same may be used, as occasion may require. In case of an emergency the mayor may, by proclamation, restrict or regulate the use of water until the next meeting of the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 20-18)  
Sec. 20-30. - Water service connection fees. 
(a)  As a condition precedent to connection to or use of the city water system, a water service connection fee shall be paid, subject to the exceptions delineated below in subsections (b), (c), (d), and (e), which service connection fee shall be the aggregate of the applicable tapping fee and plant investment fee delineated below: 
Size of Water Connection 
(in inches) 	Tapping Fee* 	Plant Investment Fee 
¾ 	$  500.00 	1,000.00 
1 	750.00 	1,700.00 
1½ 	1,000.00 	3,300.00 
2 	1,500.00 	5,300.00 
3 	2,000.00 	10,000.00 
4 	3,000.00 	16,700.00 
6 	4,000.00 	33,300.00 
 
* The tapping fee includes the installation of the service line from the water main to the property line and installation of one (1) meter. 
(b)  The tapping fee for structures or complexes of structures which contain more than one (1) dwelling unit or commercial unit and which is to be serviced by more than one (1) meter shall be the fee for the appropriate tap size, plus the actual costs, as determined by the city, for time and materials for the installation of all meters in excess of the first meter. 
(c)  The service connection fee for fire protection service shall be limited to the actual cost of installation of the service line from the main to the property line. No meter shall be required for fire protection water usage. 
(d)  (1) If the water service has been installed and paid for by an approved party other than the city, the tapping fee shall be waived. 
(2)  If an existing water service is being replaced on a property where a service connection fee has been previously paid, the plant investment fee shall be waived, and the tapping fee shall be limited to the actual costs, as determined by the city, for time and materials, to install the service line. 
(e)  The water service connection fees delineated above may be altered by agreement between the city and the tap recipient in accordance with terms, conditions, and upon the standards effectuated by the city council, from time to time, by resolution. 
(Code 1964, § 20-18.1; Ord. No. 11-1992, § 1, 11-4-92; Ord. No. 4-2007, § 1, 4-4-07)  
Sec. 20-31. - Water rates within city limits. 
(a)  All water use shall be measured by standard meters to be installed in all places where water is or may have to be used from the city water system. 
(b)  In determining the category of use as set forth below for each type of water user, the following definitions shall be applicable: 
(1)  Residential water: Use in a dwelling. For purposes of the volumetric charge to be applied to any residential use that involves more than a single unit (multi-family dwellings, mobile home parks, apartment complexes, etc.), the volumetric category into which the user falls shall be determined by dividing the total usage by the number of single family residence equivalents making up that total usage. 
(2)  Senior water: Upon application by the consumer and upon determination by the city of the consumer's eligibility, water service to a residence occupied by any consumer, either as owner or lessee thereof, who is 65 years of age or older. 
(3)  Commercial water: Use in a commercial facility, including residential type uses in commercial lodging establishments such as hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, RV parks, etc. 
(4)  Institutional water: Use by any governmental, institutional, or any private entity in a campus type setting that experiences large seasonal water demand due to irrigation or other use. 
(c)  The monthly charge for water shall be the combined total of a monthly base charge and a monthly volume charge, computed as follows: 
(1)  The monthly base charge for each premise to which water service is available during the month, regardless of whether or not any water is consumed, shall be as set forth below. 
(2)  The monthly volumetric charge for a consumer within the city limits per one thousand (1,000) gallons (or fraction thereof) shall be as set forth below for the period of time from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2023: 
Residential Water 
January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$1.61 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$2.57 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$4.49 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$8.99 
Base Charge 	$6.94 
 
January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$1.69 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$2.70 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$4.72 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$9.44 
Base Charge 	$7.29 
 
January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$1.77 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$2.84 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$4.95 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$9.91 
Base Charge 	$7.65 
 
January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2022 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$1.86 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$2.98 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$5.20 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$10.40 
Base Charge 	$8.03 
 
January 1, 2023 to December 31, 2023 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$1.95 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$3.13 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$5.46 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$10.92 
Base Charge 	$8.44 
 
Senior Water 
January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$0.82 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$1.32 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$4.49 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$8.99 
Base Charge 	$6.94 
 
January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$0.86 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$1.39 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$4.72 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$9.44 
Base Charge 	$7.29 
 
January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$0.90 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$1.46 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$4.95 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$9.91 
Base Charge 	$7.65 
 
January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2022 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$0.95 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$1.53 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$5.20 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$10.40 
Base Charge 	$8.03 
 
January 1, 2023 to December 31, 2023 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$1.00 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$1.61 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$5.46 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$10.92 
Base Charge 	$8.44 
 
Commercial Water 
January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$1.66 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$2.09 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$2.70 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$3.41 
Base Charge 	$6.94 
 
January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$1.74 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$2.19 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$2.83 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$3.58 
Base Charge 	$7.29 
 
January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$1.83 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$2.30 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$2.98 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$3.76 
Base Charge 	$7.65 
 
January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2022 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$1.92 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$2.42 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$3.12 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$3.95 
Base Charge 	$8.03 
 
January 1, 2023 to December 31, 2023 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$2.02 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$2.54 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$3.28 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$4.15 
Base Charge 	$8.44 
 
Institutional Water 
January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$1.66 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$2.09 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$3.32 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$5.49 
Base Charge 	$6.94 
 
January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$1.74 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$2.19 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$3.48 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$5.77 
Base Charge 	$7.29 
 
January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$1.83 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$2.30 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$3.66 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$6.05 
Base Charge 	$7.65 
 
January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2022 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$1.92 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$2.42 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$3.84 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$6.36 
Base Charge 	$8.03 
 
January 1, 2023 to December 31, 2023 
Quantity Used 	Charge per 1,000 Gallons or Fraction Thereof 
0 to 8,000 Gallons 	$2.02 
8,001 to 50,000 Gallons 	$2.54 
50,001—100,000 Gallons 	$4.03 
In Excess of 100,000 Gallons 	$6.67 
Base Charge 	$8.44 
 
(Code 1964, § 20-20; Ord. No. 13-1986, § 1, 8-6-86; Ord. No. 4-1990, 9-19-90; Ord. No. 2-2004, § 1, 4-21-04; Ord. No. 8-2005, § 1, 4-6-05; Ord. No. 5-2007, § 1, 4-18-07; Ord. No. 16-2011, § 1, 12-7-11; Ord. No. 20-2016 , § 5, 12-7-16; Ord. No. 30-2018 , § 2, 11-7-18)  
Sec. 20-32. - Same—Outside city limits. 
The water rates for water delivered from the city water system to points located outside the city limits shall be double the rate for consumers within the city limits. 
(Code 1964, § 20-21)  
Sec. 20-33. - Same—Tanker loads. 
The charge for water dispensed by the city from dispensing facilities located at the city waterworks shall be four dollars and fifty cents ($4.50) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
(Code 1964, § 20-21.1)  
Sec. 20-34. - Meters; requirements; charge when defective. 
(a)  All meters shall be of a type, size and design approved by the city council and shall be installed in such manner and location as the city council shall direct; each meter shall be tested by the superintendent of water and shall be adjusted and correct before being installed, but the meter shall be installed by and remain the property of the city. 
(b)  If any meter shall fail to register in any month the consumer shall be charged at the average monthly consumption as shown by the meter when in order. 
(Code 1964, § 20-22)  
Sec. 20-35. - Responsibility in multiple-tenant property for payment. 
Owners or agents in charge of any business block or other building occupied by more than one (1) tenant using or taking water from the same service pipe shall be required to pay the water rates for the whole of such block, building or premises. 
(Code 1964, § 20-23)  
Sec. 20-36. - Wasting of water prohibited. 
Water shall be used only for beneficial purposes and shall not be wasted. Prohibited water waste includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Applying more water than is reasonably necessary to establish and maintain a healthy landscape. Routine watering of turf shall be limited to three (3) days per week, except for watering for up to twenty-one (21) days to establish new turf from sod or seed; and except for syringing golf course greens when necessitated by weather conditions. 
(2)  Watering with spray irrigation between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. during the period from May 1 to October 1, except for the following uses: 
a.  Watering for up to twenty-one (21) days to establish turf from seed to sod. 
b.  Watering new plant material such as flowers, trees and shrubs on the day of planting. 
c.  Watering essential to preserve turf subject to heavy public use. 
d.  Operating an irrigation system for installation, repair or reasonable maintenance, so long as the system is attended throughout the period of operation. 
(3)  Watering landscaped areas during rain or high wind. 
(4)  Applying water intended for irrigation to an impervious surface, such as a street, parking lot, alley, sidewalk or driveway. 
(5)  Using water instead of a broom or mop to clean outdoor impervious surfaces such as sidewalks, driveways and patios, except when cleaning with water is necessary for public health or safety reasons or when other cleaning methods are impractical. 
(6)  Allowing water to pool or flow across the ground or into any drainage way, such as gutters, streets, alleys or storm drains. 
(7)  Failing to repair, for a period of more than ten business days after notice, leaking or damaged irrigation components, service lines or other plumbing fixtures. 
(8)  Washing vehicles with a hose that lacks an automatic shut-off valve. 
(Code 1964, § 20-25; Ord. No. 16-2018 , § 1, 6-6-18)  
Sec. 20-37. - Sprinkling restrictions. 
In case of water shortage or scarcity, or inability to maintain adequate water pressure in all or any part of the city waterworks, the council may, by resolution, place any restrictions which it deems necessary upon the use of water for irrigation or sprinkling purposes. 
(Code 1964, § 20-28.1)  
Secs. 20-38—20-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7-1995, § 1, adopted May 3, 1995, repealed former Art. III, §§ 20-51—20-65, and added a new Art. III, §§ 20-51—20-60. Former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1964, §§ 20-28—20-29.1, 20-1, 20-32, 20-34, 20-34.1, 20-36—20-41, 20-43, 20-44; and Ord. No. 11-1992, adopted Nov. 4, 1992. 
 
Sec. 20-51. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Floatable oil is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods. 
Industrial wastes are the wastewaters from industrial processes, trade, or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
May is permissive. 
Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the eight hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen-ion concentration of 10-7. 
Properly shredded garbage means wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (½) inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and watercarried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Sewage is the spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater." 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
Shall is mandatory. 
Sludge is any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") is a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source. 
Superintendent means the superintendent of wastewater facilities, and/or of wastewater treatment works, and/or of water pollution control of the City of Alamosa, or the public works director, or the director's authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Unpolluted water is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Wastewater is the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities are the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant". 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 7-1995, § 1, 5-3-95; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § K8, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 20-52. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other unsanitary waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this article. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater within the city. 
(d)  The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other occupancy purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer, is hereby required at the owner(s) expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and/or to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within ten (10) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 7-1995, § 1, 5-3-95)  
Sec. 20-53. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 20-52, the building sewer shall be connected, by the owner, to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement with such plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. 
(c)  A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. The superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction. The owner shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within twenty-four (24) hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of public health of the State of Colorado. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than one (1) acre. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in section 20-52, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within sixty (60) days in compliance with this article, unless otherwise given notice pursuant to section 20-52 and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(f)  The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(g)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 7-1995, § 1, 5-3-95)  
Sec. 20-54. - Sanitary sewers, building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written building sewer permit from the superintendent. 
(b)  There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service, and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner(s) shall make application on a form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by such plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and fifty dollars ($50.00) for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid the city, by the owner, at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such connection aforementioned. 
(e)  Old buildings' sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of all sanitary sewers including building sewers, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall conform to the appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 as may be hereafter amended except as otherwise provided by the building and plumbing codes and other applicable rules and regulations of the city. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(i)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 as may hereafter be amended except as otherwise provided by the building and plumbing codes, and other applicable rules and regulations of the city. All such connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved in advance by the superintendent. 
(j)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent. 
(k)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 7-1995, § 1, 5-3-95)  
Sec. 20-55. - Use of the public sewers. 
(a)  No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any sewer, except stormwater runoff from limited areas, which stormwater may be polluted at times, may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the superintendent. 
(b)  Stormwater other than that exempted under section 20-55(a), and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. 
(c)  No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas; 
(2)  Any water containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal system, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in or have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works; 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works; 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(d)  The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limbs, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The superintendent may set stricter limitations than the limitations established in the regulations below if in the superintendent's opinion such severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the superintendent are as follows: 
(1)  Wastewater having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius); 
(2)  Wastewater containing more than twenty-five (25) milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral oil origin; 
(3)  Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat, or grease; 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers; 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such material; 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits established by the superintendent; 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(8)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "sludge" as defined herein; 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters; 
(10)  Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(e)  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 20-55(d), and which in the judgement of the superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 20-55(j). 
When considering the above alternatives the superintendent shall give consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the discharger. If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plans and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
(f)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts as specified in section 20-55(d)(3), or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captivated material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal, which are subject to review by the superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owners(s) must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(g)  Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at the owner(s)' expense. 
(h)  When required by the superintendent, the owner(s) of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structures, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The structures shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(i)  The superintendent may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this ordinance. These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period; 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewaters; 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting wastewater volume and quality; 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid sludge, oil, solvent, or other materials important to sewer use control; 
(5)  A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility locations; 
(6)  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the municipal sewer. 
(j)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association Sampling methods, locations, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the superintendent. 
(k)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(Ord. No. 7-1995, § 1, 5-3-95; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § K9, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 20-56. - Damaging, etc., part of wastewater facilities. 
No person(s) shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person(s) violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 7-1995, § 1, 5-3-95)  
Sec. 20-57. - Powers and authority of inspectors 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The superintendent or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The industry must establish that revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors. 
(c)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 20-57(a), the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 20-55(h). 
(d)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 7-1995, § 1, 5-3-95)  
Sec. 20-58. - Hearing board. 
(a)  A hearing board shall be appointed to serve as necessary, to hear sewer users' appeals of matters concerning the interpretation and execution of the provisions of this article by the superintendent. The board shall consist of five (5) members. To the extent practicable, one (1) member of the board shall be a registered professional engineer; one (1) member shall be a practicing sanitary engineer; one (1) member shall be a representative of an industry or manufacturing enterprise; one (1) member shall be a lawyer; and one (1) member shall be selected at large for interest in accomplishing the objectives of this article. In the event it is not practicable to obtain one (1) or more of the above-described professionals, the board shall be constituted, to the extent possible, of individuals with educational and/or work experience to enable them to competently review the acts of the superintendent. The board shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by the superintendent based on or made in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  The hearing board shall adopt rules necessary for the conduct of its affairs and shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each decision, or if absent, or failing to vote, indicating such fact. It shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and immediately filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Appeals to the hearing board may be taken by any person aggrieved by any administrative decision based upon or made in the course of the administration or the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter within thirty (30) days of said decision. The appellant of an administrative action shall file with the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and all papers constituting the record of action upon which the appeal was taken will be immediately forwarded to the board. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal and record, the hearing board shall fix a time for hearing of the appeal and written notice shall be sent by first class mail to the party appealing and the superintendent at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing date. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The board may affirm, reverse (wholly or partly) or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination appealed and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises and to that end, shall have all powers of the superintendent. The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the superintendent, or to decide in favor of the appellant in any appeal of the administrative decision. 
(Ord. No. 7-1995, § 1, 5-3-95)  
Sec. 20-59. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this ordinance except section 20-56 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently, cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in section 20-59(a), shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 7-1995, § 1, 5-3-95; Ord. No. 11-2001, § 23, 12-19-01)  
Sec. 20-60. - Responsible party. 
It is made the duty of every owner, whether or not currently in possession, of real property in the city to ensure that such owner(s)' properties are in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7-1995, § 1, 5-3-95)  
Secs. 20-61—20-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SOLID WASTE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances, Ch. 14; garbage receptacles in mobile home parks, § 12-32. 
 
Sec. 20-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construction debris means wood, brick, concrete, steel, asphalt shingles, and other such materials commonly used in the construction of buildings, and the by-products and remnants from construction materials used to build or repair roads, buildings, and improvements, and from construction activities. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation and consumption of food. 
Large appliance means an appliance, if weighing less than twenty-five (25) pounds, not intended for unassisted hand-held removal or relocation, or not intended for counter-top use; or any appliance weighing in excess of twenty-five (25) pounds. 
Refuse means garbage, ashes, rubbish, toxic or inflammable substances, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned motorized or non-motorized vehicles or implements of transportation, and all parts or equipment thereof, industrial and commercial wastes, and abandoned or discarded materials not falling within other specific definitions in this section; but this term shall not include yard waste. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible, solid wastes consisting of either combustible and noncombustible wastes, or a mixture of both, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials; but this term shall not include refuse, construction debris, or yard waste. 
Yard waste means organic materials such as grass clippings, leaves, tree branches, weeds, and hedge trimmings with physical characteristics suitable for composting. 
(Code 1964, § 12-9; Ord. No. 3-1997, § 1, 4-16-97) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 20-82. - Dumping refuse, litter, etc., in city limits or on city property prohibited. 
No person shall dump, deposit or leave any ashes, wastepaper, leaves, trash, garbage, waste matter, or refuse of any kind within the limits of the city or on any property owned by the city, whatsoever situate. 
(Code 1964, § 12-8)  
Sec. 20-83. - Collection and disposal by city agents and employees; exceptions. 
The city, by and through its duly authorized agents and employees, shall be the sole agency for the collection and disposal of garbage for single-family residences and multifamily residences of seven (7) or fewer units. No person except duly authorized agents and employees of the city shall collect or dispose of any garbage or rubbish from such entities, whether such person's own or that of others within the limits of the city. This prohibition shall not apply to the collection or disposal of garbage or rubbish from any commercial or industrial establishment, nor of any multi-family residence of eight (8) or more units where such units share a common collection point that is contracted for by the owner of the multi-family residence. This prohibition also shall not apply to any entity, whether residential or commercial, which reasonably requires a manner of collection and/or disposal for which the city manager reasonably has determined and designated in writing to the entity that the city is not equipped to provide such service. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any contractor of the obligation of cleaning up premises after completion of his or her contract. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent any residential user from hauling his or her own garbage and rubbish if it is properly disposed of in conformity with all applicable regulations, provided that such hauling shall not affect the obligation of such individual to pay the charges hereafter set forth. 
(Code 1964, § 12-10; Ord. No. 01-2001, § 1, 2-21-01; Ord. No. 10-2017 , § 4-19-17; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § K10, 10-3-18)  
Sec. 20-84. - Commercial and residential service; frequency of pickup. 
The city shall furnish garbage and waste matter collection service as herein provided to all businesses and residents within the city limits. The frequency of pickup and collection shall be determined and set by the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 12-11)  
Sec. 20-85. - Containers. 
(a)  Duty to provide garbage containers. It shall be the duty of every owner, tenant, and/or occupant of every residence, business establishment, or institution in the city to provide for such residence, business establishment, or institution, at his or her own expense, and at all times to maintain in good order, such necessary containers as described below for all garbage and rubbish from such residence, business, or institution. No garbage or rubbish shall be deposited by any person, or allowed to accumulate by any person in any alley, street, vacant lot, or place, whether owned by such person or not, within the city, except when in proper containers for collection as provided in this article. 
(b)  Container capacity, construction, etc. Garbage and rubbish to be collected by city employees may be placed in containers only as follows: 
(1)  Residential. Wheeled, ninety-gallon capacity, plastic containers, suitable for automatic dumping with city equipment. 
(2)  Commercial. Wheeled metal dumpsters, suitable for automatic dumping with city equipment. 
(c)  Cost of containers. Containers may be leased from the city at a cost, which includes routine maintenance, over the life of the equipment. The city manager may periodically amend these rates. 
(1)  Ninety-six (96) gallon and sixty-four (64) gallon containers. The cost for these containers shall be made part of the monthly service fee as set forth in section 20-89 of this chapter. 
(2)  Dumpsters. Dumpsters may be purchased directly from the city at cost, or leased on a monthly basis. The monthly lease rate for dumpsters will be set by the city manager at the approximate cost to the city for providing and maintaining the dumpsters. 
(3)  Maintenance. It is hereby made the responsibility of the customer to maintain the containers assigned to, or owned by, the customer. The city shall provide routine maintenance on all containers as required. Such routine maintenance shall be performed at no additional charge on city owned containers. Repair and maintenance on customer owned dumpsters shall be provided, and charged to the customer, based on the cost of the labor and materials required. City-owned containers which are lost, stolen or destroyed by whatever means, shall be replaced at the expense of the assigned user. Such expense shall be determined by the city manager and periodically amended to approximate cost adjustments to the city. 
(d)  Unauthorized handling of containers or contents unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, remove, handle, place refuse into, or otherwise disturb the containers or contents which have been placed into use pursuant to this chapter. The owner, occupant, lessee or tenant of the residence or dwelling to which a container is assigned is the only person authorized to handle the containers or contents other than designated city personnel. 
(e)  Nonconforming containers; overloading. 
(1)  Nonconforming containers. Metal trash cans, fifty-five (55) gallon drums and all other containers or dumpsters which do not comply with subsection (a) above shall not be serviced by the city; 
(2)  Overloading. At no time shall residential containers be loaded with more than two hundred fifty (250) pounds of material. 
(f)  Ownership. City-owned containers shall be assigned to household addresses by serial numbers, and are to be left at the assigned addresses. Title to such containers shall remain at all times with the city. 
(Code 1964, § 12-12; Ord. No. 4-1994, § 1, 4-20-94; Ord. No. 01-2001, §§ 2, 3, 2-21-01; Ord. No. 6-2001, §§ 1—3, 6-20-01)  
Sec. 20-86. - Location of garbage containers for collection; storage; hours of collection; penalties for noncompliance. 
(a)  Residential containers will only be serviced when placed as directed by the city. In general, the containers shall be placed at the curb with the lid hinge to the rear (curb side) when placed on the street. When an alley location is designated, the hinge should be away from the alley. Containers must be placed as directed not later than 7:30 a.m. on the day designated for collection in the district in which the residence is located. No container shall be placed in any alley or on any street prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding the collection day. All such containers shall be removed from the alley not later than 6:00 p.m. on the collection day. 
(b)  Dumpsters shall be: 
(1)  Located on a hard-surfaced pad suitable to allow the dumpster to be rolled; and 
(2)  Located in a place at least fifteen (15) feet from the nearest street curbline, unless another location otherwise is approved in writing by the city manager, which approval shall be reasonably designed to adapt the particular site to unique physical obstacles impeding compliance with this subpart, or oppressive or unreasonable demands on the disposer. 
(c)  Yard wastes bagged, or bundled as described herein, shall be subject to regular collection by the city on a weekly basis only to the extent that: 
(1)  Branches and hedge trimmings shall be prepared in bundles, securely tied, not heavier than seventy-five (75) pounds each, not exceeding five (5) feet in length, with a diameter no greater than twenty-four (24) inches. 
(2)  Other yard wastes shall be securely fastened in heavy-duty plastic trash bags, constructed of not less than two (2) mils thickness, or in compostable bags of comparable carrying durability, weighing no more than seventy-five (75) pounds each. 
(3)  Each bag or bundle of yard waste shall be tagged with a tag issued by the city, as outlined in section 20-88. 
(d)  Each person or entity subject in this chapter to mandatory waste collection by the city may haul yard wastes to such compost sites as may be officially designated, from time to time, by the city, provided, however, that all such materials deposited hereunder at a city compost site shall first be removed from the bag or other container used to transport the same, and such containers shall be removed or otherwise lawfully disposed of by the depositor, which may be at the appropriately designated areas at the site. 
(1)  Yard waste handled in compliance with this subpart (d) shall be subject to no charge by the city. 
(2)  Depositing yard wastes at a city compost site in violation of this subsection (d) shall be deemed a violation of section 20-82 of this chapter. 
(3)  Nothing in this subsection (d) shall be deemed to abate or diminish the city's pre-emptive reservation of the city's exclusive right to conduct waste collection and disposal within the city, pursuant to section 20-83 of this chapter. Only yard waste may be disposed of in this manner. 
(Code 1964, § 12-13; Ord. No. 3-1997, § 3, 4-16-97; Ord. No. 01-2001, § 4, 2-21-01; Ord. No. 6-2001, § 5, 6-20-01)  
Sec. 20-87. - Hazardous materials; burning restrictions. 
(a)  Explosive materials. Highly inflammable or explosive materials will not be picked up by the city. 
(b)  Hazardous materials. Materials considered hazardous and which cannot be accepted by the landfill will not be picked up by the city. Questions on definitions of hazardous materials should be addressed to the city's department of public works. 
(c)  Trash burning restrictions. No person shall burn, or permit to be burned, on any open premises owned or controlled by him or her, or in any incinerator, or in any other open place in the city, any waste matter or other flammable material. 
(Ord. No. 4-1994, § 2, 4-20-94) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4-1994, § 2, adopted Apr. 20, 1994, repealed § 20-87 and added a new § 20-87. Former § 20-87 pertained to hedge and tree trimmings, and derived from the Code of 1964, § 12-14.  
Sec. 20-88. - Materials prohibited from placement in polycarts or dumpsters. 
Garbage and rubbish resulting from the use of a residence or business subject under this chapter to mandatory waste collection by the city shall be collected by the city only from approved containers, in conformance with the provisions of section 20-85, for pickup during regularly scheduled sanitation pickups. The following materials shall not be placed in polycarts or dumpsters for pickup by the city and shall be otherwise lawfully disposed by the possessor thereof: 
(1)  Hazardous materials, as defined in Section 25-15-101 (11A C.R.S. 1989 Repl. Vol.), as amended. 
(2)  Yard waste. 
(3)  Large appliances and furniture. 
(4)  Tires, whether intact or in pieces. 
(5)  Carcasses of dead animals. 
(6)  Construction debris. 
(7)  Any material(s) for which public notice has been given by the San Luis Valley Solid Waste Authority that such material(s) shall not be accepted for disposal in said Authority's landfill. 
a.  A copy of each such public notice shall be compiled into a regularly maintained list, which shall designate and be retained, for the applicable waste disposal prohibition period, in the city's office of public works, and shall be available for inspection and copying, upon reimbursement of reasonable copy expense, during all regular public business hours for said department. 
b.  A copy of such list, certified by the keeper of such records to be a true and accurate copy of the current list, shall be rebuttably presumed to define materials prohibited by this subpart (7). 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 2, 4-16-97) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4-1994, § 3, adopted Apr. 20, 1994, repealed former § 20-88 of the Code, which pertained to disposal of dead animals in garbage containers and derived from the 1964 Code, § 12-15. Ord. No. 3-1997, § 2, adopted Apr. 16, 1997, enacted new provisions as § 20-88 to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 20-89. - Garbage collection fees established; billing; variances. 
(a)  For residential dwellings for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2023, the monthly collection fee shall be as set forth in the following schedule. The minimum fee shall be that for a sixty-four (64) gallon container. 
Residential Solid Waste 
January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 
Size of Container 	Monthly Fee per Container 
64 Gallon 	$11.65 
96 Gallon 	$15.53 
 
January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 
Size of Container 	Monthly Fee per Container 
64 Gallon 	$12.11 
96 Gallon 	$16.15 
 
January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021 
Size of Container 	Monthly Fee per Container 
64 Gallon 	$12.60 
96 Gallon 	$16.80 
 
January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2022 
Size of Container 	Monthly Fee per Container 
64 Gallon 	$13.36 
96 Gallon 	$17.81 
 
January 1, 2023 to December 31, 2023 
Size of Container 	Monthly Fee per Container 
64 Gallon 	$13.89 
96 Gallon 	$18.52 
 
(b)  For non-residential users, for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2023, the monthly collection fee shall be set as set forth in the following schedule. The minimum fee shall be that for a ninety-six (96) gallon container. The collection fee for containers larger than three (3) cubic yards shall be the fee designated herein for three (3) cubic yard containers, plus twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per collection for each additional cubic yard of capacity. 
Commercial Solid Waste 
January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 
Number of Collections Per Week—2 Cubic Yard Container 
Number of 
Containers 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
1 	$108.35 	$216.70 	$325.05 	$433.40 	$541.75 	$650.10 
2 	168.85 	337.70 	506.55 	675.40 	844.25 	1,013.10 
3 	228.25 	456.50 	684.75 	913.00 	1,141.25 	1,369.50 
4 	287.65 	575.30 	862.95 	1,150.60 	1,438.25 	1,725.90 
5 	347.05 	694.10 	1,041.15 	1,388.20 	1,735.25 	2,082.30 
6 	406.45 	812.90 	1,219.35 	1,625.80 	2,032.25 	2,438.70 
 
January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 
Number of Collections Per Week—3 Cubic Yard Container 
Number of 
Containers 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
1 	$113.85 	$227.70 	$341.55 	$455.40 	$569.25 	$683.10 
2 	178.75 	357.50 	536.25 	715.00 	893.75 	1,072.50 
3 	243.65 	487.30 	730.95 	974.60 	1,218.25 	1,461.90 
4 	308.55 	617.10 	925.65 	1,234.20 	1,542.75 	1,851.30 
5 	374.55 	749.10 	1,123.65 	1,498.20 	1,872.75 	2,247.30 
6 	439.45 	878.90 	1,318.35 	1,757.80 	2,197.25 	2,636.70 
 
January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 
Number of Collections Per Week—2 Cubic Yard Container 
Number of 
Containers 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
1 	$112.68 	$225.36 	$338.04 	$450.72 	$563.40 	$676.08 
2 	175.60 	351.20 	526.80 	702.40 	878.00 	1,053.60 
3 	237.38 	474.76 	712.14 	949.52 	1,186.90 	1,424.28 
4 	299.16 	598.32 	897.48 	1,196.64 	1,495.80 	1,794.96 
5 	360.93 	721.86 	1,082.79 	1,443.72 	1,804.65 	2,165.58 
6 	422.71 	845.42 	1,268.13 	1,690.84 	2,113.55 	2,536.26 
 
January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 
Number of Collections Per Week—3 Cubic Yard Container 
Number of 
Containers 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
1 	$118.40 	$236.80 	$355.20 	$473.60 	$592.00 	$710.40 
2 	185.90 	371.80 	557.70 	743.60 	929.50 	1,115.40 
3 	253.40 	506.80 	760.20 	1,013.60 	1,267.00 	1,520.40 
4 	320.89 	641.78 	962.67 	1,283.56 	1,604.45 	1,925.34 
5 	389.53 	779.06 	1,168.59 	1,558.12 	1,947.65 	2,337.18 
6 	457.03 	914.06 	1,371.09 	1,828.12 	2,285.15 	2,742.18 
 
January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021 
Number of Collections Per Week—2 Cubic Yard Container 
Number of 
Containers 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
1 	$117.19 	$234.38 	$351.57 	$468.76 	$585.95 	$703.14 
2 	182.63 	365.26 	547.89 	730.52 	913.15 	1,095.78 
3 	246.88 	493.76 	740.64 	987.52 	1,234.40 	1,481.28 
4 	311.12 	622.24 	933.36 	1,244.48 	1,555.60 	1,866.72 
5 	375.37 	750.74 	1,126.11 	1,501.48 	1,876.85 	2,252.22 
6 	439.62 	879.24 	1,318.86 	1,758.48 	2,198.10 	2,637.72 
 
January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021 
Number of Collections Per Week—3 Cubic Yard Container 
Number of 
Containers 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
1 	$123.14 	$246.28 	$369.42 	$492.56 	$615.70 	$738.84 
2 	193.34 	386.68 	580.02 	773.36 	966.70 	1,160.04 
3 	263.53 	527.06 	790.59 	1,054.12 	1,317.65 	1,581.18 
4 	333.73 	667.46 	1,001.19 	1,334.92 	1,668.65 	2,002.38 
5 	405.11 	810.22 	1,215.33 	1,620.44 	2,025.55 	2,430.66 
6 	475.31 	950.62 	1,425.93 	1,901.24 	2,376.55 	2,851.86 
 
January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2022 
Number of Collections Per Week—2 Cubic Yard Container 
Number of 
Containers 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
1 	$124.22 	$248.44 	$372.66 	$496.88 	$621.10 	$745.32 
2 	193.59 	387.18 	580.77 	774.36 	967.95 	1,161.54 
3 	261.69 	523.38 	785.07 	1,046.76 	1,308.45 	1,570.14 
4 	329.79 	659.58 	989.37 	1,319.16 	1,648.95 	1,978.74 
5 	397.89 	795.78 	1,193.67 	1,591.56 	1,989.45 	2,387.34 
6 	465.99 	931.98 	1,397.97 	1,863.96 	2,329.95 	2,795.94 
 
January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2022 
Number of Collections Per Week—3 Cubic Yard Container 
Number of 
Containers 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
1 	$130.53 	$261.06 	$391.59 	$522.12 	$652.65 	$783.18 
2 	204.94 	409.88 	614.82 	819.76 	1,024.70 	1,229.64 
3 	279.34 	558.68 	838.02 	1,117.36 	1,396.70 	1,676.04 
4 	353.75 	707.50 	1,061.25 	1,415.00 	1,768.75 	2,122.50 
5 	429.42 	858.84 	1,288.26 	1,717.68 	2,147.10 	2,576.52 
6 	503.83 	1,007.66 	1,511.49 	2,015.32 	2,519.15 	3,022.98 
 
January 1, 2023 to December 31, 2023 
Number of Collections Per Week—2 Cubic Yard Container 
Number of 
Containers 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
1 	$129.19 	$258.38 	$387.57 	$516.76 	$645.95 	$775.14 
2 	201.33 	402.66 	603.99 	805.32 	1,006.65 	1,207.98 
3 	272.16 	544.32 	816.48 	1,088.64 	1,360.80 	1,632.96 
4 	342.98 	685.96 	1,028.94 	1,371.92 	1,714.90 	2,057.88 
5 	413.81 	827.62 	1,241.43 	1,655.24 	2,069.05 	2,482.86 
6 	484.63 	969.26 	1,453.89 	1,938.52 	2,423.15 	2,907.78 
 
January 1, 2023 to December 31, 2023 
Number of Collections Per Week—3 Cubic Yard Container 
Number of 
Containers 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
1 	$135.75 	$271.50 	$407.25 	$543.00 	$678.75 	$814.50 
2 	213.13 	426.26 	639.39 	852.52 	1,065.65 	1,278.78 
3 	290.52 	581.04 	871.56 	1,162.08 	1,452.60 	1,743.12 
4 	367.90 	735.80 	1,103.70 	1,471.60 	1,839.50 	2,207.40 
5 	446.60 	893.20 	1,339.80 	1,786.40 	2,233.00 	2,679.60 
6 	523.98 	1,047.96 	1,571.94 	2,095.92 	2,619.90 	3,143.88 
 
(c)  Residential yard waste pickup is offered generally from April through the first part of November, weather dependent. Those who wish to take advantage of this service shall call the department of finance to establish an account for the service. Free drop-off services are available at the city recycling center at 1130 Old Airport Road during normal business hours. The following monthly rates shall apply for yard waste pickup: 
Green Waste 
January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 
Size of Container 	Monthly Fee Per Container 
96 Gallon 	$9.08 
 
January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 
Size of Container 	Monthly Fee Per Container 
96 Gallon 	$9.44 
 
January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021 
Size of Container 	Monthly Fee Per Container 
96 Gallon 	$9.82 
 
January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2022 
Size of Container 	Monthly Fee Per Container 
96 Gallon 	$10.40 
 
January 1, 2023 to December 31, 2023 
Size of Container 	Monthly Fee Per Container 
96 Gallon 	$10.82 
 
(d)  The city offers free large item pickup twice a year, typically in May and October. At all other times large item pickups can be scheduled by calling the department of public works, fees to be assessed depending on the type and size of the item. 
(e)  Commercial containers shall be leased from the city. The lease prices shall be as set by the city manager, and amended from time to time, to be roughly proportionate to the city's cost of providing and maintaining such containers. 
(Code 1964, § 12-17; Ord. No. 4-1994, § 4, 4-20-94; Ord. No. 3-1997, § 4, 4-16-97; Ord. No. 01-2001, § 5, 2-21-01; Ord. No. 6-2001, § 5, 6-20-01; Ord. No. 4-2008, § 1, 8-20-08; Ord. No. 14-2008, § 1, 11-19-08; Ord. No. 14-2012, § 1, 10-17-12; Ord. No. 20-2016 , § 6, 12-7-16; Ord. No. 8-2018 , § 1, 3-7-18; Ord. No. 30-2018 , § 3, 11-7-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4-1994, § 4, adopted Apr. 20, 1994, repealed § 20-89 and added a new § 20-89. Former § 20-89 pertained to disturbing containers and derived from the Code of 1964, § 12-16.  
Sec. 20-90. - Special garbage and trash collection services. 
The above rates cover removal of trash placed in containers as specified in section 20-85 of this article. Items not placed in containers may be picked up at the request of the customer at an additional charge to be set by the city manager, and amended from time to time as necessary to approximate the cost of providing this service. 
(Ord. No. 4-1994, § 5, 4-20-94) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4-1994, § 5, adopted Apr. 20, 1994, repealed § 20-90 and added a new § 20-90. Former § 20-90 pertained to duty to provide containers, and derived from the Code of 1964, § 12-18.  
Sec. 20-91. - Promulgation of rules by city manager. 
The city manager shall have authority to make such reasonable rules and regulations concerning collections and the disposal and hauling of garbage and waste matter as he or she shall find necessary hereunder, subject always to the right of appeal to the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 12-19; Ord. No. 4-1994, § 6, 4-20-94; Ord. No. 27-2018 , § K11, 10-3-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4-1994, §§ 6, 7, 9, 10, adopted Apr. 20, 1994, renumbered §§ 20-92, 20-93, 20-95, and 20-96 as §§ 20-91—20-94. Section 8 of said ordinance deleted § 20-94 in its entirety. Former § 20-94 pertained to special garbage and trash collection services, and derived from the Code of 1964, § 12-22, and Ord. No. 8-1988, adopted Sept. 7, 1988.  
Sec. 20-92. - Depositing refuse in river prohibited; penalty. 
No person shall throw, conduct or cause to be thrown or conducted any filth, offal, trash or waste matter of any kind whatever into the Rio Grande River within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 12-21; Ord. No. 4-1994, § 7, 4-20-94) 
Note— See editor's note, § 20-91.  
Sec. 20-93. - Billing. 
(a)  The garbage charges shall be included on the city utility bill. All accounts shall be considered delinquent if not paid within thirty (30) days after the date of billings, and all delinquent accounts shall be subject to discontinuance of service after notice, at the option of the city. 
(b)  In addition to all of the remedies and penalties herein provided in section 1-17, the city shall have the right to collect any such unpaid charges in the manner provided by law and to collect them in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1964, § 12-20(c), (d); Ord. No. 4-1994, § 9, 4-20-94) 
Note— See editor's note, § 20-91.  
Sec. 20-94. - Violations. 
The failure and neglect or refusal to pay the collection service charge as provided in this article by person liable therefor is hereby specifically deemed to be a violation of this article and shall subject such person to the penalties provided in section 1-17. 
(Code 1964, § 12-20(b); Ord. No. 4-1994, § 10, 4-20-94) 
Note— See editor's note, § 20-91.  
Secs. 20-95—20-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 20-100. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
Approved backflow prevention assembly means a backflow prevention assembly described in Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research's (FCCC&HR) most current "list of approved backflow prevention assemblies" or in the most current list from the American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE). 
Backflow means the undesirable reversal of the direction of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases, or other substances into the distribution pipes of the potable water supply from any source(s) caused by backpressure and/or backsiphonage. 
Backflow preventer means a device designed to prevent backflow created by backpressure or backsiphonage. 
Backpressure means backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or means that could create an elevated pressure within the nonpotable system greater than the supply pressure. 
Backsiphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by negative or sub-atmospheric pressure in the potable water supply system. 
Certified cross-connection control technician means a person who is certified in accordance with the provisions of Article 12 of the Colorado Primary Drinking Water Regulations. 
Colorado Cross-Connection Control Manual means the most recent edition of a manual that has been published by the state addressing cross-connection control practices which will be used as a guidance document for the utility in implementing a cross-connection control program as outlined below in section 20-101. 
Containment means the installation of an approved backflow prevention device, or method, on the water service line(s), so that water delivered to the service line cannot return to the city potable water distribution system due to any backpressure and/or backsiphonage condition which might arise. 
Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
Cross-connection means any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage or other waste or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, four-way valve connections, and other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of which, backflow could occur are considered to be cross-connections. 
Director means the director of public works of the city or, if none, a city water department employee designated by the director in writing. 
Hazard, degree of means an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
Isolation means a backflow device installed on a branch of the internal plumbing to protect the customer's water system. 
Nonpotable water means water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of questionable quality. 
Manager means the utility manager of the city, or if none, a city water department employee designated by the public works director in writing. 
Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in the water that may degrade the water quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair its usefulness. 
Potable water means water free from impurities in amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects. The bacteriological, chemical and radiological quality shall conform with State of Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment Primary Drinking Water Regulations. 
Utility means the City of Alamosa Water Division, a water activity enterprise of the City of Alamosa. 
Water service connection means the terminal end of the city's service connection from the public potable water system; i.e., where the city loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's stop box or shut-off valve or meter, whichever comes first, from the utility water main. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There shall be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service connection shall also include any water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
(Ord. No. 06-2008, § 1, 10-1-08)  
Sec. 20-101. - Requirements. 
(a)  Implementation and enforcement of a cross-connection control program. The manager is vested with the authority and responsibility for implementing and enforcing an effective cross-connection control program in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Backflow preventers required at all service connections. An approved backflow preventer shall be required at each and every service connection to a water service customer's premises for the safety and protection of the city water supply system and water users connected to that system. 
(c)  The manager shall have the authority to specify the type of backflow preventer to be installed at each service connection. The manager's decision with respect to the type of backflow preventer that will be required in any specific situation shall be based upon the degree of hazard posed by the facility connected or to be connected to the city water supply system. The degree of hazard shall be determined on a case-by-case basis, depending upon the circumstances of each particular case. In making determinations as to the degree of hazard and the type of device required, the manager shall rely upon the latest published edition of the Colorado Cross-Connection Control Manual for guidance and may rely upon other generally accepted authorities, including but not limited to the official publications of the American Society of Sanitary Engineering. The manager shall give notice in writing to the customer to install such an approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the customer's premises. 
(d)  Inspections and testing procedures. The manager has the authority to inspect any system owned and maintained by a utility customer to determine the extent and degree of hazard. 
(e)  The utility shall notify the utility customer at any premises where containment backflow preventers are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made upon installation of the containment device and at least once per year thereafter. The manager may require certified tests at more frequent intervals if the manager deems the potential hazard to be great enough. These inspections and tests shall be performed by a certified cross-connection control technician. 
(f)  The manager reserves the right to inspect or require the inspection of installed backflow preventers at any time to ensure the devices are in proper working order. The devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found to be defective. These inspections, tests and repairs shall be at the owners' expense. Records of such tests, repairs and overhaul, including materials and parts changed, shall be filed with the manager within ten (10) days of such activities. The utility shall keep and maintain such records in accordance with the requirements of applicable law. 
(1)  Containment devices will be tested annually according to the Colorado Revised Statutes and Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment Primary Drinking Water Regulations. 
(2)  If such devices are allowed by the manager as an acceptable alternative to total containment, isolation devices used to isolate and lower the overall degree of hazard for a property will be tested on a schedule determined by the manager. 
(3)  Isolation devices used on lawn irrigation sprinkler devices will be tested upon installation, repair or relocation, but in any event no less often than once annually. 
(g)  Policy. 
(1)  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained unless the water supply is protected as required by Colorado Revised Statutes, the regulations of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment and by this article. 
(2)  Water service to any premises shall be denied or discontinued, as the case may be, by the utility if: 
i)  Backflow preventer required by this article is not installed within the time period specified by the manager; 
ii)  An approved backflow preventer has been removed or bypassed; 
iii)  An approved backflow preventer is not maintained; or 
iv)  An unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. 
(3)  Whenever service is denied or discontinued, it shall not be provided or restored until the condition or defect that is the reason for the denial or discontinuance has been corrected. 
(4)  The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the manager to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of this article, exist. 
(5)  When, as a result of an inspection, a condition involving a violation of this article resulting in a health or sanitary hazard is determined to exist, or a utility customer fails to properly test, repair, or otherwise maintain a backflow preventer as required by this article, the manager shall have the option of immediate discontinuance of water service to the premises until the condition has been corrected, or the manager may specify a date for compliance after which time the manager may discontinue service until the customer has corrected the condition. 
(h)  Installations of backflow prevention devices. 
(1)  Backflow preventers shall be installed immediately downstream of the water service customer's water meter, whether the meter is a pit set or an interior set. In all cases, backflow preventers must be installed before the first branch line leading off the service line. 
(2)  With the manager's approval, a backflow preventer may be installed to isolate a hazard and lower the degree of hazard for containment. Such approval shall not be given unless the manager is convinced that the use of the isolation device will pose no threat to the public water supply system. 
(3)  All backflow preventers shall be located and installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and in accordance with this article and the City of Alamosa Design Standards and Construction Specifications or the Colorado Cross-Connection Control Manual. The manager shall review and approve all plans as to the type, location and installation of backflow prevention devices. 
(4)  Utility customers shall be responsible for the design, installation and maintenance of properly sized and located drains and drain systems whenever the type of backflow preventer specified or approved by the manager requires a drain. 
(5)  Plans shall not be modified relative to the type, location or installation of any backflow preventer approved by the manager without the manager's prior knowledge and written authorization. 
(6)  If the location or removal of the backflow preventer results in the meter becoming contaminated, the customer shall bear the cost of decontamination. 
(i)  Device testing equipment. 
(1)  The acceptability of any testing gauge or apparatus shall be determined by the utility. 
(2)  Any testing gauge, apparatus or scientific instrument utilized for the testing of backflow prevention devices shall be checked for accuracy at least yearly and be in calibration. The manager may require certificates or other proof of calibration for such items to be filed with the utility. 
(3)  At a minimum, all test gauges must meet ASSE-1064 Standards for Gauges. 
(4)  All certified cross-connection technicians who perform work in the city shall file copies of their licenses with the utility, upon the manager's request. 
(j)  Listings identifying approved backflow prevention devices. Any approved backflow prevention assembly required in this article shall be of a model and size approved by the manager and listed in the FCCC & HR's List of Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies and/or American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE) Series 5000. 
(Ord. No. 06-2008, § 1, 10-1-08)  
Sec. 20-102. - Compliance procedures. 
(a)  Installation of required devices. 
(1)  Upon completion of inspection of the premises, or, in the case of new construction, on review of the construction plans, the manager shall notify the owner in writing of the type of device that will be required at each service connection within the owner's facility. 
(2)  The owner shall, at its expense, purchase and install the device and any necessary plumbing or construction. Such plumbing and construction shall meet all provisions of the Colorado Cross-Connection Control Manual and the City of Alamosa Design Standards and Construction Specifications and must be inspected and approved by the utility. The device, including any device installed prior to the effective date of this article, shall be the property of the owner. 
(b)  Compliance required. 
(1)  The utility will take necessary action to ensure compliance with the Colorado Department of Health, Primary Drinking Water Regulations, 5 CCR 1003-1, and more specifically Article 12 thereof, and the Colorado Revised Statues, Section 25-1-114, as amended. 
(2)  The owner of the premises is required to permit entry to the premises for inspection, testing and maintenance purposes at reasonable times. Failure to permit entry to the premises will result in the premises being regarded as a high hazard, and a reduced-pressure-principle device will be required to protect the city's water supply system. 
(3)  The owner is required to provide all necessary plumbing and construction needed for the installation of the device. Failure to provide such required plumbing and construction will result in action being taken as provided for in sections 20-101(g) and 20-105. 
(Ord. No. 06-2008, § 1, 10-1-08)  
Sec. 20-103. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any decision of the manager regarding the type of backflow preventer required with respect to any water service connection may be appealed to the director, provided that a notice of appeal is filed in the office of the director not later than twenty (20) days following the date upon which the manager's written notice specifying the type of device is delivered to the property owner or its agent. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall identify the property owner by name, mailing address, telephone number and email address, if any, and include the address of the owner's facility. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Identify the manager's decision that is being appealed; 
(2)  Identify the type of backflow preventer that the owner believes should be installed at the owner's facility; and 
(3)  Include the owner's reasons for preferring such backflow preventer, instead of the backflow preventer designated by the manager, with or without written documentation supporting the owner's position. 
(c)  Within ten (10) days following the filing of the notice of appeal, the director, by written notice specifying the date, time and place of the hearing, shall schedule a hearing. Such hearing shall be conducted no later than thirty (30) days following the date upon which the notice of appeal was filed, unless the owner and the director both agree to a later hearing date. At the hearing, the owner may present testimony, evidence and arguments in support of the owner's position and the manager may present testimony, evidence and arguments in support of the manager's decision. 
(d)  The manager's decision shall be affirmed unless the director finds that the manager's decision was arbitrary or capricious or that such decision violates applicable federal, state or local law. The director's decision shall be rendered in writing no later than ten (10) days following the hearing and shall be final. 
(e)  The paramount issue with respect to any appeal will be whether the type of backflow preventer authorized will adequately protect the public water supply system. 
(f)  Before deciding any appeal, the director shall consider: 
(1)  Whether the backflow preventer specified by the manager is necessary to adequately protect the city's water supply system; 
(2)  Whether the backflow preventer preferred by the owner would adequately protect the city's water supply system; 
(3)  Whether the use of the backflow preventer preferred by the owner, when compared to the backflow preventer designated by the manager, is likely to result in a material decrease in the level of protection to the public water supply system. 
(g)  In cases where an existing structure is being remodeled or reconstructed or where a change in the use of an existing structure will or may create a greater degree of hazard to the public water supply system than previously existed, the city administrator may consider: 
(1)  Differences in the cost of devices and backflow prevention assemblies, when comparing the type of backflow preventer specified by the manager to the type of backflow preventer preferred by the owner; 
(2)  Differences in the cost of installing and maintaining the two (2) types of backflow preventers being compared; 
(3)  Other significant cost differences or practical difficulties associated with the use, installation and/or maintenance of the backflow preventers being compared; 
(4)  Other relevant life, safety or health concerns raised by the manager or the owner. 
(Ord. No. 06-2008, § 1, 10-1-08)  
Sec. 20-104. - Jurisdictional issues and conflicts. 
In the event the provisions of this article are in conflict with the requirements of any plumbing code or regulation applicable in the city, the provisions of this article shall apply to the extent necessary to resolve the conflict and shall be binding upon all plumbing officials performing official duties within the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-2008, § 1, 10-1-08)  
Sec. 20-105. - Violation—Penalties. 
(a)  The manager shall notify the owner, or authorized agent of the owner, of the building or premises of a violation of this article. The manager shall set a specific time for the owner to have the violation removed or corrected. If the owner fails to correct the violation in the specified time, the manager may, if in his or her judgment an imminent health hazard exists, suspend water service to the building or premises. Additional fines or penalties may also be invoked following suspension of service. 
(b)  Violations of this article may be prosecuted in municipal court and, upon conviction thereof, a violator may be fined an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. 
(Ord. No. 06-2008, § 1, 10-1-08)  
Chapter 21 - UNIFORM DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, adopted December 6, 2017, repealed Ch. 21, §§ 21-1—21-7; 21-26—21-36; 21-51—21-55; 2l-71—21-80; 21-96—21-98; 21-116—21-121; 21-136—21-153; 21-171—21-173; 21-191—21-206; 21-226—21-239; and 21-246—21-253, and reenacted a new Ch. 21 as set out herein. Former Ch. 21 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 12, 1982, adopted November 17, 1982; Ord. No. 14-1986, adopted August 20, 1986; Ord. No. 1-1992, adopted March 18, 1992; Ord. No. 7-1992, adopted September 2. 1992; Ord. No. 2-1994, adopted March 16, 1994; Ord. No. 5-1994, adopted April 20, 1994; Ord. No. 8-1997, §§ 1—3, adopted June 4, 1997; Ord. No. 10-1997, § 5, adopted June 18, 1997; Ord. No. 13-1998 §§ 1—3, 6-17-98; Ord. No. 13-1999, §§ 1—3, adopted August 4, 1999; Ord. No. 6-2000, § 1, adopted August 2, 2000; Ord. No. 9-2001, §§ 1, 2, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 8-2002, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 3, 2002; Ord. No. 08-2003, §§ 1—3, adopted August 20, 2003; Ord. No. 5-2005, §§ 1—5, adopted April, 18, 2005; Ord. No. 09-2005, § 1, adopted April 20, 2005; Ord. No. 11-2005, §§ 1—3, adopted May 18, 2005; Ord. No. 2-2008, § 1, adopted February 20, 2008; Ord. No. 2-2009, §§ 1—3, adopted March 4, 2009; Ord. No. 5-2011, §§ 2, 3, adopted March 16, 2011; Ord. No. 06-2011, § 2, adopted May 4, 2011; Ord. No. 17-2012, § 1, adopted January 2, 2013; Ord. No. 16-2014, §§ 1—3, adopted November 19, 2014 ; Ord. No. 3-2015, § 1, adopted February 18, 2015 ; and Ord. No. 23, 2017, §§ 1, 2, adopted September 6, 2017 . 
Charter reference— Zoning, art. XIV, § 4; zoning board of adjustment, art. XIV, § 5. 
Cross reference— Comprehensive plan adopted, § 2-131; animals, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; city fire zones established, § 4-1; house numbering required, § 4-61; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; regulations regarding operating and maintaining secondhand store, junk store, junkyard or automobile wrecking establishment in the city, § 10-162; mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks, Ch. 12; location of mobile homes outside mobile home park prohibited, § 12-16; location of mobile home park, § 12-23; removal of weeds, noxious vegetation, trash and rubbish required, § 14-51; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; subdivisions, Ch. 17; taxation, Ch. 18; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference— Zoning, C.R.S. 1-23-301 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, APPLICABILITY, JURISDICTION, TRANSITION, INTERPRETATION, AND SEVERABILITY  
DIVISION 1-1. - TITLE, PURPOSES, AUTHORITY, AND DISCLAIMERS 
 
Sec. 21-1-101. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Alamosa Unified Development Code," and may be referred to herein as "this Code" or "UDC." 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-1-102. - Purposes. 
(a)  General purposes. The purpose and intent of this Code is to promote the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City of Alamosa, Colorado, by using the city's home rule, constitutional, and statutory powers to: 
(1)  Implement the city's adopted comprehensive plan and other adopted plans, which plans: 
a.  Reflect the shared values of the city's inhabitants with respect to the character, form, and function of its future development; and 
b.  Promote planned, logical, fiscally and environmentally responsible, and orderly development and redevelopment within the city and other areas that may be subject to the city's regulatory authority; 
(2)  Establish zoning districts and development standards that promote the use and development of property and balance the objectives of: 
a.  Reducing barriers to entry or expansion of businesses in targeted areas by reducing the cost of obtaining development approval and complying with applicable development and design regulations; 
b.  Supporting the stability and improvement of established residential, business, and industrial areas of the city by protecting or improving their physical and functional integrity and character; 
c.  Conserving and enhancing economic, social, cultural, recreational, and aesthetic property values; and 
d.  Ensuring adequate light and air and maintaining appropriate open spaces. 
(3)  Provide for a variety of housing opportunities for a diverse population; 
(4)  Diversify and improve transportation options by enhancing multimodal transportation choices, maintaining a balance of land uses, allowing for horizontally and vertically mixed uses in appropriate locations, and other appropriate measures; 
(5)  Protect and enhance the city's tax base by enhancing opportunities for commerce, and by increasing property values through business creation and expansion, quality building improvements, infill development, and redevelopment; 
(6)  Provide for sufficient, efficient, fiscally sustainable, and cost-effective transportation, water, sanitary sewer, school, park, stormwater conveyance and treatment, and other public and private facilities and services; 
(7)  Promote public safety by securing safety from fire, flood, and other dangers through appropriate site design and adequate infrastructure and emergency services, in coordination with independent providers of public services (e.g., schools and recreation); 
(8)  Promote appropriate stewardship of natural resources, including water resources; 
(9)  Provide for efficient and fair development approval procedures that respect private property rights and promote appropriate development; and 
(10)  Promote the efficient and responsible use of public and private resources towards the accomplishment of the purposes set out herein. 
(b)  Purposes of regulation of sexually-oriented businesses. 
(1)  The purpose of the regulations in this UDC that apply specifically to sexually-oriented businesses is to set reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and siting of such businesses, and to ensure that site and building design techniques are used to minimize secondary effects, for example, by limiting views into areas of a building in which the business is operated. 
(2)  The regulations have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing an unconstitutional limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of the regulations to restrict or deny access by adults to those sexually-oriented materials that are protected by the First Amendment. 
(3)  This Code shall not be interpreted to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material or other comparable material that is not protected by the First Amendment. 
(c)  Purposes of regulation of signs. The purpose of the provisions in this UDC related to signs is to set out reasonable regulations for the design, location, installation, operation, repair, maintenance, and removal of signs in a manner that advances the city's legitimate, important, substantial, and compelling interests, while simultaneously safeguarding the constitutionally protected right of free speech. 
(d)  Other specific purposes. Other specific purposes of the various provisions of this Code may be expressed therein. Additional city council findings are set out in article IX. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-1-103. - Authority. 
(a)  Generally. The provisions of this Code are authorized as provided in this section. The city may be authorized or required to act in additional areas from time to time. This section is not intended, in any way, to limit the city's ability to accept such additional authorizations or requirements. 
(b)  City Charter. Primary authority for all provisions herein that affect the area within the corporate boundaries of the City of Alamosa and are neither matters of statewide concern nor preempted by federal law is created by Article I, Section 2 (Powers, Rights and Liabilities), Article XIV, Section 4 (Zoning), and Article XV, Section 2 (Functions and Duties [of the Department of Public Works]) of the Home Rule Charter of the City of Alamosa, Colorado. This authority is granted by Article XX, Section 6 (Home Rule for Cities and Towns), Colorado Constitution. 
(c)  Colorado Revised Statutes. Supplemental authority for the provisions of this Code is provided by the Colorado Revised Statutes, if they are not inconsistent with the provisions herein, or if they are preemptive of charter ordinances. The following provisions of the Colorado Revised Statutes may be used as authority for certain provisions of this Code: 
(1)  Regulate zoning, planning, subdivision, and development of land and building by C.R.S. Title 31, Article 23; 
(2)  Designate and administer areas and activities of state interest by C.R.S. §§ 24-65.1-101 to 108, 201 to 204, 301, 401 to 407, 501 to 502 and 34-1-301 et seq., as amended; 
(3)  Regulate planned unit development by C.R.S. § 24-67-101 et seq.; 
(4)  Regulate certain activities on, and uses of land by C.R.S. § 29-20-101 et seq., as amended; 
(5)  Regulate to avoid various types of pollution by virtue of C.R.S. § 25-7-112 (water pollution, radiation, noise); 
(6)  Regulate annexation of land by C.R.S. § 31-12-101 et seq., as amended; 
(7)  Regulate medical marijuana uses by C.R.S. Title 12, Article 43.3; 
(8)  Regulate recreation marijuana uses by C.R.S. Title 12, Article 43.4; 
(9)  Recognize the vesting of property rights for site-specific development orders according to C.R.S. § 24-68-101, et. seq.; and 
(10)  Regulate surveying practices according to C.R.S. § 38-51-101, et seq. 
(d)  United States Code. Some of the regulations in this Code are authorized or required by federal law, which may include programs that are delegated to the State of Colorado for administration. Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Flood damage prevention, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 4022; and 
(2)  Local implementation of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES"), pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342. 
(e)  Additional authority; limitations. Should further authorizing legislation exist or be enacted, this Code is additionally deemed to be enacted or effective pursuant thereto, except: 
(1)  This Code shall supersede inconsistent legislation if the city's home rule authority so allows; and 
(2)  This Code shall be superseded by such legislation only to the extent of any irreconcilable conflict if the city's home rule authority does not subordinate such legislation. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-1-104. - Statement of policy regarding marijuana uses and marijuana cultivation. 
(a)  Inherent risks. Marijuana, medical and otherwise, is a controlled substance under federal law. Therefore, applicants, investors, employees, and others associated with the marijuana uses know or should know that, among other things: 
(1)  If the U.S. DOJ chooses a different allocation of its investigative and prosecutorial resources (towards "greater enforcement"): 
a.  The federal government may be more likely to prosecute those individuals who are found in violation of the Controlled Substances Act and any other applicable federal criminal laws; and 
b.  Owners of marijuana uses and other persons who cultivate, store, or possess marijuana may be subject to penalties under federal law, including incarceration, fines, and forfeitures, including forfeiture of the building in which the use is located and the contents thereof. 
(2)  Insurance companies could deny coverage, including (among other things) coverage for casualty losses or personal injuries, based on violations of the Controlled Substances Act. 
(3)  Lenders could, at any time, determine that the use is unlawful and exercise any rights they may have under the terms of the loan, which in some cases may include a demand for immediate repayment of the entire loan balance. 
(b)  No right to continued use; no vested rights; no compensable rights. 
(1)  Based on the current U.S. DOJ policy and the state of Colorado law, this Code allows certain marijuana uses according to the regulatory program created by Colorado law. However, for so long as marijuana (medical and otherwise) remains a controlled substance under federal law, no approval pursuant to this Code shall be construed to create any enforceable or compensable property right to the establishment or continuation of a marijuana use under any circumstances. 
(2)  No approval by the city shall be construed to introduce liability to the city for any consequential harms to the applicant or those associated with a proposed marijuana use, including but not limited to business owners, investors, employees, land owners, insurance companies, lenders, caregivers, patients, or customers. 
(c)  Certain marijuana land uses prohibited. The City of Alamosa has exercised its right pursuant to Article XVIII, Section 16(5)(f) of the Colorado Constitution and prohibits the operation of certain marijuana uses as provided in article X and article XI of the Alamosa Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-1-105. - Liability for damages. 
This Code shall not be construed to hold the City or its authorized representatives responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of approvals, permitting, inspection, or re-inspection authorized herein. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 1-2. - APPLICABILITY, JURISDICTION, INTERPRETATION, AND TRANSITION 
 
Sec. 21-1-201. - Applicability. 
(a)  Generally. No land shall be developed except in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code. All of the following are considered "development" that is subject to the applicable requirements of this Code (including provisions related to nonconformities): 
(1)  The use of any building, structure, or land (including new uses, changes in use, expansions of existing uses, and material changes to the operational characteristics of existing uses). 
(2)  Construction, material alteration, repair, relocation, or demolition of infrastructure, structures (including but not limited to fences, retaining walls, signs, and towers), or buildings. 
(3)  Land clearing in anticipation of the construction of infrastructure, structures, or buildings for non-agricultural purposes. 
(4)  Any other disturbance of land, soil, vegetation, or waterways, including excavation, fill, or other alteration of land for construction or other purposes, but not including routine landscape maintenance or ditch maintenance. 
(5)  Any division of a lot or parcel of land for land development, for sale, or for lease, whether by metes and bounds, subdivision, or other technique. 
(b)  Applicability to publicly owned property. The provisions of this Code are applicable not only to private persons, agencies, corporations and organizations, but also to all public agencies, and organizations to the full extent that they may be enforceable under the United States Constitution and the Constitution and Statutes of the State of Colorado. 
(c)  Relationship to covenants, conditions, and restrictions. This Code does not abrogate private restrictions that affect the use, development, or maintenance of property. The city has no duty to search for the existence of private restrictions on property, and the city will not interpret, enforce, or apply private restrictions unless it is a party to them. 
(d)  Relationship to referral agencies. Certain applications may be referred to affected agencies or entities for review and comment. It is the applicant's responsibility to comply with all applicable rules and regulations. The city may withhold hearing or approval of an application until issues between the applicant and a referral agency or entity are resolved if the city determines that the issue affects public health or safety, or the referral agency's function or property rights. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-1-202. - Jurisdiction. 
This Code shall apply within the corporate boundaries of the City of Alamosa, Colorado, as may be amended from time to time, and, limited only to control with reference to a major street plan and not otherwise, shall also include all land lying within three (3) miles of the corporate boundaries of the city and not located within any other municipality, except that in the case of any of such non-municipal land lying within five (5) miles of the city and another municipality, the jurisdiction of the city shall terminate at a boundary line equidistant from the respective corporate limits of the city. This Code may also apply according to the terms of one (1) or more applicable intergovernmental agreements. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-1-203. - Interpretation. 
The provisions of this Code may be regarded as the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare. This Code shall be interpreted to implement its stated purposes, and in such interpretations, the specific shall control the general. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-1-204. - Transition. 
(a)  Pending applications. 
(1)  Generally. An application for approval of a site specific development plan, as well as the approval, conditional approval, or denial of approval of such plan, shall be governed only by the duly adopted laws and regulations in effect at the time the complete application is submitted. See C.R.S. § 24-68-102.5, Applications - Approval by Local Government. 
(2)  Exception. The city may adopt a new or amended ordinance or regulation, when necessary, for the immediate preservation of public health and safety, and may enforce such ordinance or regulation in relation to applications pending at the time such ordinance or regulation is adopted. See C.R.S. § 24-68-102.5, Applications - Approval by Local Government. 
(b)  Generally. Development that was approved before the effective date may be carried out within the scope of the development approval or permit, provided that the approval is valid and has not lapsed. Where development approvals or other approvals authorize the issuance of a permit, the permit must be requested within the period that the approval is valid. Work that is authorized by permits must be commenced during the period in which the permit is valid, and then diligently pursued to completion. 
(c)  Term of approvals and permits that pre-date the effective date. 
(1)  Development approvals and permits that are valid on the effective date are valid until the earlier of: 
a.  Their stated expiration date (or vested rights period), which may be on the face of the permit or development approval, or within related documents such as development agreements or regulations in force on the date of the approval; or 
b.  Two (2) years from the effective date. 
(2)  The following approvals are not terminated by this subsection: 
a.  Rezonings, except rezonings to zones that are not set out in this UDC; 
b.  Vacations or abandonments of easements or rights-of-way; 
c.  Comprehensive plan amendments; and 
d.  Recorded final plats. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
ARTICLE II. - ZONES AND LAND USE  
DIVISION 2-1. - ZONES 
 
Sec. 21-2-101. - Purpose of zones. 
The zones that are established by this article are intended to: 
(1)  Encourage new development, reinvestment, and redevelopment that are consistent with the city's comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Promote a range of economic opportunities that diversify the city's economy and provide opportunities for its residents; 
(3)  Respect and reinforce the fabric of the city's neighborhoods; 
(4)  Promote development that has character, scale, and quality that are compatible with the surrounding context; 
(5)  Provide opportunities for commercial and mixed-use development to serve city and regional residents; 
(6)  Provide opportunities for development of additional land uses that create primary employment; and 
(7)  Respond to constraints that are inherent in the landscape. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-102. - Establishment of zones. 
In order to implement the purposes and provisions of this chapter, the city hereby establishes the zones that are set out in Table 21-2-102, Zones. The acronym used to refer to the zone, as well as the general purposes of each zone, are also set out in the Table. 
Table 21-2-102 
ZONES 
Zone 	Acronym 	Purpose 
Agricultural 	A 	This zone is intended for areas that are primarily in an unimproved, natural state, as well as areas which are utilized for keeping and pasturing livestock and growing crops and plant materials, and where routine farm production activities are practiced. 
Estate Residential 	RE 	This zone is intended for large-lot (at least twelve thousand (12,000) square feet), single-family detached residential uses. 
Low-Density Residential 	RL 	This zone is intended for low-density, suburban-scale residential development. 
Medium-Density Residential 	RM 	This zone is intended to allow for mixed residential alternatives, such as small-lot single-family detached and as well as low-scale multiple-unit, attached configurations such as multiplexes, duplexes, and townhouses. 
High-Density Residential 	RH 	This zone is intended to allow for a variety of housing types such as single-family detached, small-number attached single-family dwellings, as well as multi-unit residential uses at apartment densities (maximum of twenty-five (25) dwelling units per gross acre). 
Mixed-Use 	MU 	This zone is intended to implement the mixed-use opportunity area designation of the comprehensive plan. It allows for an integrated vertical or horizontal mix of residential, commercial, office, civic, and recreational uses. 
Commercial Business 	CB 	This zone is intended to be used for a full range of retail sales and commercial services, serving both residents and visitors. This zone also allows vertically mixed commercial-residential development, such as residential apartments or condominiums located above retail shops. 
Industrial 	I 	This zone is intended to be used for clean manufacturing, research and development, processing, and warehousing activities, and for other industrial uses provided that their impacts are appropriately mitigated. Offices and limited retail that is accessory to a permitted industrial or office use are also allowed in this district. 
Central Business District 	CBD 	This zone encompasses the City's historic commercial core, framed by 4 th and 6 th Streets on the north and south, and Denver and Edison Avenues on the east and west; and is intended to support a walkable, pedestrian-scale center for shopping, entertainment, dining, arts, culture, and community events. 
Campus 	CA 	This zone is intended to promote the development of education, health care, recreation, or research campuses pursuant to a campus master plan. 
Established Neighborhoods 	EN 	This zone is intended to promote re-investment in established neighborhoods, while maintaining the existing physical character of the neighborhood 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-103. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  Generally. The locations of the various zones are depicted on the map entitled "Official Zoning Map of the City of Alamosa" (referred to hereinafter as "zoning map"). The zoning map is incorporated into and made part of this UDC. 
(b)  Maintenance of zoning map. The zoning map is maintained by the administrator. The administrator shall promptly update the zoning map after a rezoning ordinance is adopted. 
(c)  Status of zoning map. The zoning map that is on file with the administrator shall control in the event of a conflict between said map and any other reproduction of the zoning map, including but not limited to, maps that are made available electronically. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-104. - Interpretation of zoning map. 
(a)  Generally. The precise location of any zone boundary line shown on the zoning map shall be identified using the rules set out in this section. It is the intent of the city council that all land within the City of Alamosa be located within a zone. In the event that land within the city exists for which no zone can be identified (even after the application of the standards in this section), no permits for development or use of said land shall be issued until the city council adopts an initial zoning ordinance for the land. Such action shall be taken at the city council's first available regular meeting after the city discovers that the land is not zoned. 
(b)  Conflicts between zoning map and adopted rezoning ordinance, after effective date of UDC. Conflicts between the zone boundaries on the zoning map and the zoning for land that is set out in an adopted rezoning ordinance dated after the effective date of this UDC could result from administrative or scrivener's errors. In the event of such conflict: 
(1)  It is presumed that the adopted rezoning ordinance controls, and the zoning map shall be promptly corrected when the conflict is identified. In such a case, the administrator shall provide written notice of the correction to the owners of property that is the subject of a zoning map correction. 
(2)  The presumption may be rebutted if it is obvious that the error is within the text of the rezoning ordinance, in that: 
a.  The rezoning affects property that was not the subject of the application for rezoning; or 
b.  The rezoning affects only a portion of the property that was the subject of the application, the application requested rezoning for the entire property, and the application was granted without conditions that restricted the extent of the rezoning; or 
c.  The legal description of the land in the rezoning ordinance does not close, but the description of the land that was intended to be the subject of the rezoning ordinance is otherwise obvious. 
(c)  Conflict between zoning map and adopted rezoning ordinance, before effective date of UDC. Any conflict between the boundaries on the zoning map and a rezoning ordinance that was adopted before the effective date of this UDC shall be resolved as follows: 
(1)  If the zoning map conflicts with a rezoning ordinance adopted before the effective date, the zoning map boundaries control. However, if the rezoning ordinance was tied to a site specific development plan, then the zoning map designation shall not interfere with any vested rights created by the site specific development plan. 
(2)  If the zoning map conflicts with an active planned unit development ("PUD") ordinance that was adopted before the effective date, the PUD ordinance controls, unless there is record evidence to show that the zoning map was intended to adjust the boundaries of the PUD. 
(3)  If the zoning map conflicts with an inactive PUD ordinance, or with the boundary of a completed PUD, then the zoning map controls. 
(4)  If the zoning map conflicts with a development or annexation agreement, then the conflict shall be resolved according to the terms of the agreement. 
(d)  Identifiable features. In the absence of a rezoning ordinance that specifies parcel boundaries, where zoning district boundary lines appear to follow identifiable features, their location shall be determined by applying the rules of this subsection in order from (1) to (5): 
(1)  Rights-of-way. Boundary lines shown as following, or approximately following, streets, alleys, railroad tracks, or utility lines shall be construed as following the centerline of the right-of-way. Where the location of the actual streets or alleys differs from the location of corresponding streets or alleys on the zoning map, the location of the actual streets or alleys controls. 
(2)  Property lines. Boundary lines shown as following, or approximately following, lot lines or other property lines shown on the zoning map shall be construed as following such lines. 
(3)  Toe or top of slope. Boundary lines shown as following, or approximately following, the toe or the top of a steep slope, shall be construed as following the contour line of the toe or top of slope. 
(4)  Watercourses. Boundaries shown as following, or approximately following, the centerline of streams or other watercourses shall be construed as following the channel centerline. In the event of a natural change in the location of such streams or other watercourses, the zoning district boundary shall be construed as moving with the channel centerline. However, such movement shall not render existing development nonconforming. 
(5)  Parallel to features. Boundaries shown as separated from and parallel, or approximately parallel, to any of the features listed in subsections (d)(1) through (d)(4), above, shall be construed to be parallel to such features and at such distances as are shown by the scale on the zoning map. 
(e)  Un-subdivided land or no identifiable feature. In the absence of a rezoning ordinance that specifies parcel boundaries, on un-subdivided land, or where a district boundary follows no identifiable feature, the location of district boundaries shall be determined by applying the following rules in sequential order, until the boundaries are known: 
(1)  Text dimensions. The boundary shall be located by reference to dimensions shown in text on the zoning map, if any. 
(2)  Map scale. The boundary shall be located using the map scale appearing on the zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-105. - Zoning of annexed land. 
(a)  Generally. Zoning of annexed land or land in the process of annexation is an "initial zoning." 
(b)  Timing of adoption of zoning ordinance. An ordinance annexing a subject property into the city may provide for the zoning of the subject property. If the zoning ordinance is considered separately, it shall not be finally adopted by the city council before final adoption of the annexation ordinance. The zoning ordinance may be processed concurrently and heard at the same hearing as the annexation ordinance for the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-106. - Standards for rezoning. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The city council may approve an application for rezoning if it finds that: 
a.  The policy set out in subsection (b), below, is implemented; 
b.  The standards set out in subsection (c), below, are met; and 
c.  One (1) or more of the alternatives set out in subsection (d), below are met. 
(2)  If the proposed rezoning is to a CA Zone, the subject property shall be at least twenty (20) acres in area and under single ownership or control. 
(b)  Historic resource protection and hazard mitigation. 
(1)  It is the policy of the city not to rezone land in a manner that would tend to create or facilitate the creation of development rights or entitlements that would either: 
a.  Reduce the level of protection for significant historical resources that exist on the subject property; or 
b.  Expose additional people or personal property to unmitigated natural or man-made hazards that are present on the subject property. 
(2)  This policy may be waived upon a finding by the city council that: 
a.  Alternative means have been implemented (or will be implemented as a condition of development approval) to achieve a comparable or better level of historic resource protection or hazard mitigation; or 
b.  The policy is outweighed by a substantial community interest that is served by approval of the rezoning. 
(c)  Compatibility and public benefits. All applications for rezoning shall meet all of the following standards: 
(1)  The proposed zone is in conformance with the comprehensive plan's future land use map; 
(2)  The proposed zone will provide a benefit (or degree of benefit) to the community or immediate area that cannot be provided in the existing zone, and which is sufficient to offset potential adverse impacts of the proposed zone, if any; 
(3)  Public facilities are addressed in at least one (1) of the following ways: 
a.  Adequate public facilities are available to serve development in the proposed zone; or 
b.  The proposed zone would limit demands upon public facilities more than the existing zone; or 
c.  Reasonable assurances are provided that adequate facilities will be made available to serve new development by the time the new development places demands on the facilities. 
(d)  Alternative standards. All applications for rezoning shall meet at least one (1) of the following four (4) alternative standards: 
(1)  Alternative #1. The proposed zone is more appropriate than the existing zone to implement the most recent adopted city plan that: 
a.  Was developed with public input (e.g., the comprehensive plan or a special area, corridor, redevelopment, or strategic plan); and 
b.  Includes the subject property. 
(2)  Alternative #2. The proposed zone is more appropriate than the existing zone because: 
a.  There has been a change in character or capacity of public infrastructure in the area (e.g., installation of public facilities, other zone changes, new growth trends, deterioration, development transitions, etc.); and 
b.  The proposed zone allows for the reasonable development or redevelopment of the subject property in a manner that will be compatible with its existing or planned context. 
(3)  Alternative #3. The proposed zone is more appropriate than the existing zone because: 
a.  There is greater need in the city for land in the proposed zone than the existing zone; and 
b.  The proposed zone will promote a balance of land uses in the city that will improve economic opportunity for city residents. 
(4)  Alternative #4. The proposed zone is more appropriate than the existing zone because: 
a.  The existing zoning for the property was erroneously assigned; or 
b.  Development has not proceeded in reliance on the erroneous zone. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 2-2. - LAND USE 
 
Sec. 21-2-201. - Interpretation of land use tables. 
(a)  Generally. The tables set out in this division ("Land Use Tables") describe which land uses are allowed administratively ("Permitted Uses"), allowed administratively if certain conditions are met ("Limited Uses"), allowed after public hearing if certain conditions are met ("Conditional Uses"), and not allowed ("Prohibited Uses") in each zone. 
(b)  Legend. The following symbols are used in the land use tables: 
(1)  "P" means "permitted use." Permitted uses are subject to administrative review for compliance with the general requirements of this UDC. 
(2)  "L" means "limited use." Limited uses are subject to administrative review for compliance with specific standards that pertain to the use, and for compliance with general standards for all limited uses, and the general requirements of this UDC. 
(3)  "C" means "conditional use." Conditional uses are subject to public hearing review for compliance with specific standards that pertain to the use, general standards for all conditional uses, and the general requirements of this UDC. 
(4)  "-" means "prohibited use." Prohibited uses are not allowed in the specified zone. 
(c)  Multiple uses. Proposed uses that combine more than one (1) listed use, except those that qualify as "mixed-use," shall meet the substantive and procedural requirements for each applicable listed use. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-202. - Residential and special residential land use table. 
(a)  Generally. The residential and special residential land uses are set out in Table 21-2-202(a), Residential and Special Residential Land Uses. 
Table 21-2-202(a) 
RESIDENTIAL AND SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL LAND USES 
	Zones 	
Land Use 	EN 	RE 	RL 	RM 	RH 	MU 	CB 	I 	CBD 	CA 	A 	Ref. 
Residential Uses 
Single-family detached 	(by lot type - see below) 	
  Farmstead (street access) 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	
  Estate (street access) 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	P 	(b)(1) 
  Suburban (street access) 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	L 	- 	(b)(1) 
  Town (street access) 	L 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	L 	- 	(b)(1) 
  Town (alley access) 	P 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	L 	- 	(b)(1) 
Duplex or twin house 	P 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Townhouse or rowhouse 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Multiplex or Multifamily 	L 	- 	- 	L 	P 	P 	L 	- 	L 	L 	- 	(b)(2) 
Manufactured home 	L 	- 	- 	L 	L 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	- 	(b)(3) 
Cottage clusters or co-housing clusters 	L 	L 	L 	L 	L 	L 	- 	- 	- 	L 	P 	(b)(4) 
Live-work 	L 	- 	- 	L 	L 	P 	P 	- 	P 	- 	P 	(b)(5) 
Special Residential Uses 
Assisted living or congregate care 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	L 	- 	(b)(6) 
Boarding or rooming house 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	L 	- 	(b)(7) 
Convalescent center, Alzheimer's care, memory care, nursing home 	- 	- 	- 	L 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	L 	- 	(b)(8) 
Group home 	L 	L 	L 	L 	L 	L 	- 	- 	- 	L 	L 	(b)(9) 
Sheltered care facility 	- 	- 	- 	- 	C 	C 	- 	- 	- 	C 	C 	(b)(10) 
 
(b)  Residential and special residential use—Specific standards. 
(1)  Single-family detached. 
a.  Single-family detached dwelling units are allowed in the CA Zone if: 
1.  They provide lodging principally for employees of the other uses on the campus; or 
2.  They exist on the effective date of this UDC. 
b.  Street accessed town lots are allowed in the EN Zone if alley access is not available or otherwise not reasonable as determined by the administrator. 
(2)  Multiplex or multifamily. Multifamily dwelling units are allowed if: 
a.  In the EN Zone: 
1.  No individual building contains more than eight (8) dwelling units and the applicable standards of section 21-4-205, Multiplex and multifamily lot and building standards, are met; or 
2.  The multiplex or multifamily use exists on the effective date of this UDC. 
b.  In the RM Zone, no individual multiplex or multifamily building contains more than four (4) dwelling units on the ground floor. 
c.  In the CB Zone, the units are located in vertically mixed-use buildings. 
d.  In the CBD Zone: 
1.  The dwelling units are located above the ground floor; or 
2.  The dwelling units do not have frontage on Main Street. 
e.  In the CA Zone, the units provide housing principally for students, employees, or contractors of the other uses on the campus. 
(3)  Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes are allowed if: 
a.  In the EN Zone, the manufactured home was already installed upon the subject property on the effective date of this UDC. 
b.  In the RM Zone or RH Zone, the manufactured home is installed within a manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision. 
(4)  Cottage clusters or co-housing clusters. Cottage clusters or co-housing clusters are allowed if: 
a.  In the EN Zone, cottage clusters or co-housing clusters contain not more than eight (8) dwelling units and are separated from each other within the same zone by not less than two hundred (200) feet, measured from property boundary line to property boundary line. 
b.  In the RE, RL, RM, RH, or MU Zones, cottage clusters or co-housing clusters contain no more than twelve (12) dwelling units and are separated from each other within the same zone by not less than five hundred (500) feet, measured from property boundary line to property boundary line. 
c.  In the CA Zone, cottage clusters or co-housing clusters provide housing principally for students, employees, or contractors of the other uses on the campus, and include not more than twenty (20) dwelling units per cluster. 
(5)  Live-work. Live-work units are allowed if: 
a.  In the EN Zone, the subject property is located across the street from the CBD Zone. 
b.  In the RM Zone, the subject property fronts on Stockton Street. 
c.  In the RH Zone, the subject property: 
1.  Is located across the street from a CB or I zone; 
2.  Takes direct access from the street that defines the district boundary; and 
3.  Is not located within a manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision. 
(6)  Assisted living or congregate care. Assisted living or congregate care is allowed in the CA Zone if it is related to the purpose of the campus (e.g., assisted living or congregate care is allowed on a healthcare or hospital campus as part of the healthcare mission, or on a college or university campus if it is related to an educational program of the college or university). 
(7)  Boarding or rooming house. Boarding and rooming houses are allowed in the CA Zone if they principally provide lodging for students, employees, contractors, or guests of the other uses on the campus. 
(8)  Convalescent center, Alzheimer's care, memory care, or nursing home. Convalescent center, Alzheimer's care, memory care, or nursing home uses are allowed if: 
a.  In the RM Zone, the subject property is located at a zone boundary with an RH Zone or nonresidential Zone, or fronts on and takes access from an arterial or collector street. 
b.  In the CA Zone, the use is related to the purpose of the campus. 
(9)  Group home. Group homes are allowed if: 
a.  In the EN, RE, RL, RM, RH, MU, and A Zones, they are spaced from other group homes on the same street (for corner lots, both intersecting streets) by not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
b.  In the CA Zone: 
1.  The use is related to the purpose of the campus; and 
2.  They are spaced from other group homes on the same street (for corner lots, both intersecting streets) by not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(10)  Sheltered care facility. Sheltered care facilities may be allowed if: 
a.  In the RH Zone, the subject property: 
1.  Is located at a zone boundary with a nonresidential Zone; 
2.  Takes access from the street that forms the boundary; and 
3.  Is separated from other sheltered care facilities by not less than six hundred (600) feet. 
b.  In the MU Zone, the subject property is separated from other sheltered care facilities by not less than six hundred (600) feet. 
c.  In the CA Zone, the use is related to the purpose of the campus. 
d.  In the A Zone: 
1.  The subject property is at least ten (10) acres in area; and 
2.  Agriculture or outdoor recreation is a material part of the treatment program. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17; Ord. No. 32-2018 , § 1, 12-5-18)  
Sec. 21-2-203. - Civic, education, and health care land use table. 
(a)  Generally. The civic, education, and health care land uses are set out in Table 21-2-203(a), Civic, Education, and Health Care Land Uses. 
Table 21-2-203(a) 
CIVIC, EDUCATION, AND HEALTH CARE LAND USES 
	Zones 	
Land Use 	EN 	RE 	RL 	RM 	RH 	MU 	CB 	I 	CBD 	CA 	A 	Ref. 
Civic 
Cemetery or Mausoleum 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 
City Facilities 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 
Funeral Home or Crematorium 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Place of Assembly 	L 	- 	L 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	L 	P 	- 	(b)(1) 
Protective Care 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	C 	- 	- 	C 	(b)(2) 
Day Care 
Adult Day Care 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Child Care Center, Small 	L 	L 	L 	L 	L 	P 	P 	L 	- 	P 	- 	(b)(3) 
Child Care Center, Large 	L 	- 	- 	L 	L 	P 	P 	L 	- 	P 	- 	(b)(4) 
Family Child Care Home 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 
Education 
School 	L 	L 	L 	L 	L 	P 	P 	C 	- 	P 	- 	(b)(5) 
College or University 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	L 	- 	P 	- 	(b)(6) 
Vocational School / Job Training Center 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	L 	L 	- 	P 	- 	(b)(7) 
Health Care 
Hospital or Emergency Room 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	C 	P 	- 	- 	P 	- 	(b)(8) 
Medical Office or Clinic 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
 
(b)  Civic, education, and health care use—Specific standards. 
(1)  Place of assembly. Places of assembly are allowed if: 
a.  In the EN and RL Zones: 
1.  A place of assembly exists on the effective date of this UDC; or 
2.  The subject property is at least one-half (½) acre in area and located on a street corner. 
b.  In the CBD Zone, the use is located above the ground floor. 
(2)  Protective care. Protective care is allowed: 
a.  In the I Zone if: 
1.  The use is not a correctional facility or a juvenile detention facility (but may be a short-term detention facility for arrestees who are awaiting trial); 
2.  The building coverage ratio of the subject property does not exceed ten (10) percent; 
3.  The subject property is not less than five (5) acres in area; 
4.  Principal buildings are set back from property lines not less than fifty (50) feet; 
5.  The subject property is at least one thousand (1,000) feet from public parks or schools; and 
6.  Unless the use is surrounded by a security fence, the use is surrounded by a Class D bufferyard. 
b.  In the A Zone if: 
1.  The building coverage ratio of the subject property does not exceed ten (10) percent; 
2.  The subject property is not less than twenty (20) acres in area; 
3.  Principal buildings are set back from property lines not less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet; 
4.  The subject property is at least one thousand (1,000) feet from public parks or schools; and 
5.  Unless the use is surrounded by a security fence, the use is surrounded by a Class D bufferyard. 
(3)  Child care center, small. Small child care centers are allowed if: 
a.  In the EN, RE, RL, RM, or RH Zones, 
1.  The use is provided at an existing school or place of public assembly; or 
2.  The subject property is located on a corner lot and no other child care centers are located on the same street segments or within two hundred fifty (250) feet, whichever distances are shorter. 
b.  In the I Zone: 
1.  The use is provided at an existing school or place of public assembly; or 
2.  The use is provided for employees of an industrial use that is located on the same property or on adjoining property. 
(4)  Child care center, large. Large child care centers are allowed if: 
a.  In the EN, RM, or RH Zones: 
1.  The use is provided at an existing school or place of public assembly; or 
2.  The subject property is not less than one (1) acre in area, and no other child care centers are located on the same street segment or within two hundred fifty (250) feet on either side of the use along the street that it fronts, whichever distance is shorter. 
b.  In the I Zone: 
1.  The use is provided at an existing place of public assembly; or 
2.  The use is provided for employees of an industrial use that is located on the same property or on adjoining property. 
(5)  School. Schools are allowed if: 
a.  In the EN, RE, RL, RM, or RH Zones, the area of the subject property is at least: 
1.  Elementary Schools: The greater of five (5) acres or one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet per student at design capacity. 
2.  Middle Schools: The greater of ten (10) acres or one thousand nine hundred (1,900) square feet per student at design capacity. 
3.  High Schools: The greater of twenty (20) acres or two thousand (2,000) square feet per student at design capacity. 
b.  In the I Zone, a material component of the school's curriculum is industrial in nature, and the use is appropriately buffered from heavy industrial uses. 
(6)  College or university. Colleges or universities are allowed in the I Zone if the instruction provided or research performed within the zone is principally industrial in nature. 
(7)  Vocational school/job training center. Vocational schools or job training centers are allowed in the MU, CB, and I Zones if: 
a.  The curriculum is limited to traditional classroom instruction; or 
b.  The vocational training is of a type that is permitted in the underlying zone, or that is allowed as a limited use and the limited use standards are met (e.g., vocational training in auto body repair is allowed where heavy motor vehicle repair and services uses are allowed). 
(8)  Hospital or emergency room. Hospitals or emergency rooms are allowed in the MU Zone if they take access from a collector or arterial street, or from a local street that does not also provide direct access to a single-family detached or duplex use between the hospital or emergency room and a major arterial. 
(9)  Manufactured home. Manufactured homes are allowed in the CA zone if the manufactured home is used for a use otherwise allowed, and consistent with any restrictions on such use. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17; Ord. No. 32-2018 , § 2, 12-5-18)  
Sec. 21-2-204. - General commercial and motor vehicle land use table. 
(a)  Generally. The general commercial and motor vehicle land uses are set out in Table 21-2-204(a), General Commercial and Motor Vehicle Land Uses. 
Table 21-2-204(a) 
GENERAL COMMERCIAL AND MOTOR VEHICLE LAND USES 
	Zones 	
Land Use 	EN 	RE 	RL 	RM 	RH 	MU 	CB 	I 	CBD 	CA 	A 	Ref. 
General Commercial 
Heavy Retail 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	(b)(1) 
Liquor Stores 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 	P 	L 	- 	- 
Personal Services 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 	P 	P 	- 	- 
Retail Sales and Services Type 1 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	L 	P 	L 	- 	(b)(2) 
Retail Sales and Services Type 2 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	L 	- 	- 	L 	- 	(b)(3) 
Professional or Business Offices 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	L 	P 	- 	(b)(4) 
Recording or Television Studio 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	L 	P 	L 	P 	- 	(b)(5) 
Veterinary and Animal Facilities 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	L 	P 	L 	L 	P 	(b)(6) 
Motor Vehicle Land Uses 
Fueling/Charging Stations or Light Motor Vehicle Repairs and Services 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	(b)(7) 
Heavy Motor Vehicle Repairs and Services 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	P 	- 	- 	- 	(b)(8) 
Motor Vehicle Wash 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Motor Vehicle Parking 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 
Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	P 	P 	L 	- 	- 	(b)(9) 
 
(b)  General commercial and motor vehicle use—Specific standards. 
(1)  Heavy retail. Heavy retail is allowed in the MU Zone if: 
a.  Not more than thirty-three (33) percent of the area put to the heavy retail use is located outdoors; and 
b.  The outdoor area used for the display of merchandise is adjacent to a wall of a principal structure, is configured as a walled or decoratively fenced area, and is set back from property lines as required for principal buildings. 
(2)  Retail sales and services type 1. Retail sales and services type 1 are allowed if: 
a.  In the I Zone: 
1.  The retail sales or services are related to an industrial use on the subject property (e.g., the sale of merchandise that is manufactured or assembled on-site); 
2.  The retail sales or services are incidental to a permitted use (e.g., the sales of boxes or locks at a self-storage facility); or 
3.  The retails sales or services support other industrial uses (e.g., contractor supply shops). 
b.  In the CA Zone: 
1.  The use is targeted towards the students, employees, or contractors of, or visitors to, the other uses on the campus; and 
2.  The use is incidental to the overall purpose of the campus. 
(3)  Retail sales and services type 2. Retail sales and services type 2 are allowed if: 
a.  In the MU Zone or CB Zone, the use is separated from other retail sales and services type 2 uses by at least six hundred (600) feet, measured in both directions along the street upon which the use fronts. 
b.  In the CA Zone, the use is targeted towards the students, employees, or contractors of the other uses on the campus, and are incidental to the overall function of the campus. 
(4)  Professional or business offices. Professional or business offices are allowed in the CBD Zone, but if the use fronts on Main Street, it must be located above the ground floor. 
(5)  Recording or television studio. Recording or television studios are allowed if: 
a.  In the MU Zone or CB Zone, noise generated by the use will not exceed forty-five (45) dBA at any residential building wall (within or outside the zone) between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
b.  In the CBD Zone: 
1.  The subject property does not front on Main Street; and 
2.  Noise generated by the use will not exceed forty-five (45) dBA at any residential building wall (within or outside the zone) between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(6)  Veterinary and animal facilities. Veterinary and animal facilities are allowed if: 
a.  In the MU Zone or CB Zone: 
1.  Treatment is limited to small domestic animals (e.g., dogs, cats, birds, and exotic pets); and 
2.  Outdoor dog runs, if provided, are not less than two hundred fifty (250) feet away from any residential property line. 
b.  In the CBD Zone: 
1.  The subject property does not front on Main Street; 
2.  Treatment is limited to small domestic animals; and 
3.  There are no outdoor dog runs. 
c.  In the CA Zone, the use is related to the purpose of the campus. 
(7)  Fueling/charging stations or light motor vehicle repairs and services. Fueling/charging stations or light motor vehicle repairs and services are allowed in the MU Zone if they are limited to electric vehicle charging. 
(8)  Heavy motor vehicle repairs and services. Heavy motor vehicle repairs and services are allowed in the CB Zone if the area in which the use is conducted is not less than two hundred fifty (250) feet away from any residential property line. 
(9)  Motor vehicle sales and rental. Motor vehicle sales and rental is allowed in the MU Zone and CBD Zone if the use is located entirely indoors. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-205. - Hospitality, recreation, and entertainment land use table. 
(a)  Generally. The hospitality, recreation, and entertainment land uses are set out in Table 21-2-205(a), Hospitality, Recreation, and Entertainment Land Uses. 
Table 21-2-205(a) 
HOSPITALITY, RECREATION, AND ENTERTAINMENT LAND USES 
	Zones 	
Land Use 	EN 	RE 	RL 	RM 	RH 	MU 	CB 	I 	CBD 	CA 	A 	Ref. 
Hospitality 
Bar, Tavern, or Nightclub 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	P 	- 	P 	L 	- 	(b)(1) 
Bed and Breakfast 	L 	L 	L 	L 	P 	P 	P 	- 	L 	P 	P 	(b)(2) 
Campground or RV Park 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	- 	- 	L 	P 	(b)(3) 
Hotel or Motel 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 	P 	P 	- 	- 
Restaurant, Drive-In or Drive-Through 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Restaurant, Indoor 	- 	- 	- 	L 	L 	P 	P 	L 	P 	P 	- 	(b)(4) 
Restaurant, Outdoor 	- 	- 	- 	L 	L 	L 	P 	- 	P 	L 	- 	(b)(5) 
Smoking Lounge 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	P 	- 	P 	L 	- 	(b)(5.5) 
Recreation and Entertainment 
Commercial Equestrian Facility 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 
Indoor Amusement, Recreation, and Entertainment 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	P 	L 	P 	L 	- 	(b)(6) 
Indoor Gun Ranges 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	L 	- 	- 	- 	(b)(7) 
Outdoor Commercial Amusement 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Park 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	L 	P 	P 	(b)(8) 
Sexually-Oriented Business 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	L 	- 	- 	- 	(b)(9) 
Stadium or Amphitheater 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	- 	- 	- 	L 	- 	(b)(10) 
Zoo 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	C 	C 	(b)(11) 
 
(b)  Hospitality, recreation, and entertainment use—Specific standards. 
(1)  Bar, tavern, or nightclub. Bar, tavern, or nightclub is allowed if: 
a.  In the MU Zone, noise generated by the use will not exceed forty-five (45) dBA at any residential building wall (within or outside the zone) between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and must otherwise comply with the city's noise ordinance. 
b.  In the CA Zone, the use is targeted towards the students, employees, or contractors of the other uses on the campus, and is incidental to the overall function of the campus. 
(2)  Bed and breakfast. Bed and breakfast is allowed if: 
a.  In the EN Zone, the lot area of the subject property is at least seven thousand (7,000) square feet. 
b.  In the RE Zone, the lot area of the subject property is at least twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. 
c.  RL, or RM Zones: 
1.  The lot area of the subject property is at least seven thousand (7,000) square feet; and 
2.  The subject property is a corner lot. 
d.  In the CBD Zone, the subject property does not front on Main Street. 
(3)  Campground or RV Park. Campgrounds or RV Parks are allowed in the CA Zone if: 
a.  The use complies with CDPHE standards (6 CCR 1010-9) for modern campgrounds; 
b.  The use is surrounded by a Type B bufferyard; and 
c.  The use is targeted towards visitors to the other uses on the campus, and is incidental to the overall function of the campus. 
(4)  Restaurant, indoor. Indoor restaurants are allowed if: 
a.  In the RM or RH Zones, the restaurant existed on the effective date. 
b.  In the I Zone, the scale and hours of operation of the restaurant are limited such that it primarily provides service to employees and visitors to the surrounding industrial uses. 
(5)  Restaurant, outdoor. Outdoor restaurants are allowed if: 
a.  In the RM or RH Zones, the restaurant existed on the effective date. 
b.  In the MU Zone, noise generated by the use will not exceed forty-five (45) dBA at any residential building wall (within or outside the zone) between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and must otherwise comply with the city's noise ordinance. 
c.  In the CA Zone, the use is targeted towards the students, employees, or contractors of, or visitors to, the other uses on the campus, and is incidental to the overall function of the campus. 
(5.5)  Smoking lounge. Smoking lounge is allowed if: 
a.  In the MU Zone, noise generated by the use will not exceed forty-five (45) dBA at any residential building wall (within or outside the zone) between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and must otherwise comply with the city's noise ordinance. 
b.  In the CA Zone, the use is targeted towards the students, employees, or contractors of the other uses on the campus, and is incidental to the overall function of the campus. 
c.  The ventilation system shall assure that smoke from the smoking lounge is incapable of migrating into any other portion of the building hosting the smoking lounge or into any other building in the vicinity of the smoking lounge. If the smoking lounge is in a multi-unit building, the building must minimize uncontrolled pathways for the transfer of smoke and other indoor air pollutants between units by sealing penetrations in the walls, ceilings, and floors and by sealing vertical chases (including utility chases, garbage chutes, mail drops, and elevator shafts) adjacent to the units. 
d.  All business-related activities shall be conducted wholly within a building. Operation of outdoor appurtenances, such as barbecues, fire-pits, braziers or lit coals, shall not be permitted. 
e.  A smoking lounge is not permitted to be located any closer than the following distances from the listed uses: 
(1)  Residential zoning districts: five hundred (500) feet; 
(2)  Public or private pre-school, elementary school, middle school, junior high school or high school: five hundred (500) feet; 
(3)  Park or recreation facility operated by the city: five hundred (500) feet; 
(4)  Another smoking lounge: five hundred (500) feet. 
f.  No persons under eighteen (18) years of age shall be permitted within the business. 
(6)  Indoor amusement, recreation, and entertainment. Indoor amusement, recreation, and entertainment are allowed if: 
a.  In the MU Zone, noise generated by the use will not exceed forty-five (45) dBA at any residential building wall (within or outside the zone) between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and must otherwise comply with the city's noise ordinance. 
b.  In the I Zone, the use is located in an area in which light industrial uses are established, and is spaced not less than two hundred fifty (250) feet from heavy industrial or heavy logistics uses. 
c.  In the CA Zone, the use is targeted towards the students, employees, or contractors of, or visitors to, the other uses on the campus, and is incidental to the overall function of the campus. 
(7)  Indoor gun ranges. Indoor gun ranges are allowed if: 
a.  In the CB Zone, noise generated by the use will not exceed forty-five (45) dBA at any residential building wall (within or outside the zone) between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and must otherwise comply with the city's noise ordinance. 
b.  In the I Zone: 
1.  Noise generated by the use will not exceed forty-five (45) dBA at any residential building wall (within or outside the zone) between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and must otherwise comply with the city's noise ordinance; and 
2.  The use is located in an area in which light industrial uses are established, and is spaced not less than two hundred fifty (250) feet from heavy industrial or heavy logistics uses. 
(8)  Park. Parks are allowed in the CBD Zone if they are limited to passive recreation activities (e.g., plazas, fountains, outdoor seating). 
(9)  Sexually-oriented business. Sexually-oriented businesses are allowed in the CB Zone or I Zone if: 
a.  The building that contains the use is located not less than one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way lines of Highway 285 and Highway 160; 
b.  All activities related to the business are conducted indoors; 
c.  The use is spaced not less than one thousand (1,000) feet, measured as the shortest distance from the property line of the use to the nearest property line of the use or zone from which spacing is required, from: 
1.  Other sexually-oriented businesses; 
2.  Lots that are developed with dwelling units; 
3.  Residential zone boundaries; 
4.  Schools, public parks, and child care centers that are located within the city limits; and 
5.  Places of assembly; 
Except that the spacing requirement may be reduced to five hundred (500) feet from those listed uses that do not operate between 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.; 
d.  Access to the use is configured to allow for verification of age of customers before entry into rooms where sexually-oriented merchandise is displayed or sexually-oriented entertainment activities occur; and 
e.  The interior of the use is configured so that sexually-oriented activity, sexually-oriented merchandise, and depictions of said activity or merchandise, are not visible from outside of the building through windows or doors. 
(10)  Zoo. Zoos are allowed if: 
a.  In the CA Zone, the zoo is related to the purpose of an educational campus in that the animals are research subjects for faculty and students on the campus; 
b.  In the A Zone: 
1.  Noise generated by the use will not exceed forty-five (45) dBA at any residential building wall between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and must otherwise comply with the city's noise ordinance; 
2.  The subject property is at least ten (10) acres in area; 
3.  The use is enclosed with a Type B bufferyard; and 
4.  The zoo operator maintains a Colorado wildlife exhibitor's park license. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17; Ord. No. 31-2018 , § 3, 12-5-18)  
Sec. 21-2-206. - Industry, transportation, storage, and disposal land use table. 
(a)  Generally. The industry, transportation, storage, and disposal land uses are set out in Table 21-2-206(a), Industry, Transportation, Storage, and Disposal Land Uses. 
Table 21-2-206(a) 
INDUSTRY, TRANSPORTATION, STORAGE, AND DISPOSAL LAND USES 
	Zones 	
Land Use 	EN 	RE 	RL 	RM 	RH 	MU 	CB 	I 	CBD 	CA 	A 	Ref. 
Industry 
Heavy Industry 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	- 	L 	- 	(b)(1) 
Light Industry 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	L 	P 	- 	L 	- 	(b)(2) 
Marijuana Testing Facility 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	C 	- 	C 	- 	(b)(3) 
Resource Extraction, Minerals 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	- 	- 	P 	(b)(4) 
Resource Extraction, Oil and Gas 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 
Transportation 
Airport 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	C 	- 	- 	L 	(b)(5) 
Heavy Logistics 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	- 	- 	- 	(b)(6) 
Helistop 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	C 	- 	L 	L 	(b)(7) 
Storage 
Outdoor Storage Yard 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	- 	L 	- 	(b)(8) 
Self-Storage 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	P 	P 	- 	L 	- 	(b)(9) 
Disposal 
Salvage or Junk Yard 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	C 	- 	- 	- 	(b)(10) 
Transfer Station 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	C 	- 	L 	C 	(b)(11) 
 
(b)  Industry, transportation, storage, and disposal use—Specific standards. 
(1)  Heavy industry. Heavy industry is allowed if: 
a.  In the I Zone: 
1.  A truck routing plan is provided that shows how trucks will avoid streets that provide access to single-family detached and duplex uses; 
2.  Noise generated by the use will not exceed forty-five (45) dBA at any residential building wall between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; and 
3.  Outdoor storage and processing areas shall be screened from view from residential zones and public rights-of-way with a Class C bufferyard. 
b.  In the CA Zone: 
1.  The use is related to the purpose of the campus; 
2.  Heavy truck traffic is limited to two (2) trips per week; 
3.  Noise generated by the will not exceed forty-five (45) dBA at any residential building wall between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; and 
4.  Outdoor storage and processing areas shall be screened from view from residential zones and public rights-of-way with a Class C bufferyard. 
(2)  Light industry. Light industry is allowed if: 
a.  In the MU and CB Zones, the use is allowed in conjunction with on-site retail or educational uses in which the products of the use are used or sold. 
b.  In the CA Zone, the use is related to the purpose of the campus. 
(3)  Marijuana testing facility. Marijuana testing facilities may be allowed if: 
a.  In the I Zone, the facility is located not less than one thousand (1,000) feet from any other marijuana testing facility. 
b.  In the CA Zone: 
1.  The facility is located not less than one thousand (1,000) feet from any other marijuana testing facility; and 
2.  The use is related to the purpose of the campus. 
(4)  Resource extraction, minerals. Mineral resource extraction is allowed if: 
a.  All extraction activities shall be in accordance with an adopted master plan for extraction. See section 21-6-402, master plan for extraction. 
b.  The use shall be screened from view from adjacent property and public rights-of-way with a Class C bufferyard that includes an eight-foot tall privacy fence or masonry wall or earthen berm. 
c.  A truck routing plan is required. See section 21-6-403, heavy truck routing plan. 
d.  Noise generated by the use shall not exceed forty-five (45) dBA at any residential building wall between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
e.  Existing tree stands shall be preserved to the extent practicable as a method of screening the operation from adjacent public streets. 
f.  Access points and interior vehicular use areas shall be designed and maintained to limit airborne dust and erosion, and to prevent tracking of debris onto public rights-of-way. 
(5)  Airport. Airports are allowed in the I Zone or A Zone if: 
a.  A master plan for the airport and a forecast of aviation activity is provided that demonstrates that the proposal is designed to minimize the impact on existing and approved residential uses by: 
1.  Minimizing the number of residences that are brought within the fifty-five (55) DNL noise zone; 
2.  Ensuring that residential uses do not come within the sixty-five (65) DNL noise zone unless they are subject to an appropriate aviation easement; and 
3.  The airport's safety zones are situated so that the airport will not materially interfere with the anticipated development of the city; and 
b.  The airport will not interfere with safety or operations at existing airports, heliports, or helistops; and 
c.  The airport complies with all applicable federal regulations. 
(6)  Heavy logistics. Heavy logistics uses are allowed in the I Zone if: 
a.  A truck routing plan is provided that shows how trucks will avoid streets that provide access to single-family detached and duplex uses; 
b.  Noise generated by the use will not exceed forty-five (45) dBA at any residential building wall between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; and 
c.  Outdoor truck or trailer storage areas are paved and screened from view from residential zones and public rights-of-way with a Class B bufferyard. 
(7)  Helistop. Helistop is allowed in the I, CA, or A Zones if: 
a.  The helistop is intended to serve a nonresidential land use on the subject property (e.g., a hospital) 
b.  A forecast of aviation activity and noise impacts is provided that demonstrates that the proposal is designed to minimize the impact on existing and approved residential uses by: 
1.  Minimizing the number of residences that are brought within the fifty-five (55) DNL noise zone; 
2.  Ensuring that residential uses do not come within the sixty-five (65) DNL noise zone unless they are subject to an appropriate aviation easement; and 
3.  Safety zones are situated so that the helistop will not materially interfere with the anticipated development of the city; and 
c.  The helistop will not interfere with safety or operations at existing airports, heliports, or helistops; and 
d.  The helistop complies with all applicable federal regulations. 
(8)  Outdoor storage yard. Outdoor storage yards are allowed: 
a.  In the I Zone if the outdoor storage yard complies with the standards set out in section 21-4-506, outdoor storage. 
b.  In the CA Zone if: 
1.  The outdoor storage yard is related to the purpose or maintenance of the campus; and 
2.  The outdoor storage yard complies with the standards set out in section 21-4-506, outdoor storage. 
(9)  Self-storage. Self-storage is allowed: 
a.  In the MU Zone if the use is screened from view from public streets by intervening buildings and a Class B bufferyard is installed along side and rear lot lines, or: 
1.  The use is located within a multi-story building; 
2.  The building includes windows on street-facing elevations, such that not less than fifteen (15) percent of the elevations are transparent; 
3.  The principal public entrance to the building is architecturally prominent; and 
4.  Overhead doors are not present on street-facing elevations unless they are screened from view by a Class B bufferyard. 
b.  In the CA Zone if: 
1.  The self-storage facility is related to the purpose or maintenance of the campus, or is for the use of residents, employees, or students of the campus; 
2.  Overhead doors do not face public streets; and 
3.  The use is screened from view from public streets and adjacent residential zones (if any) by a Class B bufferyard or intervening buildings. 
(10)  Salvage or junk yard. Salvage or junk yards are allowed in the I Zone if: 
a.  Noise generated by the use does not exceed forty-five (45) dBA at any residential building wall between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and must otherwise comply with the city's noise ordinance; and 
b.  The outdoor areas of the salvage or junk yard comply with the standards set out in section 21-4-506, outdoor storage. 
(11)  Transfer station. Transfer stations are allowed in the I, CA, or A Zones if: 
a.  The use shall be enclosed within a Class D bufferyard that includes security fencing and access controls. 
b.  A heavy truck routing plan is required. See section 21-6-403, heavy truck routing plan. 
c.  Noise generated by the use shall not exceed forty-five (45) dBA at any residential building wall between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
d.  All waste shall be stored in an enclosed building, except that clean, palletized recyclable materials may be stacked outdoors provided that they are secured against being blown away. 
e.  The use shall be located not less than one thousand (1,000) feet from the boundary of any residential zone (on-site buffers may be counted towards the one thousand (1,000) foot separation). 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-207. - Utility and communications land use table. 
(a)  Generally. The utility and communications land uses are set out in Table 21-2-207(a), Utility and Communications Land Uses. 
Table 21-2-207(a) 
UTILITY AND COMMUNICATIONS LAND USES 
	Zones 	
Land Use 	EN 	RE 	RL 	RM 	RH 	MU 	CB 	I 	CBD 	CA 	A 	Ref. 
Utilities 
Major Utility Facilities (110+ kV Power Lines) 	C 	- 	- 	- 	- 	C 	C 	L 	- 	C 	C 	(b)(1) 
Communications 
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities 	L 	L 	L 	L 	L 	L 	L 	L 	L 	L 	P 	(b)(2) 
Telecommunications Towers 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	C 	C 	L 	- 	C 	P 	(b)(3) 
 
(b)  Utility and communications use—Specific standards. 
(1)  Major utility facilities. 
a.  No new transmission lines shall be installed without a certificate of need from the Colorado Public Utilities Commission, or an exemption certification. To the extent practicable, new transmission lines shall be located within existing transmission easements or routed outside of the City limits. 
b.  New transmission lines that are not located within existing transmission easements shall be routed to minimize their impact on the natural resource, and scenic values of the city, according to the following priorities, in descending order: 
1.  Minimize impacts of structures, construction, and maintenance on residential neighborhoods; 
2.  Minimize impacts of structures, construction, and maintenance on views of the natural environment; 
3.  Minimize impacts of structures, construction, and maintenance on historic resources; and 
4.  Minimize visual impacts using existing topographic features and existing stands of trees as screens between the route and areas of existing development within the city. 
(2)  Wireless telecommunications facilities and telecommunications towers. Wireless telecommunications facilities and telecommunications towers, including co-located facilities, shall comply with the standards of article IV, division 6, wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-208. - Agricultural land use table. 
(a)  Generally. The agricultural land uses are set out in Table 21-2-208(a), Agricultural Land Uses. 
Table 21-2-208(a) 
AGRICULTURAL LAND USES 
	Zones 	
Land Use 	EN 	RE 	RL 	RM 	RH 	MU 	CB 	I 	CBD 	CA 	A 	Ref. 
Agricultural or Commercial Crop Production 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	P 	(b)(1) 
Community Garden 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 
Keeping and Pasturing of Livestock 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 
Wholesale Nursery or Greenhouse 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	L 	L 	P 	- 	- 	P 	(b)(2) 
 
(b)  Agricultural use—Specific standards. 
(1)  Agriculture or commercial crop production. Agriculture or commercial crop production is allowed in the CA Zone if it is related to the purpose of the campus in that the agricultural products are principally researched, processed, or consumed on the campus. 
(2)  Wholesale nursery or greenhouse. Wholesale nurseries or greenhouses are allowed in MU Zone or CB Zone if: 
a.  Greenhouses and nursery storage buildings are set back according to the requirements that apply to principal buildings. 
b.  Active areas of open air nurseries are spaced not less than two hundred (200) feet from residential zones and uses, measured as the shortest distance from the nearest edge of the part of the nursery that is used to grow plants for sale to the property line of the residential zone or use. 
c.  A truck routing plan is provided that shows how trucks will avoid streets that provide access to single-family detached and duplex uses. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-209. - Uses that are prohibited in all zones. 
The following uses are prohibited in all zones within the City of Alamosa: 
(1)  Disposal of radioactive wastes; 
(2)  Fossil fuel power generation (except back-up generators for individual uses); 
(3)  Intensive agriculture; 
(4)  Marijuana uses (except medical or recreational testing laboratories); 
(5)  Nuclear power generation; and 
(6)  Slaughterhouse. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-210. - Uses that are not listed. 
(a)  Generally. If a proposed use is not listed in the land use tables of sections 21-2-201 to 21-2-208, inclusive, or in section 21-2-209, then the proposal shall be evaluated pursuant to this section. The evaluation will determine whether the proposal is a permitted, limited, conditional, or prohibited use, or whether it is something other than a principal use as such is defined by this UDC. 
(b)  Findings and intent. 
(1)  The city council recognizes that there is a middle-ground between the position that "all uses that are not specifically permitted by the UDC are prohibited" and the position that "all uses that are not specifically prohibited by the UDC are allowed." The city council finds: 
a.  The former places too much burden on the right to use property, and is therefore not consistent with the values of the residents of the city; and 
b.  The latter would frustrate the purposes and administration of this UDC by inviting arguments regarding whether a particular use is included in the list of uses regulated by this UDC and creating uncertainty that undermines the stability upon which many residents and real estate investors depend for their lifestyles and livelihoods. 
(2)  This section is intended to provide a "middle ground." It is the intent of this section to create sufficient flexibility to allow for property owners to establish new uses that are not specifically identified in this UDC, without placing upon the property owner the burden of waiting for the city to initiate and process an ordinance amending this UDC. 
(3)  This section should be interpreted to favor the establishment of the new use. Accordingly, if a new use meets the threshold determination under subsection (d), below, and is comparable to two (2) or more listed uses, then the listed use which is allowed with the least process shall be selected as the comparable use. 
(4)  It is the intent of the city council to provide flexibility, but not to allow this section to be used to avoid the application of this UDC. Likewise, it also is the intent of the city council that this section not be used to create rules and regulations that are not part of this UDC. 
(c)  Application. 
(1)  The first step of this process (the "threshold determination" in subsection (d), below) is to determine whether a proposed use is a principal use under this UDC, and not something else (like a temporary use or a structure) that should be allowed without city approval or with a more limited administrative review (e.g., a staff review, a building permit, etc.). 
(2)  If a proposed unlisted use is a principal use, then it is the intent of city council that it be approved in the same manner and under the same conditions as the single listed use to which the proposed use is most closely functionally comparable (see subsection (e), below). 
(3)  If a proposed unlisted use is not a principal use, then it is the intent of the city council to ensure that it is classified appropriately as a temporary land use, an accessory use, a part of an existing principal use, an accessory building or structure, or a sign. That classification shall be used to determine if any requirements of this UDC apply. 
(d)  Threshold determination. 
(1)  The administrator shall review the description of the proposed use and decide whether the proposed use is: 
a.  A principal land use; 
b.  A seasonal land use; 
c.  A temporary land use; 
d.  An accessory use; 
e.  An accessory building or structure; 
f.  A sign; 
g.  Mechanical, water, wastewater, electrical equipment, or communications equipment which provides services to a building or use on the applicant's property and not to other properties; 
h.  Essential services; or 
i.  An area or activity that is a customary part of the existing or approved principal use of the applicant's property. 
(2)  Proposed principal land uses shall be evaluated according to the standards of subsection (e), below. Other classifications (listed subsections (d)(1)b. to (d)(1)i., above) do not require further analysis under this section, but may be subject to other requirements of this UDC according to its terms, or to the building codes, or to other parts of the City of Alamosa Municipal Code. 
(e)  Functionally comparable principal uses. New or changed principal uses are permitted, limited, conditional, or prohibited in the same manner as uses to which they are most closely functionally comparable. An unlisted use is functionally comparable to a listed use if, with regard to each of the decision criteria below, the unlisted use is categorically similar (e.g., a residential use is not "functionally comparable" to an industrial use, even if it could otherwise meet the standards of this subsection) and has no greater negative impacts than listed use to which it is being compared: 
(1)  Average daily and peak hour trip generation (personal vehicles and heavy trucks); 
(2)  Impervious surface; 
(3)  Regulated air or water emissions; 
(4)  Noise; 
(5)  Ground vibration; 
(6)  Exterior lighting; 
(7)  Dust; 
(8)  Odors (including but not limited to odors from storage of solid wastes prior to pickup); 
(9)  Potentially hazardous conditions (such as risk of fire or explosion, projectiles leaving the site, etc.); 
(10)  Use and storage of hazardous materials; 
(11)  Secondary impacts on the community (e.g., increased crime or threats to public health, or degradation of historic resources); or 
(12)  Implementation of the comprehensive plan. 
(f)  Effect of determination. 
(1)  If the administrator finds that an unlisted use is most closely functionally comparable to a permitted, limited, or conditional use, then an application for approval of the unlisted use at a particular location shall be processed with the same restrictions as the listed use that is functionally comparable. 
(2)  If the administrator determines that an unlisted use is most closely functionally comparable to a prohibited use, or is not functionally comparable to any listed use, then the unlisted use is a prohibited use. 
(g)  Record-keeping; proposed amendment. The administrator shall keep a record of all determinations of functionally comparable uses. The administrator may propose an amendment to this UDC to incorporate such uses into existing use definitions, or to add new land uses and revise the land use tables accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-211. - Essential governmental or public utilities services. 
Essential governmental or public utilities services are allowed in all zones. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 2-3. - LIMITED AND CONDITIONAL USE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 21-2-301. - Purpose and application of division. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to promote compatibility among land uses in the city by establishing standards for specific uses that are designated as limited ("L") or conditional ("C") in the tables of article II, division 2, land use. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  In zones where a land use is designated as a limited use ("L") in the tables of article II, division 2, land use, the limited use shall be approved if: 
a.  The standards of this division that relate to the use in the zone in which the subject property is located are met; and 
b.  All other requirements of this UDC are met. 
(2)  In zones where a land use is designated as a conditional use ("C") in the tables of article II, division 2, land use, the conditional use shall be approved if: 
a.  The standards of this division that relate to the use in the zone in which the subject property is located are met; 
b.  The general standards for all conditional uses that are set out in section 21-2-302, general standards for all conditional uses, are met; and 
c.  All other requirements of this UDC are met. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-302. - General standards for all conditional uses. 
(a)  Generally. All conditional uses shall meet the standards of this section related to plan implementation, compatibility, and community need. 
(b)  Plan implementation. The proposed conditional use in its proposed location will not conflict with the implementation of current adopted plans of the city, including, but not limited to, the comprehensive plan; 
(c)  Compatibility. The conditional use: 
(1)  Will be compatible with surrounding land uses; 
(2)  Is proposed for a location that is appropriate in terms of mitigating the impacts or risks of the use to the natural environment, or the environmental impacts or risks are mitigated through the design or the operation of the use; and 
(3)  Will not materially detract from the character of the immediate area or negatively affect the anticipated development or redevelopment trajectory (for example, by creating a critical mass of similar conditional uses that is likely to discourage permitted uses by making the vicinity less desirable for them). 
(d)  Community need. The conditional use, in the proposed location, will: 
(1)  Address a material need for the use in the community; or 
(2)  Create jobs that are likely to pay more than the median wages for the region, or support a critical mass of related and mutually supportive land uses that promote economic development and opportunity. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 2-4. - TEMPORARY USES 
 
Sec. 21-2-401. - Temporary use permit required; conditions of approval. 
(a)  Generally. A temporary use permit is required for the temporary special events identified in section 21-2-402, the temporary retail uses identified in section 21-2-403, and the temporary buildings and temporary construction uses identified in section 21-2-404. Temporary use permits are issued by the administrator. 
(b)  Exceptions. This division does not apply to: 
(1)  The use of public parks and rights-of-way; 
(2)  Pre-approved temporary uses (which are subject to the standards set out in the applicable site plan or other approval and not the standards of this division); and 
(3)  Special events (e.g., sporting events or festivals) at elementary schools, middle schools, high schools, colleges, or universities. 
(c)  Conditions of approval. 
(1)  Conditions of approval may be imposed by the administrator if deemed necessary to minimize the potential adverse impacts of a temporary use on neighboring properties, public streets, or the city, or to reduce hazards to the public, historic resources, or event participants. 
(2)  Such conditions shall not relate to the content of or viewpoint expressed in constitutionally protected speech, except where a statute so authorizes (e.g., statutes that protect minors from speech that is harmful to minors) or a court of competent jurisdiction has upheld such conditions. 
(3)  Generally, conditions of approval may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Modification of, or restrictions on, the hours of operation or duration of the event. 
b.  Arrangements for the provision of services or equipment, such as traffic control or security personnel, fire protection, emergency response personnel, or specialized equipment that is reasonably needed to ensure safe operation of the use or event. 
c.  Additional insurance, based on the scale and risks involved with the use or event. 
(d)  Denial of temporary use permit. The city may refuse to issue a temporary use permit if the application does not demonstrate compliance with the applicable standards of this division, or if proposed use or event is too large to be safely conducted at the proposed site. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-402. - Temporary special events. 
(a)  Generally. The standards of this section apply to temporary special events that are likely to attract more than two hundred fifty (250) people at any one (1) time. Such events may include outdoor entertainment, cultural, religious, or charitable events, as well as flea markets, farmers' markets, craft shows, and comparable events. 
(b)  Standards for approval of temporary use permits for special events. 
(1)  Frequency and duration. No site shall host a temporary special event more than seventy-five (75) days per year, and no individual event shall be longer than twelve (12) days. 
(2)  General site requirements. The event shall be held on a site that is suitable for safely accommodating the expected level of attendance. 
(3)  Buildings and structures. 
a.  Temporary structures that are taller than the height limitations of the applicable zone shall be set back from all property lines a distance of one (1) foot for every two (2) feet in height. 
b.  If existing buildings are used, they must be in a condition that is safe and appropriate for the intended level of use and occupancy. 
(4)  Access and circulation. 
a.  The street from which access is taken must have adequate capacity to serve the temporary special event. A traffic management plan may be required to ensure safe access and safe operation of adjacent streets. 
b.  Safe on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation routes shall be identified and unobstructed emergency access shall be provided. 
(5)  Parking. 
a.  The number of parking spaces available for the temporary special event shall be sufficient to meet the peak demands of the event, assuming four (4) attendees per vehicle. 
b.  Fewer parking spaces may be allowed if the applicant demonstrates that the reduced number is justified based on the nature of the event, the provision of alternative transportation (e.g., buses), or the close association of the event with a permanent use that provides parking for attendees. 
c.  Parking may be provided in remote locations, provided that if parking is provided more than eight hundred (800) feet from the boundaries of the temporary special event, an appropriate level of shuttle service is provided between the event and the parking area. 
d.  Truck parking and loading areas shall be provided as necessary to service the event and provide for storage of trucks and trailers that will remain on-site. Trucks shall be routed away from local residential streets. 
(6)  Noise. Noise controls may be required for temporary special events that are expected to generate high levels of noise or to operate after 9:00 p.m. 
(7)  Security. Adequate security shall be provided for the proposed temporary special event. 
(8)  Sanitation. Adequate restrooms shall be provided to serve the event. Trash containers and recycling bins shall be placed in convenient areas, including principal places of assembly, near food and beverage vendors, near restrooms, and at pedestrian entry and exit points. 
(9)  Insurance. 
a.  A certificate of insurance shall be provided to the city demonstrating that the applicant has a commercial general liability insurance policy, written on an occurrence basis for bodily injury, personal injury, property damage, and product liability, with a minimum limit of liability of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in the aggregate. 
b.  Additional endorsements may be required for events with amusement rides or alcoholic beverages. 
(10)  Restoration and cleanup. The site of the temporary event and the abutting right-of-way shall be cleared of all litter and debris from the event, including temporary signage, not more than two (2) days after the last day of the event. The city may require a refundable deposit for site clean-up. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-403. - Temporary retail uses. 
(a)  Generally. Temporary retail uses involve the outdoor sales of retail products on a temporary basis. Illustrative temporary commercial sales uses include seasonal holiday sales (e.g., pumpkins and Christmas trees), outdoor sales by a single itinerant vendor (e.g., poster or framed art sale, carpet sales). Temporary retail sales uses do not include garage sales or sales at temporary special events. 
(b)  Standards for approval of temporary use permits for temporary retail uses. 
(1)  Frequency and duration. No site shall host a temporary retail use more than one hundred (100) days per year, and no individual event shall be longer than fourteen (14) days. 
(2)  General site requirements. The event shall be held on a site that is suitable for safely accommodating the scale of the temporary retail use. Temporary retail uses may be conducted from vacant property or property that is not used for residential purposes. 
(3)  Setbacks. Retail displays and temporary structures shall be set back not less than ten (10) feet from all property lines. 
(4)  Structure height. Temporary structures shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. 
(5)  Access and circulation. 
a.  The street from which access is taken must have adequate capacity to serve the temporary retail use. A traffic management plan may be required to ensure safe access and safe operation of adjacent streets. 
b.  Safe on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation routes shall be identified and unobstructed emergency access shall be provided. If the temporary retail use is located on a site that includes operating permanent uses, the temporary retail use shall not interfere with access to the permanent uses. 
(6)  Parking. 
a.  Four (4) parking spaces shall be provided for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of land area occupied by temporary retail displays. Such parking spaces shall not be spaces that are required for operating permitted uses on the site. 
b.  Fewer parking spaces may be allowed if the applicant demonstrates that the reduced number is justified based on the nature of the event, the provision of alternative transportation (e.g., buses), or the close association of the event with a permanent use that provides parking for customers who are likely to visit the permanent use and the temporary retail use in the same trip. 
c.  Parking may be provided in remote locations, provided that if parking is provided more than eight hundred (800) feet from the boundaries of the temporary retail use, an appropriate level of shuttle service is provided between the event and the parking area. 
d.  Truck parking and loading areas shall be provided as necessary to service the temporary retail use and provide for storage of trucks and trailers that will remain on-site. Trucks shall be routed away from local residential streets. 
(7)  Site restoration and cleanup. The site of the temporary retail use and the abutting right-of-way shall be cleared of all litter and debris from the temporary use, including temporary signage, not more than two (2) days after the last day of the sales event. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-404. - Temporary buildings and temporary construction uses. 
(a)  Temporary buildings and temporary construction uses. Temporary buildings and temporary construction uses are those uses that relate to construction activities or the temporary expansion of an existing permanent use into a portable building. There are two (2) classes of temporary buildings and temporary construction uses: 
(1)  Class A temporary building/construction uses. "Class A temporary building/construction uses" are temporary heavy construction uses, such as batch plants for lime, concrete, asphalt, or other materials, or areas for the bulk outdoor storage or staging of construction materials or equipment. 
(2)  Class B temporary building/construction uses. "Class B temporary building/construction uses" are temporary buildings that are used on construction sites as contractor offices, sales offices, security buildings, sanitary facilities, or storage buildings, as well as storage containers that are larger than eight (8) feet by eight (8) feet by twenty (20) feet, or dumpsters with a total capacity of more than thirty (30) cubic yards. Class B temporary building and construction uses also include manufactured buildings that are used to temporarily expand the capacity of an existing use, including portable classrooms on school campuses, either in advance of and during permanent construction or to accommodate a temporary increase in capacity. 
(b)  Temporary storage containers and dumpsters. 
(1)  Temporary storage containers and dumpsters are used for temporary outdoor storage of household or business property in shipping containers during remodeling, landscaping, cleaning, or moving; or the temporary placement of a roll-off dumpster or comparable solid waste container (e.g., disposable containers that require collection service other than standard household garbage collection) for household waste, construction waste, or landscaping debris. To qualify as a "temporary storage container" or "temporary dumpster," and not a "class B temporary building/construction use:" 
a.  Storage containers may not be larger than eight (8) feet by eight (8) feet by twenty (20) feet in dimension; and 
b.  Dumpsters may not have a capacity that is larger than thirty (30) cubic yards. 
(2)  Temporary storage containers or dumpsters shall not be placed on the public right-of-way without prior approval by the public works director. 
(c)  Standards for approval of temporary use permits for temporary buildings and temporary construction uses. The standards that apply to approvals of temporary use permits for temporary buildings and temporary construction uses are set out in Table 21-2-404(c), Standards for Approval of Temporary Buildings and Temporary Construction Uses. 
Table 21-2-404(c) 
STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF TEMPORARY BUILDINGS AND TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION USES 
Temporary Use 	Location of Use 	Operational 
Requirements 	Duration of Use 
Class A Temporary Building/Construction Uses 
Concrete, mortar and asphalt batching operations 	Must be located at least 600 feet from property lines of lots that are used for residential purposes (measured as the shortest linear distance from the edge of the operation and the boundary or property line). Must be set back at least 40 feet from the right-of-way line and 25 feet from all other property lines. 	Restroom facilities shall be provided on-site for employees/contractors. Plans shall provide for stormwater management and erosion and sediment control, and upon termination of use, final grading, site stabilization, and re-vegetation. Surety shall be provided in the amount of 125 percent of the estimated site restoration cost plus estimated road repair cost along principal truck routes. All necessary traffic control shall be provided at the applicant's expense. Appropriate dust control measures shall be implemented. Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. if any residential use is located within 1,000 feet; 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. in all other locations. 	Established by approval, but will coincide with the use of the facility for a specified construction project. 
Temporary construction yard 	Must be set back at least 40 feet from the right-of-way line and 25 feet from all other property lines. 	Plans shall provide for stormwater management and erosion and sediment control, and upon termination of use, final grading, site stabilization, and re-vegetation. Surety shall be provided in the amount of 125 percent of the estimated site restoration cost plus estimated road repair cost along principal truck routes. Appropriate dust control measures shall be implemented. Truck and heavy equipment activity limited to 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. if any residential use is located within 1,000 feet; 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. in all other locations. 	Established by approval, but will coincide with the use of the facility for a specified construction project. 
Class B Temporary Building/Construction Uses 
Temporary manufactured buildings 	The building shall be set back as required for principal buildings, if possible. Alternative locations may be approved as part of a construction staging plan if there is no reasonable alternative location that complies with the required setbacks. 	May be used by construction superintendent, construction workers, contractors, and other personnel on a construction team; a security office; or as temporary office or classroom space. Restroom facilities shall be provided on properties that use temporary buildings unless the buildings are only used for storage. May not be used as a residence. 	No limit for public schools; construction-related facilities shall be removed prior to certificate of occupancy for last building; other buildings shall be removed within two years from date of permit. 
Model homes and on-site real estate offices 	On lot or parcel proposed for development 	Sales limited to units located on the lot or parcel proposed for development; sales offices within model homes shall meet applicable building code criteria. Restroom facilities shall be provided in or within 100 feet of model homes or on-site real estate offices. 	Temporary buildings shall be removed upon completion of the model home(s) or suitable permanent floor area on-site. 
Temporary Storage Containers and Dumpsters 
Temporary storage containers 	On a subject property that is served by the temporary storage container. No encroachment onto lawn areas or sidewalks is permitted. On nonresidential parcels, containers must be set back 20 feet from all property lines unless the Administrator determines a lesser setback is appropriate due to the configuration of the site. 	N/A 	In general, 5 days If an active construction project is occurring with a valid permit, 6 months If located behind the principal building and screened from view from public rights-of-way, 1 year. 
Temporary dumpsters 	Must be located on a hard surface on the lot using the dumpster, set back at least one ft. from the property line. Dumpsters shall be located behind nonresidential and multifamily buildings and shall not obstruct required parking areas. 	All refuse shall be contained within the dumpster, and shall be secured if necessary to prevent it from being removed from the dumpster by wind or wildlife. 	If used for construction or renovation, may remain in place for 1 week after the permit is closed. If used for other purposes, up to 10 days. 
 
(d)  Extension of approvals. Approvals pursuant to this section may be extended upon demonstration of good cause, appropriate maintenance, extension of any required surety, and diligent pursuit of the purposes for which the uses were established. All applications for renewal of a temporary use permit issued pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the Administrator at least seven (7) days before the permit expires. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-405. - Short-term rental of dwelling units. 
(a)  Generally. The standards of this section apply to short-term rental of residential dwelling units, which includes rental of all or part of a dwelling unit for a term of less than thirty (30) days. 
(b)  Business license required. No dwelling unit shall be offered for short-term rental unless the owner or lessee (with the written authorization of the owner) has first secured a business license for such use from the city. 
(c)  Parking. Short-term rental contracts shall limit the number of guest vehicles to the number of parking spaces that are available to accommodate them. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 2-5. - ACCESSORY USES 
 
Sec. 21-2-501. - Storage and overnight parking of commercial vehicles or recreational vehicles. 
(a)  Generally. Commercial vehicles and mobile homes shall not be parked or stored on any lot that is developed with a dwelling, or on any lot in any residential district (such lots, individually and collectively, "residential lots"), except in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Commercial vehicles. No more than one (1) commercial vehicle, not to exceed one and one-half (1½) tons rated capacity for each family living on the premises, shall be parked overnight on a residential lot. In no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline, or liquefied petroleum products be parked overnight on a residential lot. 
(c)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles, except pickups with camper shells, shall not be parked or stored overnight on a residential lot unless such parking or storage is behind the front building line. A recreational vehicle shall not be occupied for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours while it is parked or stored on private property within the city (except in a manufactured home park or campground). 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-2-502. - Home occupations and cottage industries. 
(a)  Generally. The accessory use of a dwelling unit for business purposes is allowed pursuant to the standards of this section. These regulations do not apply to the use of work spaces in live-work units or to a residential building that has been legally converted to a commercial use. 
(b)  Requirements and limitations. These standards are intended to protect the residential function and physical character of the neighborhood in which the accessory business use is located, including, but not limited to, the quiet enjoyment of nearby residential property by its occupants. 
(1)  Minimum lot and building requirements. 
a.  There are no minimum lot and building requirements for a home occupation. 
b.  The minimum lot area for a cottage industry is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(2)  Physical features and building character. The following are not allowed: 
a.  Modifications to the principal building that alter its residential character; 
b.  Construction of accessory buildings or structures that alter the residential character of the lot; 
c.  New, separate entrances to the building that provide access only to the area used for the business; and 
d.  Outdoor displays. 
(3)  Limitations on business operations. The following are not allowed: 
a.  Solicitation, advertising, or promotion of the business in a manner that generates commercial traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, that is inconsistent with the residential character of the neighborhood. 
b.  Parking demands that are inconsistent with the residential use of the neighborhood. 
c.  Use of areas outside of the principal or accessory buildings for business purposes, except parking. 
d.  Business use of a garage in a manner that reduces available parking on the lot to less than that required by this UDC. 
e.  Pick-up or delivery of products or machinery by commercial vehicles or heavy trucks other than parcel pick-up and delivery services. 
f.  Production of noise, vibration, light, dust, odor, fumes, smoke, or other comparable effects which are detectable outside the dwelling unit. 
g.  Storage of hazardous, combustible, or volatile materials in amounts which are greater than typically stored for home use. 
h.  Storage of motor fuels in amounts that are greater than typically stored for home use. Storage of more than ten (10) gallons of gasoline or diesel fuel on site shall be presumed to be in violation of this requirement if related to a home-based business. 
i.  No commercial vehicles associated with the business shall be stored at the home location or stored parked on residential streets. 
j.  Professional services, instruction, or counseling to more than one (1) person at one (1) time unless it meets the standards of subsection (b)(5) of this section. 
(4)  Employees. 
a.  A home occupation may employ any resident of the dwelling unit, plus one (1) additional employee who does not reside in the dwelling unit. A cottage industry may employ any resident of the dwelling unit, plus three (3) additional employees who do not reside in the dwelling unit. 
b.  Employees who work off-site shall not regularly gather at the dwelling unit for transportation to off-site locations. 
(5)  Small groups. 
a.  Professional services, instruction, or counseling to small groups of up to six (6) persons are allowed as a cottage industry. 
b.  Professional services, instruction, or counseling to small groups of up to four (4) persons may be allowed as a home occupation if the following are met: 
1.  The total number of small group gatherings shall not exceed two (2) times per week. 
2.  The small groups shall not be scheduled on the same day of the week. 
(6)  Building and fire code compliance. If the business use of the home involves employees who are not residents of the home, the building shall comply with all applicable building and fire codes, as amended from time to time. 
(c)  Business license required. The use of a dwelling unit for business purposes requires a business license from the city. 
(d)  Continuation of established business use of the home. Any lawful business use of the home that is operating on the effective date, which has a current, valid business license, shall be permitted to continue notwithstanding the provisions of this section; provided, however, that such use is not expanded or modified in a manner that creates a greater impact on the neighborhood. Future expansions or modification of the principal building or use, or change in the business license shall thereafter comply with all applicable provisions of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
ARTICLE III. - DENSITY, INTENSITY, OPEN SPACE, LANDSCAPE SURFACE, AND SCALE  
DIVISION 3-1. - PURPOSE AND APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 
 
Sec. 21-3-101. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to set out density, intensity, open space, landscape surface, and scale requirements to ensure that new development in each zone is compatible with the existing or planned character and scale of the zone. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-3-102. - Application of article. 
(a)  Division 2, residential development yield, establishes a residential density limitation and a minimum open space ratio for each zone. The maximum density is used to calculate the maximum number of dwelling units that are allowed on a subject property. The minimum open space ratio is used to determine how much of the subject property may be developed with buildings and paved areas. The buildable area of the subject property may be laid out with a variety of lot types, based on the housing types that are allowed in the zone (see section 21-2-202, residential and special residential land use), and the lot and building standards for those housing types (see article 4, division 2, housing palette). 
(b)  Division 3, nonresidential and mixed-use development yield, sets out standards for the minimum amount of landscape area that is required in nonresidential or mixed-use development, and standards for the scale of nonresidential buildings that are located within residential zones. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 3-2. - RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT YIELD 
 
Sec. 21-3-201. - Residential density and open space. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The number of dwelling units that may be constructed on a subject property is based on the area of the subject property and the zone in which it is located. 
(2)  After the maximum number of dwelling units is calculated according to the standards of this section, the specifications for individual lots or building types shall comply with the requirements of article IV, division 2, housing palette, for the type(s) of housing that will be developed. 
(b)  Density and open space by zone. The maximum residential density and minimum open space ratio ("OSR") for each zone are set out in Table 21-3-201(b), Maximum Density and Minimum Open Space Ratio. 
Table 21-3-201(b) 
MAXIMUM DENSITY AND MINIMUM OPEN SPACE RATIO 
	Zones 
Standard 	EN 	RE 	RL 	RM 	RH 	MU 	CB 	I 	CBD 	CA 	A 
Maximum Density (u/a) 	12 	3 	5 	12 	18 	18 	12 	N/A 	not 
limited 	18 	0.2 
Minimum Open Space Ratio ("OSR") (%) 	N/A 	N/A 	10% 	10% 	12.5% 	15% 	N/A 	N/A 	- 	10% 	- 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-3-202. - Alternative compliance with open space ratio requirements. 
(a)  Generally. The minimum open space ratio may be met (in whole or in part) by preserving an equivalent amount of open space on private property as provided in this section. 
(b)  Standards for alternative compliance. Private property may be counted towards open space requirements if all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The proposed development has fewer than ten (10) dwelling units; and 
(2)  The plat includes building envelopes and, as appropriate, designated landscape areas, that will ensure that: 
a.  Applicable yard requirements of the housing palette (see article IV, division 2, housing palette) will be applied; and 
b.  Buildings and structures (except fences) are not allowed in areas that are used to meet the open space requirement; and 
(3)  The drainage plan shows how drainage will be conveyed to appropriate stormwater facilities; and 
(4)  Bufferyards, if required, are identified on the plat as landscape easements; and 
(5)  Covenants, conditions, and restrictions: 
a.  Provide for the ongoing maintenance of landscape easements (where such easements exist); 
b.  Ensure that the maintenance requirement is enforceable by the city; and 
c.  Require the written consent of the administrator prior to amendment of the maintenance obligation. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 3-3. - NONRESIDENTIAL AND MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT YIELD 
 
Sec. 21-3-301. - Required landscape surface ratio. 
(a)  Generally. The standards of this section apply to nonresidential and mixed-use development. 
(b)  Required landscape surface ratio ("LSR"). Required LSRs for nonresidential uses in each zone are set out in Table 21-3-301(b), Minimum LSR by Zone. The LSR is the minimum portion of the subject property that must be allocated to natural features, permeable surfaces, or landscaping. 
Table 21-3-301(b) 
MINIMUM LSR BY ZONE 
	Zones 
Standard 	EN 	RE 	RL 	RM 	RH 	MU 	CB 	I 	CBD 	CA 	A 
Minimum 
LSR 	15% 	25% 	25% 	15% 	15% 	10% 	10% 	- 	- 	15% 	80% 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-3-302. - Development intensity. 
(a)  Generally. In nonresidential and mixed-use zones, the intensity of development (e.g., floor area ratio), is not directly regulated. Instead, it is limited by required parking, landscape surface ratio, setbacks, building height, and buffering requirements. The intensity of specific uses may be limited by use-specific or district-specific building coverage, floor area, or height standards, or by conditions of approval of a conditional use. 
(b)  Nonresidential scale in residential zones. 
(1)  In residential zones (EN, RE, RL, RM, and RH), the gross floor area of nonresidential buildings (except schools and places of public assembly) shall be limited based on the type of street from which primary access is taken, as provided in Table 21-3-302(b), Nonresidential Building Scale in Residential Zones. 
Table 21-3-302(b) 
NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING SCALE IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES 
Classification of Street from which Access is Taken 	Maximum Building Coverage 	Nonresidential Gross Floor Area Limit 
	RE, RL 	EN, RM, RH 	
State Highway or Arterial 	25% 	35% 	No Specific Limit 
Collector 	20% 	30% 	15,000 sf. 
Local Street 	15% 	25% 	8,000 sf. 
 
(2)  The maximum nonresidential floor area for a subject property that is bounded by streets of different classifications may be based on a higher-order bounding street from which the property does not take access, provided that: 
a.  The street that provides access intersects with the larger bounding street; and 
b.  No residential front yards are located across the street in the area between the access to the nonresidential parcel and the larger bounding street. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
ARTICLE IV. - LOT, BUILDING, AND STRUCTURE STANDARDS  
DIVISION 4-1. - ESTABLISHED NEIGHBORHOOD ZONE 
 
Sec. 21-4-101. - Purpose and application of division. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to provide standards that allow for neighborhood diversity and stability in the EN Zone. The EN Zone is generally characterized by medium and higher density single-family development, with duplexes and small multifamily buildings interspersed. 
(b)  Application of division. The standards of this division apply within the EN Zone. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-102. - Status of existing lots and buildings in EN zone. 
(a)  Protection of existing lots, buildings, and density. 
(1)  Lots within the EN Zone that were lawfully created and existing as of the date the zoning of the lot changed to the EN Zone are "conforming" for the purposes of this UDC regardless of their dimensions. 
(2)  Buildings within an EN Zone that were lawfully constructed as of the date the zoning of the lot changed to the EN Zone are "conforming" to these regulations regardless of their height, building coverage, floor area ratio, or setbacks. 
(3)  Duplex and multifamily residential dwelling units within the EN Zone that were lawfully constructed as of the date the zoning of the lot changed to the EN Zone are "conforming" to these regulations with regard to density. 
(4)  It is the policy of the city to allow for the continuation of existing residential uses, and for the construction of new single-family detached buildings on existing vacant lots in the EN Zone. As such, the development yield of each existing vacant lot in the EN Zone shall be a minimum of one (1) single-family detached dwelling unit. 
(b)  Restriction on subdivision of combined lots. If two (2) or more existing lots of record are combined for the purposes of development as of the effective date (i.e., an existing building footprint spans two (2) or more lots), they shall not be subsequently split for the purposes of separate development, unless all of the resulting lots meet the applicable minimum requirements for lot width, lot frontage, and lot area. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-103. - EN zone flexible setback standards. 
(a)  Generally. In general, the standards of article IV, division 2, housing palette, apply within the EN Zone. However, with regard to residential building setbacks: 
(1)  Setback standards apply to new residential building construction on vacant lots, redevelopment of developed residential lots for residential use, and to nonresidential buildings. Front setbacks may be reduced for single-family detached and duplex uses as provided in subsection (b), below. 
(2)  Setback standards apply to expansions of existing residential buildings, except that such standards may be modified according to subsections (b) and (c), below. 
(b)  Contextual front or rear setback reduction. 
(1)  The required front setback may be reduced if it is demonstrated that: 
a.  Fifty (50) percent or more of the lots on the same side of the street segment (not counting the applicant's lot) are developed with buildings that are set back at distances that are less than the required front yard setback; 
b.  The average front setback of all of the developed lots on the same side of the street segment (with fractions dropped) is less than the required front setback; and 
c.  The reduced front setback is not less than the average front setback of all of the developed lots on the same side of the street segment. 
(2)  The required rear setback may be reduced for an addition to an existing building if it is demonstrated that the proposed rear building setback is equal to not more than ten (10) percent less than the average actual rear setback of the other homes on the same side of the same block. 
(c)  Individual lot setback reductions. The following setback reductions are allowed for additions to existing buildings. 
(1)  All setbacks. Setback reductions on individual lots shall be applied only if it is demonstrated that the setback-specific standards below are met, and: 
a.  The proposed construction does not interfere with planned expansion of right-of-way (if right-of-way expansion is planned, the encroachment shall be evaluated as if the right-of-way has been expanded); 
b.  The proposed construction does not result in interference with a utility easement, drainage easement, emergency access, or required sight triangle; and 
c.  The proposed addition does not create new or increased nonconformity with respect to the building code or fire code (e.g. fire separation distance) on either the subject property or adjoining property. 
(2)  Front setbacks. 
a.  Option #1. The reduction is ten (10) percent or less of the required front setback, and the encroachment will not reduce the depth of a driveway to: 
1.  Less than twenty (20) feet in length to the edge of the sidewalk; or 
2.  Less than twenty-five (25) feet in length to the edge of pavement if no sidewalk is either provided or planned. 
b.  Option #2. The reduction is more than ten (10) percent of the required front setback, but less than twenty-five (25) percent of the required front setback, and: 
1.  No garage doors or carport openings that face the street are located in the reduced setback area; 
2.  The improvement is not more than eighteen (18) feet in height; 
3.  The proposed construction does not involve the destruction of a healthy, mature tree; and 
4.  If the encroachment is more than ten (10) feet wide (measured parallel to the front building line), then a canopy tree or evergreen tree is located between the encroachment and the street. 
c.  Option #3. The existing building encroaches upon the setback as of the effective date, and: 
1.  The proposed construction does not involve the destruction of a healthy, mature tree; 
2.  The proposed construction will not reduce the depth of a driveway to less than twenty (20) feet in length to the edge of the sidewalk or less than twenty-five (25) feet in length to the edge of pavement if no sidewalk is either provided or planned; and 
3.  The proposed construction will be set back not less than ninety (90) percent of the setback of the existing building. 
(3)  Interior side setbacks. Interior side setbacks may be reduced by up to forty (40) percent if it is demonstrated that the proposed construction meets the following standards: 
a.  Limit of encroachment towards residential property. If the lot that adjoins the proposed building expansion is used for residential purposes, then: 
1.  The building expansion is screened from view from the street by at least one (1) evergreen tree per story of the building expansion, unless it encroaches into the required side setback less than one (1) foot closer to the lot line than the existing building; 
2.  Building expansions that are twelve (12) feet in height (measured from the average grade across the side of the proposed construction facing the abutting lot) or less are set back at least forty-two (42) inches from the side lot line; and 
3.  Building expansions that are more than twelve (12) feet in height (measured from the average grade across the side of the proposed construction facing the abutting lot) are set back at least five (5) feet from the side lot line. 
b.  Limit of encroachment towards nonresidential property or open space. If the lot that abuts the proposed building expansion is used for nonresidential purposes or permanent open space that is at least twenty (20) feet in width, then the building expansion is set back at least forty-two (42) inches from the side lot line. 
c.  Horizontal dimension. The building expansion, combined with the existing building, will not create a horizontal building dimension of more than fifty (50) feet that does not include an offset in the building wall of at least two (2) feet for a horizontal distance of at least six (6) feet. 
d.  Windows. The building expansion does not include a window that is located directly across from another window on a residential building that is closer than fifteen (15) feet away, unless: 
1.  The window is on the first floor and a privacy fence is installed between the two (2) buildings to a height of six (6) feet; or 
2.  The window is not operational and is made of glass block or frosted glass. 
(4)  Street side setbacks. 
a.  On corner lots of double-loaded blocks, street side setbacks may be reduced up to fifty (50) percent if it is demonstrated that: 
1.  The portion of the building expansion that encroaches on the street side setback contains not more than fifteen (15) percent of the floor area of the building; and 
2.  No horizontal dimension of the part of the building expansion that encroaches upon the street side setback runs for more than thirty (30) feet unless there is an offset of at least two (2) feet for a distance of at least six (6) feet to break up the apparent mass of the building wall. 
b.  On corner lots that are not on double-loaded blocks, street side setbacks may be reduced as if the street side setback were a front setback. 
(5)  Rear setbacks. Rear setbacks may be reduced up to twenty (20) percent if it is demonstrated that: 
a.  No driveway on an alley-loaded lot with a rear-facing garage door will be affected such that its resulting length will be between three (3) and twenty (20) feet. 
b.  There will be at least five hundred (500) square feet of useable, permeable landscaped area in the back yard. 
c.  The encroachment affects not more than forty (40) percent of the rear elevation of the building. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 4-2. - HOUSING PALETTE 
 
Sec. 21-4-201. - Purpose and application of division. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to set out types of housing that may be developed in the city, and to establish minimum lot and building standards (and in some cases, other applicable standards) for each housing type. The housing palette provides a range of choices for lot sizes and housing types so that applicants may design projects that promote affordability and diversity, address multiple market demands, and (where appropriate) protect open space and natural resources. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  Measure the available land. Step 1 is to multiply the open space ratio by the land area of the subject property to determine how much land must be open, and how much land is available for development. The open space that is required in each zone is set out in article III, density, intensity, and open space. 
(2)  Calculate the maximum unit count. Step 2 is to calculate the maximum unit count by multiplying the allowed density by the land area of the subject property (in acres, including open space). The densities that are allowed in each zone are set out in article III, density, intensity, and open space. 
(3)  Check the use table. Step 3 is to determine which housing types are allowable in the zone by checking the use table. The use table is set out in section 21-2-202, Residential and Special Residential Land Use Table. 
(4)  Check the site design standards and apply the housing palette. Step 4 is to review the applicable design standards in this article and article V, Site design standards, and then lay out a development that incorporates the allowable housing types of the applicant's choice. The standards for each housing type are set out in this division. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-202. - Single-family detached lot and building standards. 
(a)  Generally. The single-family detached housing type consists of a single-family dwelling unit located on a privately-owned lot with private yards on each side of the dwelling unit. An illustrative single-family detached building is shown in Figure 21-4-202(a), Illustrative Single-Family Detached Building. 
Figure 21-4-202(a) 
ILLUSTRATIVE SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED BUILDING 
  
 
(b)  Lot and building standards. Table 21-4-202(b), Single-Family Detached Lot and Building Standards, below, establishes lot and building standards for four (4) types of single-family dwelling units. 
Table 21-4-202(b) 
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Single-Family 
Lot Type 	Lot 
Area 	Lot 
Width 	Front 
Setback 	Side 
Setback 	Street Side 
Setback 	Rear 
Setback 	Stories 	BCR 1 
Estate Lot (Street Access) 
Principal Building 	  
  
12,000 sf. 	  
  
100 ft. 	30 ft. 	10 ft. 	30 ft. 	25 ft. 	2.5 	  
  
20% 
Accessory Buildings 			49 ft. 	10 ft. 	30 ft. 	10 ft. 	2 	
Suburban Lot (Street Access) 
Principal Building 	  
  
7,000 sf. 	  
  
60 ft. 	25 ft. 	10 ft. 	25 ft. 	25 ft. 	2 	  
30% 
Accessory Buildings 			35 ft. 	3 ft. 2 	25 ft. 	5 ft. 	1 	
Town Lot (Street Access) 
Principal Building 	  
  
4,500 sf. 	  
  
45 ft. 	25 ft. 	5 ft. 	8 ft. 	20 ft. 	2 	  
  
40% 
Accessory Buildings 			35 ft. 	3 ft. 2 	8 ft. 	5 ft. 	1 	
Town Lot (Alley Access) 
Principal Building 	  
  
4,500 sf. 	  
  
40 ft. 	15 ft. 
Behind 
front 
building 
line 	5 ft. 	8 ft. 	20 ft. 	2 	  
  
40% 
Accessory Buildings 				3 ft. 2 	8 ft. 	5 ft. 3 	1.5 	
TABLE NOTES: 
1 BCR = Building Coverage Ratio 
2 Increased setback may be required if required by fire code. 
3 No garage with an overhead door that faces an alley shall be set back to create a driveway that is more than 3 ft. but less than 20 feet long. 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-203. - Duplex lot and building standards. 
(a)  Generally. The duplex housing type consists of two (2) single-family dwelling units located in a single building (either side-by-side or over-and-under). An illustrative duplex building is shown in Figure 21-4-203(a)(1), Illustrative Side-by-Side Duplex Building, and Figure 21-4-203(a)(2), Illustrative Over-Under Duplex Building. 
Figure 21-4-203(a)(1) 
ILLUSTRATIVE SIDE-BY-SIDE DUPLEX BUILDING 
  
 
Figure 21-4-203(a)(2) 
ILLUSTRATIVE OVER-UNDER DUPLEX BUILDING 
  
 
(b)  Lot and building standards. Table 21-4-203(b), Duplex Lot and Building Standards, below, establishes lot and building standards for duplex buildings. 
Table 21-4-203(b) 
DUPLEX LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Duplex Type 	Lot 
Area 1 	Lot 
Width 1 	Front 
Setback 	Side 
Setback 	Street 
Side Setback 	Rear 
Setback 	Stories 	BCR 2 
Side-by-Side (Street Access) 
Principal Building 	  
  
8,000 sf. 	  
  
80 ft. 	25 ft. 	5 ft. 	8 ft. 	20 ft. 	2 	  
  
40% 
Accessory Building 			Behind principal building 	5 ft. 	8 ft. 	5 ft. 	1 	
Side-by-Side (Alley Access) 
Principal Building 	  
  
  
  
8,000 sf. 	  
  
  
80 ft. 	15 ft. 	5 ft. 	8 ft. 	25 ft. 	2 	  
  
  
40% 
Garage (attached or detached) 			Behind principal building 	5 ft. 	8 ft. 	3 ft. 3 	1 4 	
Accessory Building 			Behind principal building 	5 ft. 	8 ft. 	3 ft. 	1 	
Over-Under (Alley Access) 
Principal Building 	  
  
  
7,000 sf. 	  
  
  
70 ft. 	15 ft. 	5 ft. 	8 ft. 	25 ft. 	2 	  
  
  
45% 
Garage (attached or detached) 			Behind principal building 	5 ft. 	8 ft. 	3 ft. 3 	1 4 	
Accessory Building 			Behind principal building 	5 ft. 	8 ft. 	3 ft. 	1 	
TABLE NOTES: 
1 Measured per building. No dwelling unit shall be allocated less than 40 percent of the lot area or lot width. 
2 BCR = Building Coverage Ratio 
3 No garage with an overhead door that faces an alley shall be set back to create a driveway that is more than 3 ft. but less than 20 feet long. 
4 Attached garages within the setbacks for the principal building are treated as part of the principal building. 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-204. - Townhouse lot and building standards. 
(a)  Generally. The townhouse housing type consists of three (3) or more dwelling units located in a single building, in which the individual dwelling units are separated by vertical firewalls. An illustrative townhouse building is shown in Figure 21-4-204(a), Illustrative Townhouse Building. 
Figure 21-4-204(a) 
ILLUSTRATIVE TOWNHOUSE BUILDING 
  
 
(b)  Lot and building standards. Table 21-4-204(b), Townhouse Lot and Building Standards, below, establishes lot and building standards for townhouse buildings. 
Table 21-4-204(b) 
TOWNHOUSE LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Townhouse Lot Type 	Lot Area (per unit) 	Lot Width (per unit) 	Front Setback 	Building Separation 	Street Side Setback 	Rear Setback 	Stories 	Units per Bldg. 
Street Access 	2,500 sf. 	25 ft. 	10 ft./ 
20 ft. 1 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	15 ft. 	2 	6 
Alley or Parking Court Access 	2,200 sf. 	22 ft. 	8 ft. 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	0 ft. 2 	3 	8 
TABLE NOTES: 
1 Setback to garage door. 
2 May be increased as the City determines is necessary to provide safe access along the alley or within the parking court. Garage doors that face alleys or parking courts shall not be located in the area between 4 feet and 20 feet from the nearest edge of the alley or parking court. 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-205. - Multiplex or multifamily lot and building standards. 
(a)  Generally. Multiplex and multifamily are both multiple-family building types. Multiplex buildings are constructed to look like large single-family homes. See Figure 21-4-205(a)(1), Illustrative Multiplex Building. The multifamily housing type is typically in the form of apartments or condominiums of two (2) to three (3) stories in height. See Figure 21-4-205(a)(2), Illustrative Multifamily Building. Multifamily dwelling units may also be located in the upper floors of vertically mixed-use buildings; however, those buildings are subject to the standards for nonresidential and mixed-use buildings set out in division 3, Nonresidential and mixed-use lot and building standards, and not the standards of this section. 
Figure 21-4-205(a)(1) 
ILLUSTRATIVE MULTIPLEX BUILDING 
  
 
Figure 21-4-205(a)(2) 
ILLUSTRATIVE MULTIFAMILY BUILDING 
  
 
(b)  Lot and building standards. Table 21-4-205(b), Multiplex and Multifamily Lot and Building Standards, below, establishes lot and building standards for multiplex and multifamily buildings. 
Table 21-4-205(b) 
MULTIPLEX AND MULTIFAMILY LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS 
	Housing Type 
Development Standards 	Multiplex 	Multifamily 
Dimensions of Subject Property 
Minimum Area of Subject Property 	3-unit building: 8,000 sf. 
4-unit building: 10,000 sf. 
5-unit building: 12,000 sf. 	11,000 sf. 
Minimum Width of Subject Property 	3-unit building: 80 ft. 
4-unit building: 100 ft. 
5-unit building: 120 ft. 	70 ft. 
Minimum Setbacks and Building Separation 
Front Setback 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 
Interior Side Setback 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 
Building Separation 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 
Street Side Setback 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 
Rear Setback 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 
Parking Setback 	3 ft. 1 	3 ft. 1 
Height and Building Coverage 
Maximum Stories 	2.5 	3 
Maximum Building Coverage Ratio 	45% 	45% 
TABLE NOTES: 
1 No garage with an overhead door that faces an alley shall be set back to create a driveway that is more than 3 ft. but less than 20 feet long. 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-206. - Manufactured home lot and building standards. 
(a)  Generally. Manufactured homes are a special type of single-family detached home, in that they are constructed in factories according to federal standards (instead of local building codes), and are designed to be moved. There are three (3) types of manufactured homes: single-wide (transported in one (1)section), double-wide (transported in two (2) sections), and triple-wide (transported in three (3) or more sections). An illustrative example of a single-wide is provided in Figure 21-4-206(a), Illustrative Manufactured Home. 
Figure 21-4-206(a) 
ILLUSTRATIVE MANUFACTURED HOME 
  
 
(b)  Lot and building standards. 
(1)  The lot and building standards for manufactured homes are set out in Table 21-4-206(b), Manufactured Home Lot and Building Standards. The standards of this Subsection apply to manufactured homes that are located in new manufactured home parks or manufactured home subdivisions, or expanded areas of existing manufactured home parks or manufactured home subdivisions. 
(2)  In existing manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions, manufactured homes may be placed on existing lots or spaces that do not comply with this section, provided that they are spaced a minimum of ten (10) feet apart and ten (10) feet from the boundary lines of the manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision. 
(3)  Where manufactured homes are allowed as an individual residential use in other areas, they are subject to the standards applied to single-family detached homes. 
Table 21-4-206(b) 
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Lot 
Type 	Lot 
Area 	Lot 
Width 	Front 
Setback 	Side Setback 	Street Side Setback 	Rear Setback 	Stories 	BCR 1 
Single-Wide 	4,000 sf. 	40 ft. 	15 ft. 2 	5 ft. 	8 ft. 	10 ft. 	1 	50% 
Double-Wide 	5,000 sf. 	50 ft. 	15 ft. 2 	5 ft. 	8 ft. 	10 ft. 	1 	50% 
Triple-Wide 	6,000 sf. 	60 ft. 	15 ft. 2 	5 ft. 	8 ft. 	10 ft. 	1 	50% 
TABLE NOTES: 
1 BCR = Building Coverage Ratio 
2 Where parking is provided in front of the building, the setback shall be increased to 20 ft. 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-207. - Tiny home, cottage, small duplex, and co-housing cluster lot and building standards. 
(a)  Generally. The tiny home and cottage housing types consists of small single-family detached residences that have a floor area that is less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. The small duplex housing type is a duplex with a total floor area of less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. These housing types are typically arranged in a cluster of three (3) to twelve (12) residential buildings around a green space, and may include a common building as an amenity (e.g., a common kitchen or meeting area). Vehicular access is provided by a shared parking lot. See Figure 21-4-207(a), Illustrative Housing Cluster. 
Figure 21-4-207(a) 
ILLUSTRATIVE HOUSING CLUSTER 
  
 
(b)  Lot and building standards. Table 21-4-207(b), Tiny Home, Cottage, Small Duplex, and Co-Housing Cluster Lot and Building Standards, below, establishes lot and building standards for clusters of tiny homes, cottages, and small duplex buildings, and for common buildings within the clusters. 
Table 21-4-207(b) 
TINY HOME, COTTAGE, SMALL DUPLEX, AND CO-HOUSING CLUSTER LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Housing Type 	Lot 
Area 1 	Lot Width 2 	Front Setback 3 	Side Setback 3 	Street Side Setback 3 	Rear Setback 3 	Building Spacing 4 	Stories 	OSR 5 
Tiny Home 6 	7,500 sf. 	75 ft. 	  
  
  
15 ft. 	  
  
  
10 ft. 	  
  
  
10 ft. 	  
  
  
15 ft. 	  
  
15 ft. front to front; 10 ft. all other 	1 	  
  
  
35% 
Cottages 7 	12,500 sf. 	125 ft. 						1.5 	
Small Duplex 7 	12,500 sf. 	125 ft. 						1.5 	
Common Building 	12,500 sf. 	125 ft. 						1.5 	
TABLE NOTES: 
1 Minimum area of subject property in which cluster is developed. 
2 Minimum width of subject property in which cluster is developed. For clusters that include more than one housing type, the largest minimum width applies. 
3 Applies to cluster as a whole in relation to adjoining property. 
4 Minimum spacing among buildings within the cluster. 
5 OSR = Open Space Ratio. 
6 Building footprint of 400 sf. or less. 
7 Building footprint of 800 sf. or less. 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-208. - Live-work lot and building standards. 
(a)  Generally. The live-work housing type consists of a dwelling unit with an integrated ground-floor workspace. Live-work buildings may take many forms, including single-family detached, townhouse, and multifamily. An illustrative single-family detached live-work building is shown in Figure 21-4-208(a), Illustrative Live-Work Building. 
Figure 21-4-208(a) 
ILLUSTRATIVE LIVE-WORK BUILDING 
  
 
(b)  Lot and building standards. Table 21-4-208(b), Live-Work Lot and Building Standards, below, establishes lot and building standards for live-work buildings. 
Table 21-4-208(b) 
LIVE-WORK LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS 
Lot Type 	Lot and Building Standards 
Single-Family Detached 	See sec. 21-4-202, single-family detached lot and building standards 
Townhome 	See sec. 21-4-204, townhouse lot and building standards 
Multifamily 	See sec. 21-4-205, multiplex or multifamily lot and building standards (multifamily only) 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 4-3. - NONRESIDENTIAL AND MIXED-USE LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 21-4-301. - Nonresidential and mixed-use lot and building standards. 
Table 21-4-301, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Lot and Building Standards, sets out the lot and building standards for nonresidential and mixed-use development. 
Table 21-4-301 
NONRESIDENTIAL AND MIXED-USE LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS 
	Zones 
Standard 	EN 	RE 	RL 	RM 	RH 	MU 	CB 	I 	CBD 	CA 	A 
Minimum Lot Standards 
Lot Area 	8,000 sf. 	0.5 ac. 	0.5 ac. 	8,000 sf. 	8,000 sf. 	0.5 ac. 1 	0.5 ac. 	0.5 ac. 	N/A 	N/A 	5 ac. 
Lot Width (ft.) 	80 ft. 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 	80 ft. 	80 ft. 	100 1 	100 	100 	25 	N/A 	165 
Minimum Setback Standards (ft.) 
Front 	25 	30 	30 	25 	25 	0 	30 	30 	0 	25 	30 
Street Side 	10 	30 	30 	25 	10 	0 	30 	30 	0 	25 	30 
Interior Side 
  Principal Buildings 	7 	10 	10 	7 	7 	0 2 	7 	7 	0 	7 	20 
  Accessory Buildings 	3 	10 	3 	3 	3 	0 2 	3 	3 	0 	3 	15 
Rear 
  Principal Buildings 	25 	25 	25 	25 	25 	0 2 	25 	25 	0 	20 	25 
  Accessory Buildings 	5 	10 	5 	5 	5 	0 2 	5 	5 	0 	5 	10 
Maximum Building Height Standards (ft.) 
Principal Buildings 	35 	35 	35 	35 	50 	50 	50 	50 	50 	90 	45 
Accessory Buildings 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	25 	20 	45 	45 
TABLE NOTES: 
1 Lot area and lot width may be reduced if parking is provided in centralized facilities outside of the subject property and sufficient landscape surface is provided in the development as required by section 21-3-301, required landscape surface ratio. 
2 If the lot line from which the setback is measured is shared with a lot that is put to residential use, the setback is 20 feet. 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 4-4. - EXCEPTIONS TO LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 21-4-401. - Purpose and application of division. 
The purpose of this division is to set out the exceptions to the lot and building standards that are set out in division 2, housing palette, and division 3, nonresidential and mixed-use lot and building standards. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-402. - Setback flexibility. 
(a)  Generally. Setbacks may be administratively modified as provided in this section. 
(b)  Effect on building coverage. The objective of this section is not to allow an increase the permissible building coverage, but instead, to provide for a range of relationships between buildings and the street. 
(c)  Front setbacks. 
(1)  EN Zone. In the EN Zone, the front yard requirement for single-family detached and duplex dwellings that front on local streets (not collector or arterial streets) may be reduced if: 
a.  Thirty (30) percent or more of the lots on the same side of the street segment (not counting the subject property) within the same zone are developed with principal buildings that are set back at distances that are less than the required front setback; 
b.  The reduced front setback is not less than the average front setback of the developed lots on the same side of the street segment that are set back les than the required front setback. (See Figure 21-4-402(c)(1), Illustrative EN Zone Front Setback Reduction). 
Figure 21-4-402(c)(1) 
ILLUSTRATIVE EN ZONE FRONT SETBACK REDUCTION 
  
The owner of lot 4 seeks to redevelop the lot. The required front setback line is 15 feet. However, lots 1 and 8 were constructed to a 12-foot setback, and lots 5 and 7 were constructed to a 13-foot setback. Since more than 30 percent of the lots have less than the required front setback, the owner of lot 4 may build to the average setback of lots 1, 5, 7, and 8, which is 12 ½ feet. 
 
(2)  CA Zone. In the CA Zone, front setbacks may be reduced to five (5) feet if: 
a.  A build-to line is established by the campus master plan or by existing conditions along the same side of the block; 
b.  For single-family detached, duplex, and townhome buildings: 
1.  Access is taken from an alley; 
2.  Garage doors that face alleys are not located in the area between three (3) feet and twenty (20) feet from the nearest edge of the alley; and 
3.  Buildings have a porch or stoop frontage (see Figure 21-4-402(c)(2), Illustrative Frontage Types). 
c.  For nonresidential, mixed-use, and multifamily buildings: 
1.  Parking is not located between the building and the street; 
2.  Nonresidential and mixed-use buildings have shopfront, gallery, arcade, or forecourt frontages; and 
3.  Multifamily buildings have a porch, stoop, gallery, arcade, or forecourt frontage (see Figure 21-4-402(c)(2), Illustrative Frontage Types). 
Figure 21-4-402(c)(2) 
ILLUSTRATIVE FRONTAGE TYPES 
  
 
(d)  Interior side setbacks. 
(1)  Interior side setbacks for single-family detached lots may be reduced by the Administrator up to thirty (30) percent (or up to one hundred (100) percent if the applicant owns or controls both affected lots), provided that: 
a.  The reduction is necessary due to the existing development of the lot, or specific physical or access constraints justify the reduction; 
b.  There is no reduction of an interior side setback along a lot line that is also a boundary line of the subdivision; 
c.  Buildings on both sides of the reduced setback are constructed to applicable building and fire codes based on their proximity to each other; 
d.  There is sufficient space between the buildings for building maintenance and emergency access, or a sufficient easement is provided on the adjacent lot for such access; and 
e.  Windows that face the reduced setback are not located across from each other within a six-foot offset distance along the building wall unless they are frosted and inoperable, or located at least six (6) feet above the room floor of the story in which they are located. 
(2)  Interior side setbacks for lots that are not used for single-family detached purposes may be reduced by the Administrator by up to twenty (20) percent, provided that: 
a.  The reduction is necessary due to the existing development of the lot, or specific physical or access constraints justify the reduction; 
b.  The reduction affects only one (1) side lot line; 
c.  The affected side lot line is not shared with a lot that is put to single-family detached or duplex use; and 
d.  Buildings on both sides of the reduced setback are constructed to applicable building and fire codes based on their proximity to each other. 
(e)  Street side setbacks. Street side setbacks may be reduced by the Administrator by up to twenty (20) percent, provided that: 
(1)  The reduction is necessary due to the existing development of the lot, or specific physical or access constraints justify the reduction; 
(2)  There will be no material impact on public safety as a result of potential obstruction of the street for sight distances, or movement of emergency vehicles; 
(3)  Sight triangles are not obstructed; 
(4)  Building walls are located at least five (5) feet from the inside edge of the public sidewalk and do not encroach upon the public right-of-way or drainage or utility easements; and 
(5)  All street-facing overhead doors are set back twenty (20) feet. 
(f)  Rear setbacks. Rear setbacks may be reduced by the Administrator by up to twenty (20) percent for lots with street access, and up to one hundred (100) percent for lots with alley access, provided that: 
(1)  The reduction is necessary due to the existing development of the lot, or specific physical or access constraints justify the reduction; 
(2)  If the lot is accessed from an alley: 
a.  There is sufficient area for parking, and maneuvering, and safe passage along the alley; 
b.  Sight triangles are not obstructed; 
c.  There will be no material impact on public safety as a result of potential obstruction of a street or alley for sight distances or movement of emergency vehicles; and 
d.  All alley-facing overhead doors are set back less than three (3) feet or more than twenty (20) feet. 
e.  The building will not encroach upon a drainage or utility easement. 
(3)  If the lot is accessed from a street, windows within the reduced setback area do not face the back yards of adjoining single-family detached or duplex residential uses unless they are frosted and inoperable, or located at least six (6) feet above the room floor of the story in which they are located 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-403. - Projections into required setbacks. 
(a)  Generally. Specified structures and architectural features may encroach into required setback areas as provided in Table 21-4-403(a), Setback Reductions for Building Elements, Equipment, and Structures. The encroachments authorized by this section are subject to all applicable building code requirements. 
Table 21-4-403(a) 
SETBACK REDUCTIONS FOR BUILDING ELEMENTS, EQUIPMENT, AND STRUCTURES 
	Yard In Which Setback Reduction is Allowed 	Amount of Setback Reduction Allowed (use whichever column allows the least setback reduction) 
Architectural Element 	Front 	Interior Side 	Street Side 	Rear 	Measured From Setback Line Towards Property Line 	Measured From Property Line Towards Interior of the Property 
Air conditioning units 	No 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	3 ft. 	3 ft. 
Awnings, canopies, or sunshades without supports that extend to ground 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	4 ft. 	2 ft. 
Balconies 	Yes 	No 	Yes 	Yes 	2 ft. 	4 ft. 
Chimneys 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	2 ft. 	3 ft. 
Decks, porches, or patios that are not covered, if the surface of the deck is less than 3 feet above average adjacent grade 	Yes 	No 	Yes 	Yes 	Any distance 	3 ft. 
Decks, porches, or patios that are not covered, if the surface of the deck is 3 feet or more above average adjacent grade 	No 	No 	No 	Yes 	2 ft. 	5 ft. 
One-story bay windows 	Yes 	No 	Yes 	Yes 	2 ft. 	4 ft. 
Overhanging eaves and gutters 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	4 ft. 	2 ft. 
Parking shelters, detached from the principal building and open on all sides 1 	No 	Yes 	No 	Yes 	50% of the required setback 	3 ft. 
Stairways that are necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to property; fire escapes. 	No 	No 	Yes 	Yes 	As necessary 	3 ft. 
Cornices, canopies, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features and other similar architectural features 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	2 ft. 	2 ft. 
TABLE NOTES: 
1 This exception does not apply in zones that are developed with single-family detached dwelling units of any type. 
 
(b)  Limitations. No building, building element, or structure shall cross a lot line: 
(1)  Into separately owned property, unless a recorded document provides for access to and maintenance of the projection; 
(2)  Into public property or rights-of-way, unless a revocable encroachment permit is issued by the administrator; 
(3)  Into access easements; or 
(4)  Into utility easements, unless the design of the improvement and a recorded agreement allows access to the utility and allows the utility or the city to efficiently remove the encroachment at the property owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-404. - Exception to building height regulations. 
The height of chimneys, radio and television towers, wind chargers, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers, spires, grain elevators, and necessary mechanical appurtenances may exceed the building height regulations subject to approval as a conditional use, except that the standards for approval that are set out in section 21-2-302, general standards for all conditional uses, are replaced with the following: 
(1)  The additional height does not materially affect the adequacy of light and air on adjacent properties or public rights-of-way; 
(2)  The additional height does not materially affect views from neighboring properties to landmarks or scenic vistas; 
(3)  The additional height does not affect public safety in case of structural collapse; and 
(4)  Adequate firefighting capabilities are available to address the additional height in the event of a fire emergency. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 4-5. - SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 21-4-501. - Purpose of division. 
The purpose of this division is to set out standards for certain accessory buildings, structures, and accessory uses. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-502. - Accessory buildings. 
(a)  Generally. Accessory buildings (e.g., detached garages, storage buildings, or accessory dwelling units) shall comply with all requirements for principal buildings except where specifically modified by this chapter. 
(b)  Spacing. No part of any accessory building shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any other building, whether on the same lot or on an adjacent lot. 
(c)  Construction. All accessory buildings (except greenhouses) that are larger than two hundred (200) square feet in floor area: 
(1)  Shall be installed on a permanent foundation; and 
(2)  Shall be designed and constructed with cladding and roofing materials and colors that are comparable or complimentary to the principal building. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-503. - Accessory dwelling units. 
(a)  Generally. Accessory dwelling units are allowed on lots that contain single-family detached dwelling units according to the standards of this Section. 
(b)  Accessory dwelling units in accessory buildings. If the accessory dwelling unit is in an accessory building: 
(1)  The floor area of the accessory dwelling unit may not be more than five hundred (500) square feet; and 
(2)  The lot area of the subject property must be at least eight thousand (8,000) square feet or the lot depth of the subject property must be at least one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
(c)  Integrated units. If the accessory dwelling unit is integrated into the principal building, the floor area of the accessory dwelling unit may not be more than thirty (30) percent of the floor area of the principal building, except that an integrated accessory dwelling unit may occupy an entire basement or garden level, regardless of floor area. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-504. - Fences, garden walls, retaining walls, and hedges. 
(a)  Generally. A fence, hedge, garden wall, retaining wall, column, pier, post, dog run, or any similar type structure, or any combination of such structures, are subject to the standards of this Section. 
(b)  Building code. All fences, garden walls, or retaining walls that are more than six (6) feet in height are subject to building code requirements. 
(c)  Identification of property lines. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to locate all property lines. No fence or wall may extend beyond or across a property line except by agreement with the adjoining property owner. No fence, hedge, or wall shall extend into street or alley rights-of-way. 
(d)  Sidewalk setback. No fence, hedge, or wall shall be placed nearer than eighteen (18) inches to any public sidewalk, unless by written permission of the administrator. 
(e)  Security fencing. No barbed wire, razor edge, or electrically charged fence shall be permitted, except as follows: 
(1)  In the I zone, barbed wire or razor edge fences may be used if there is a demonstrated need for heightened security due to the nature of the use. 
(2)  In the A zone, barbed wire or an electrically charged fence may be used. 
(f)  Dog runs. Dog runs are allowed only in back yards. 
(g)  Maximum height; exceptions. 
(1)  No fence, garden wall, retaining wall, or hedge shall exceed six (6) feet in height in a side yard, rear yard, or street side yard behind the front building line, and four (4) feet in height in a front yard or street side yard in front of the front building line, except that: 
a.  If the State of Colorado requires a particular use to have a higher fence than this UDC otherwise allows, and the use meets all other requirements of this UDC, then the maximum height shall be increased to allow the state-mandated fence height. 
b.  Wall height may be increased by up to two (2) inches to allow for drainage under the wall. 
c.  The height of a dog run may be increased to up to ten (10) feet, provided that the dog run is set back from property lines not less than two (2) feet for each foot in height (or portion thereof) that the dog run fence extends above six (6) feet. 
d.  The height of a deer fence may be increased to up to ten (10) feet, provided that the deer fence is set back from property lines not less than two (2) feet for each foot in height (or portion thereof) that the deer fence extends above six (6) feet. 
e.  Posts and pillars may exceed the maximum fence height by up to eight (8) inches. 
f.  Open arches, gates, and pergolas may be constructed up to nine (9) feet in height, provided such elements are spaced at least thirty (30) feet apart. 
g.  Fences that are used for athletic fields (e.g., baseball diamonds), play courts (e.g., tennis), or driving ranges are not subject to the height restriction. 
h.  Walls that are used in Class D bufferyards, and buffers between industrial uses and other uses, may be up to ten (10) feet in height. 
(2)  The administrator may approve deviations from the standards of this subsection as required to create appropriate buffering or screening, accommodate recreational uses, or provide for specific security requirements. 
(h)  Materials. 
(1)  All privacy fences shall be constructed to orient any exposed structural framework to the interior of the subject property; 
(2)  All fences, garden walls, or retaining walls that are visible from public rights-of-way must be made from traditional fence or wall materials such as: 
a.  Fence materials: 
1.  Wood, vinyl, or composite wood (in picket, shadowbox, or post-and-rail formats); 
2.  Metal (chain-link fencing or aluminum or wrought iron decorative fencing); 
b.  Wall materials: 
1.  Stacked stone; 
2.  Tinted split-face concrete masonry units; 
3.  Brick; 
4.  Stucco-finished block; or 
c.  For fences or walls, materials that are approved by the administrator that are comparable to the materials listed in this subsection (h)(2). 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-505. - Swimming pools. 
(a)  Generally. A swimming pool may be permitted in any zone as an accessory use, subject to the standards of this Section. 
(b)  Location. No public or private swimming pool may be located in any required front or side setback that abuts a street. No swimming pool basin shall be located closer than five (5) feet to a property line. 
(c)  Enclosure. 
(1)  Every swimming pool must be completely surrounded by a fence or garden wall not less than six (6) feet in height with no openings that are large enough to facilitate climbing or permit children to pass through, other than gates or doors that can be fastened to protect against entry. A building may be used as part of such required enclosure. 
(2)  All gates or doors that open through such fenced or walled enclosures must be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-506. - Outdoor storage. 
(a)  Generally. Outdoor storage areas, whether as a primary use (e.g. salvage or junk yard or outdoor storage yard) or accessory use (e.g., to heavy industry or heavy retail), shall meet the standards of this Section. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  The area used for outdoor storage shall be located in a back yard or side yard, except that if the principal use is heavy industry, outdoor storage yard, or salvage or junk yard, outdoor storage areas may be located anywhere on the subject property. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1), outdoor storage area shall not be located in areas that are used for parking, bufferyards, or stormwater conveyance or detention areas, or that are environmentally sensitive areas (e.g., a wetland). 
(c)  Surfacing. Outdoor storage areas shall be surfaced and maintained in a manner that prevents windblown particulates. 
(d)  Screening and enclosure. The area used for outdoor storage shall be enclosed by a Class B bufferyard (see section 21-5-306) that includes fence or screen wall that is not less than six (6) feet in height, except that: 
(1)  If the principal use is heavy retail, then the area used for outdoor storage shall be enclosed by a wall that is integrated into the principal building in terms of aesthetics, quality, and durability. 
(2)  If the principal use is salvage or junk yard, the area used for outdoor storage shall be enclosed by a Class C bufferyard (see section 21-5-306) that includes a fence, screen wall, berm, or combination thereof that is at least eight (8) feet in height. 
(3)  If the principal use is single-family or duplex residential, the area used for outdoor storage shall be enclosed by a privacy fence that is at least five (5) feet in height. 
(e)  Operation and maintenance. 
(1)  The area used for outdoor storage shall be kept orderly, pest-free, and odor-free. 
(2)  The following materials shall not be stored outdoors: gasoline, other motor fuels, and comparable or greater fire or explosion hazards; or items that have a high potential for generating obnoxious odors or windblown particulates or debris. 
(3)  Unless the principal use is salvage or junk yard, the outdoor storage area shall not be used to dispose of inoperable vehicles, inoperable machines, garbage, or other waste. 
(4)  If the principal use is single-family or duplex residential, outdoor storage areas shall not be used for storage of materials, products, and equipment used for a home occupation or cottage industry. 
(f)  Common residential outdoor storage. Residential development, including manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions, may provide for common outdoor storage, as follows: 
(1)  Common outdoor storage areas in residential developments shall be enclosed by a Class B bufferyard (see section 21-5-306). 
(2)  Access to the common outdoor storage area shall be provided from a street within the development. 
(3)  Common outdoor storage areas shall not be located such that they adjoin neighboring residential development. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-507. - Loading and service areas. 
(a)  Generally. Loading and service areas for nonresidential uses shall conform to the standards of this section. Where alley access is not available for loading in the CBD zone, over-the-curb loading is allowed. 
(b)  Required setback. No areas for loading or building service shall be located within twenty (20) feet of any public street, public sidewalk, or internal pedestrian way. 
(c)  Design integration. Loading docks, semi-truck or trailer parking, utility meters, HVAC equipment, trash compaction, and other service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and the landscaping so that the visual and acoustic impacts of these functions are mitigated and, to the maximum extent feasible, out of view from adjacent properties and public streets. 
(d)  Materials. Screening materials shall be comparable to the principal materials of the building and landscape in terms of aesthetics, quality, and durability. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-508. - Trash collection. 
(a)  Generally. Trash collection for multifamily and nonresidential uses shall conform to the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Centralized collection facilities. Multifamily uses shall provide centralized collection facilities. Manufactured home parks, manufactured home subdivisions, and nonresidential uses may provide centralized collection facilities. Such facilities shall be designed and configured as follows: 
(1)  Distance to dwelling units or nonresidential uses. Centralized solid waste collection facilities shall be located so that they are available within two hundred (200) linear feet of the principal entrance of each residential unit or nonresidential service entrance on the subject property. 
(2)  Location on site. 
a.  Centralized solid waste collection facilities shall be set back at least: 
1.  Ten (10) feet from interior property lines; and 
2.  Twenty (20) feet from any public street, public sidewalk, or internal pedestrian way. 
b.  In the alternative, if it is not possible to service the centralized facilities in a location which is at least ten (10) feet from all property lines, then the facilities may be located closer to the property lines, provided that: 
1.  They are designed and constructed to be consistent and compatible with the building or buildings on the subject property in terms of materials and architecture; 
2.  The setback reduction is applied to the front setback as a "last resort," and only if it is demonstrated that no other setback reduction will solve the service problem; and 
3.  They are located as far from the property line as is practicable. 
(c)  Enclosure requirements. 
(1)  The areas where refuse and recycling containers are stored shall be fully enclosed to the height of the tallest dumpster with screen walls, privacy fencing, or a landscaped berm. 
(2)  The materials, colors, and design of screening walls or fences and any cover shall be comparable to those used as principal materials and colors on the principal building in terms of quality, durability, and aesthetic appearance. 
(3)  The enclosures shall be sized to include the types of solid waste containers that will be necessary to serve the use or uses of the subject property. 
(d)  Access configuration. 
(1)  Service gates shall be provided and shall remain closed at all times except when the containers are being serviced. 
(2)  The enclosure shall also provide separate, accessible pedestrian access gates. 
(e)  Container specification. Containers shall be fly-tight, watertight, and rodent-proof. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-509. - Drive-in or drive-through facilities. 
(a)  Generally. Drive-in or drive-through facilities, where allowed, are subject to the standards of this section. 
(b)  Minimization of circulation conflicts. Traffic circulation shall be arranged so that internal pedestrian and vehicular movements are compatible and traffic hazards are minimized. 
(c)  Minimization of off-site hazards. Traffic circulation, ingress and egress shall be arranged so as to avoid hazardous or adverse effects on adjacent sites and streets. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-510. - Satellite dishes and antennae. 
(a)  Generally. The standards of this section apply to satellite dishes and antennae that are typically associated with residential uses. They are not applicable to facilities that are used for commercial purposes or the provision of personal wireless telecommunication services to people who do not reside on the lot on which the dish or antenna is located. 
(b)  TV antennae, DTV antennae, wireless cable antennae, and satellite dishes. 
(1)  The following are allowed if they are attached to a building or mounted on a mast that extends not more than twelve (12) feet above the highest peak of the roof: 
a.  TV antennae; 
b.  DTV antennae; 
c.  Wireless cable antennae; or 
d.  Satellite dishes that are one (1) meter or less in diameter; or 
e.  Antennae for MMDS, ITFS, or Wireless Internet, that are one (1) meter or less in diameter or diagonal measurement. 
(2)  All cabling must be run internally (when feasible), securely attached, and as inconspicuous as practicable. 
(3)  Masts that are greater than twelve (12) feet above the peak of the roof are allowed if it is demonstrated that: 
a.  An adequate signal cannot be obtained at a lower height; and 
b.  The mast and antenna are lower than overhead utility lines, or set back from overhead utility lines such that a collapse of the mast will not result in contact with the lines. 
(4)  Satellite dishes that are more than one (1) meter in diameter are allowed if: 
a.  They are located on the ground in the rear yard and are not visible from ground-level views from public rights-of-way or abutting properties; or 
b.  If the dish cannot be located in the rear yard, it is located on the ground within the permitted building envelope on the side of the building, and the dish or antenna is fully screened from view from public rights-of-way with: 
1.  A masonry wall; or 
2.  An evergreen hedge or evergreen shrubs and understory trees. 
(c)  Amateur radio antennae. Amateur radio antennae are permitted if the following standards are met: 
(1)  Height, setbacks, and screening for the antenna structure shall be as provided in Table 21-4-510(c), Amateur Radio Antennae. 
(2)  Support structures that are not attached to the antenna structure are accessory structures for the purposes of this UDC. 
Table 21-4-510(c) 
AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNAE 
Lot Area 	Max. Height 	Min. Front Setback 	Min. Street Side Setback 	Min. Side and Rear Setback 
more than 2 ac. 	120 ft. 	100 ft.; or, alternatively, 20 ft. behind back wall of principal building 	Height of antenna 	Greater of required building setback or 70 ft. 
more than 8,000 sf., up to 2 ac. 	72 ft. 	72 ft.; or alternatively, 15 ft. behind back wall of principal building 	Height of antenna 	Greater of required building setback or 25 ft. 
8,000 sf. or less 	40 ft. 	Same as required for principal building 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-511. - Renewable energy. 
(a)  Generally. Renewable energy systems include solar collectors (photovoltaic arrays or water heaters), geothermal heating and cooling systems, and small wind energy conversion systems. They do not include the manufacture of renewable combustible fuels (e.g., ethanol or biodiesel). 
(b)  Photovoltaic arrays. Photovoltaic arrays convert sunlight into electricity. The following standards apply to photovoltaic arrays: 
(1)  Roof-mounts. Photovoltaic arrays may be roof-mounted on principal and accessory buildings and structures (e.g., covered walkways or covered parking spaces) in all residential districts. 
(2)  Ground-mounts or structure-mounts. Ground or structure-mounted photovoltaic arrays (not mounted on buildings or roofed structures) shall be set back as if they were detached accessory buildings if the highest point on the panels is more than eight (8) feet above grade. 
(c)  Geothermal heating and cooling systems. Geothermal heating and cooling systems use buried pipes to exchange heat with the ground, cooling buildings in the summer and warming them in the winter. Closed loop systems (horizontal and vertical loop systems) are permitted, provided that the loops are set back two (2) feet from property lines and do not encroach into utility easements. 
(d)  Small wind energy conversion systems. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-512. - Unattended collection boxes. 
(a)  Generally. Unattended collection boxes may be located in parking and loading areas of nonresidential uses, according to the standards of this section. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  Unattended collection boxes shall be set back at least five (5) feet from front property lines. 
(2)  Unattended collection boxes shall not obstruct parking or vehicular circulation. 
(c)  Construction. Unattended collection boxes shall be constructed of waterproof and rustproof materials, and shall be secured against animals and scavenging. 
(d)  Maintenance. Materials that are deposited in unattended collection boxes shall be collected on a regular schedule that is sufficient to prevent the boxes from overflowing. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 4-6. - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 21-4-601. - Purpose and applicability of division. 
(a)  Purpose. The unique and diverse landscapes of the city are among its most valuable assets. Protecting these assets requires that wireless telecommunications facilities and related equipment be designed and sited in a manner that is sensitive to, and in scale and harmony with, the character of the community. As such, the purpose of this division is to provide design standards specific to wireless telecommunications facilities in order to ensure their compatibility with the surrounding environment and existing and anticipated development patterns. 
(b)  Intent. 
(1)  These regulations are intended to provide predictable, consistent, and balanced standards for the siting and screening of wireless telecommunications facilities and related equipment on private property within the city, in order to: 
a.  Preserve the character and aesthetics of areas that are in close proximity to wireless telecommunications facilities and related equipment by minimizing the visual, aesthetic, and safety impacts of such facilities and equipment through careful design, siting, screening, and placement; 
b.  Protect the health, safety, and welfare of persons living, recreating, or working in the area surrounding wireless telecommunications facilities and related equipment, as they relate to the placement, construction, or modification of such facilities; 
c.  Provide development that is compatible in appearance with allowed uses of the underlying zone; 
d.  Ensure that the city does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services; 
e.  Encourage co-location and clustering of antenna sites and structures, when practical, to help reduce the number of such facilities that may be required in the future to service the needs of customers, and thus avert unnecessary proliferation of facilities and related equipment; and 
f.  Ensure the timely processing of applications for insubstantial changes to existing wireless telecommunications facilities (See section 21-8-521 for approval procedures). 
(2)  It is not the intent of these regulations to regulate the placement, construction, or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with the Federal Communications Commission's regulations concerning such emissions. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  This division applies to wireless telecommunications facilities and related equipment related to cellular telephone, paging, enhanced specialized mobile radio ("ESMR"), personal communication services ("PCS"), commercial mobile radio service ("CMRS"), and other commercial wireless telecommunication devices, including facilities and equipment that are affixed to the ground or buildings, and all associated structures and equipment such as transmitters, antennas, monopole antennas, towers, masts, microwave dishes, cabinets, and equipment rooms. 
(2)  This division does not apply to facilities that are regulated by section 21-4-510, satellite dishes and antennae. 
(d)  Permitting. All applications for the installation, expansion, or modification of wireless telecommunication facilities must receive permits prior to installation. Approval procedures are set forth in section 21-8-521. Minor modifications that do not substantially change the size or appearance of the facility may be approved by the administrator on application forms developed by the administrator. For purposes of this subsection (d), a "substantial change" is defined as follows: 
Substantial change. A modification substantially changes the physical dimensions of a support structure if it meets any of the following criteria: 
(1)  For Telecommunications Towers, it increases the height of the tower by more than ten (10) percent or by the height of one (1) additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than ten (10) percent or more than ten (10) feet, whichever is greater; 
(2)  For Telecommunications Towers, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than twenty (20) feet, or more than the width of the Tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six (6) feet; 
(3)  For any support structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four (4) cabinets; or it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten (10) percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure; 
(4)  It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site; 
(5)  It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or 
(6)  It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the tower or multiple use facility, provided however that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in paragraphs (1)-(4) of this section. 
(e)  Conditions and limitations. Approval by the city of a wireless telecommunications facility or related equipment application is an approval of the land use only, and shall not be construed to waive any other applicable zoning or building regulations. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17; Ord. No. 20-2018 , § 3, 7-18-18)  
Sec. 21-4-602. - Site selection standards. 
(a)  Wireless telecommunications facilities shall, in accordance with the requirements of this UDC, be located in the following order of preference: 
(1)  First, the facilities shall be co-located with existing or approved wireless telecommunications facilities ("co-location priority"); or installed on existing approved structures that are (or will be) principally used for other purposes (e.g., buildings, flagpoles, church steeples, cupolas, ball field lights, water towers, etc.) ("multiple-use facility priority"); 
(2)  Second, in locations where existing topography, vegetation, buildings or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening; and 
(3)  Last, on vacant ground or highly visible sites without significant visual mitigation and where screening or buffering is difficult. 
(b)  The co-location priority and multiple-use facility priority locations (collectively, "first priority locations") may be waived by the Administrator or other decision making authority upon a showing that: 
(1)  Federal or state regulations prohibit the installation of the wireless telecommunications facility in the first priority locations; 
(2)  The proposed wireless telecommunications facility would interfere with the current uses of the first priority locations; 
(3)  The proposed wireless telecommunications facility, if installed in the first priority locations, would materially interfere with surrounding property or uses; 
(4)  The owners of the first priority locations will not agree to reasonable terms; 
(5)  No available first priority location is appropriate for the proposed wireless telecommunications facility due to its physical characteristics or capacity to provide the desired service from the first priority locations; or 
(6)  Installation of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility in the first priority locations is not in the best interest of the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-603. - Telecommunications towers. 
(a)  Location and form. 
(1)  Prohibited locations. Telecommunications Towers are not allowed in the following locations 
a.  Residential zones, and any location within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zone boundary except that Small Wireless Facilities not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height are not prohibited. 
b.  The CBD zone. 
c.  The area within two hundred (200) feet of the centerline of Highway 160 except that Small Wireless Facilities not exceeding forty (40) feet in height (if not within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zone) are not prohibited. 
d.  The area within two hundred (200) feet of the centerline of Highway 285 South except that Small Wireless Facilities not exceeding forty (40) feet in height (if not within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zone) are not prohibited. 
e.  The area bounded by the railroad tracks, Highway 285 South, and Highway 160 except that Small Wireless Facilities not exceeding forty (40) feet in height (if not within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zone) are not prohibited. 
f.  The area within two hundred (200) feet of the centerline of Highway 17except that Small Wireless Facilities not exceeding forty (40) feet in height (if not within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zone) are not prohibited. 
g.  In a public right-of-way within 600 feet of any other Telecommunications Tower. The administrator may exempt an applicant from this requirement if: (i) the applicant demonstrates through technical network documentation that the minimum separation requirement cannot be satisfied for technical reasons, or (ii) the administrator determines, when considering the surrounding topography; the nature of adjacent uses and nearby properties; and the height of existing structures in the vicinity, that placement of a Telecommunications Tower at a distance less than six hundred (600) feet from another Telecommunications Tower in the public right-of-way will meet the intent of reducing visibility and visual clutter of Telecommunications Towers. 
(2)  Prohibited forms. Guyed mast towers are prohibited. 
(b)  Maximum height. The maximum tower height by zone is set out in Table 21-4-603(b), Maximum Tower Height by Zone. 
Table 21-4-603(b) 
MAXIMUM TOWER HEIGHT BY ZONE 
	Zone 
Standard 	Residential Zones 	MU 	CB 	I 	CBD 	CA 	A 
Maximum Height 	Not Allowed 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 	Not Allowed 	100 ft. 	150 ft. 
 
(c)  Design for concealment. New Telecommunications Towers shall be designed insofar as practicable to conceal their presence or intended use. Design plans shall call out all design or location elements that tend to conceal the presence or intended use of the tower (e.g., limitation of height to tree line, color or material specifications, "stealth" features such as artificial tree limbs, or other contextual or physical features). 
(d)  Design for co-location. New Telecommunications Towers shall be designed to provide for co-location of other wireless telecommunications facilities or equipment by structurally "overbuilding" in order to handle the loading demands of additional antennas to the extent reasonably feasible from technical, construction, engineering and design perspectives.. 
(e)  Co-location of additional facilities. Facilities that are proposed for co-location on an existing tower shall not reduce the effectiveness of any concealment techniques that applied to the existing tower when it was constructed. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17; Ord. No. 20-2018 , § 4, 7-18-18)  
Sec. 21-4-604. - Multiple-use facilities. 
(a)  Generally. All wireless telecommunications facilities (including co-located facilities) that are mounted on multiple-use facilities, and related equipment (whether installed on the roof or on the ground), shall be concealed from view from adjacent and nearby public rights-of-way and property (whether public or private) by color selection and either: 
(1)  Camouflage (e.g., the facility appears to be an integrated part of the architecture of the building or the function of the structure, such that its presence is not obvious); or 
(2)  Physical barriers such as: 
a.  Parapet walls, screen walls, or architectural or structural elements (e.g., steeples, cupolas, belfries, chimneys, towers, turrets, ) that are compatible with the building or structure's design in terms of color, materials, or texture; or 
b.  Fencing, landscaping or berming that is compatible with the site's overall design. 
(b)  Height. 
(1)  The maximum height of building-mounted wireless telecommunications facilities that are located on a rooftop is ten (10) feet above the highest portion of the roof. 
a.  Antennae: Five (5) feet above the highest portion of the roof; or 
b.  Whip antennae: Ten (10) feet above the highest portion of the roof. 
(2)  The maximum height of building-mounted wireless telecommunications facilities that are located on a building wall, or of structure-mounted (e.g., flagpoles, light poles, water towers, and comparable structures) wireless telecommunications facilities, is: 
a.  The top of the parapet for a building with a flat-roofed system; or 
b.  The eave line above the equipment for a building with a sloped-roof system; or 
c.  No more ten (10) feet above the top of the structure. 
(c)  Setbacks and step-backs. 
(1)  Building-mounted antennae and related equipment shall be set back the same distances that are required for principal buildings. 
(2)  Roof-mounted antennae shall be stepped back from the parapet wall one (1) foot for each foot in height between the roof surface and the top of the antenna. 
(d)  Distance restrictions in public rights-of-way. 
(1)  In general. No multiple-use support structure for wireless telecommunications facilities may be installed within the public right-of-way within six hundred (600) feet of, nor in the same block as, any other wireless telecommunications facility support structure in the public right-of-way. This limitation shall not apply to multiple use facilities that replace an existing traffic signal, street light pole, or similar structure, as determined by the administrator. The administrator may exempt an applicant from this requirement if: (i) the applicant demonstrates through technical network documentation that the minimum separation requirement cannot be satisfied for technical reasons, or (ii) the administrator determines, when considering the surrounding topography; the nature of adjacent uses and nearby properties; and the height of existing structures in the vicinity, that placement of a Telecommunications Tower at a distance less than six hundred (600) feet from another Telecommunications Tower in the public right-of-way will meet the intent of reducing visibility and visual clutter of Telecommunications Towers. 
(2)  Residential areas. When placed adjacent to a residential zoned property, the facility shall be placed within five (5) feet of the common side yard property line between adjoining residential properties. In the case of a corner lot, the facility shall be placed within five (5) feet of the common side yard property line between adjoining residential properties or on the corner formed by two (2) intersecting streets. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17; Ord. No. 20-2018 , §§ 5—8, 7-18-18)  
Sec. 21-4-604.5. - Equipment location limits in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Under grounding. To the extent reasonably feasible from technical, construction, engineering and design perspectives, all ground based equipment shall be installed in the facility itself or in an underground or partially underground equipment vault (projecting not more than thirty-six (36) inches above grade), or co-located within a traffic cabinet of a design approved by the administrator, unless a waiver is obtained from the administrator based on unique circumstances of the particular location that cannot reasonably accommodate such underground installation. 
(b)  Public safety. Any ground mounted equipment shall be located in a manner necessary to address both public safety and aesthetic concerns in the reasonable discretion of the administrator. The applicant shall demonstrate that the vertical infrastructure to which any equipment is fastened to can safely support such equipment. 
(c)  Sidewalk Clearance. Any encroachment on a sidewalk shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet vertically and horizontally of unobstructed pedestrian way. The requirements of this paragraph may be modified by the administrator if reasonable passage is provided on the sidewalk and the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists is not impaired. 
(d)  Unreasonable Interference with traffic and parking prohibited. Wireless telecommunications facilities in the public right-of-way shall not alter vehicular circulation or parking within the right-of-way or impede vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian access or visibility along the right-of-way. All equipment installations shall comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act and every other local, state and federal law and regulation. No wireless telecommunication facility may be located or maintained in a manner that causes unreasonable interference. Unreasonable interference means any use of the right-of-way that disrupts or interferes with its use by the city, the general public or other persons authorized to use or be present upon the right-of-way, when there exists an alternative that would result in less disruption or interference. Unreasonable interference includes any use of the right-of-way that disrupts vehicular or pedestrian traffic, any interference with public utilities and any other activity that will present a hazard to public health, safety or welfare. 
(e)  Exclusion of competitors prohibited. No wireless telecommunication facility owner or lessee shall act to exclude or to attempt to exclude any other competitor from using the same structure for the location of other antennas, to the extent reasonably feasible from technical, construction, engineering and design perspectives. 
(Ord. No. 20-2018 , § 4, 7-18-18)  
Sec. 21-4-605. - Lighting and signage. 
(a)  Generally. In addition to other applicable sections of the city Code regulating signage or outdoor lighting, the standards of this section apply to wireless telecommunications facilities and related equipment. 
(b)  Lighting. Telecommunications towers and tower-mounted wireless telecommunications facilities and related equipment shall not be illuminated, unless such illumination is required by state or federal regulations. Wireless telecommunications facilities (except towers and tower-mounted facilities), including accessory buildings and equipment, may be illuminated as provided in division 4, lighting. 
(c)  Signage. The display of any sign other than as required by law as to public safety warnings, licenses, certifications, or other required seals on any wireless communications facility or related equipment is prohibited. Emergency contact telephone numbers shall be posted: 
(1)  On each wireless telecommunications facility; or 
(2)  In the case of tower-mounted facilities, at the base of the tower or on each gate if the tower is enclosed by a security fence. 
(d)  Access. 
(1)  Access to and from wireless telecommunications facilities and related equipment shall comply with all applicable building code requirements. 
(2)  No wireless telecommunications facility shall be located in a required parking, maneuvering, or vehicle or pedestrian circulation area such that it interferes with or in any way impairs the intent or functionality of the area for such parking or circulation. 
(3)  Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be secured from access by the general public, but access for emergency services must be provided. Access roads shall be capable of supporting all potential emergency response vehicles and equipment. 
(4)  Any easements required for ingress and egress and for electrical and telephone shall be recorded at the county clerk and recorder's office prior to the issuance of building permits. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-606. - Maintenance, abandonment, and removal. 
(a)  Maintenance. All towers, antennas, related facilities and equipment, and the subject property shall be maintained in a safe and clean condition in accordance with project approvals and building codes. The operator or property owner shall be responsible for maintaining the subject property and its improvements free from graffiti, debris, and litter. All towers, antennas and related facilities shall be subject to periodic inspection by the city to ensure continuing compliance with all conditions of approval and requirements of this section. 
(b)  Abandonment and removal. All required approvals shall be in effect only so long as the antennas and other structures are operated on the subject property. Facilities that are not in use for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days for personal wireless services purposes shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed by the facility owner within forty-five (45) days of the one hundred eightieth (180th) consecutive day of non-use. Following removal, the subject property shall be restored to the condition it was in prior to the installation or construction of the facility. Such removal shall be carried out in accordance with applicable health and safety requirements. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 4-7. - SIGNS 
 
Sec. 21-4-701. - Applicability, exemptions, and permit exceptions. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The provisions of this division apply to the display, construction, installation, erection, alteration, use, location, maintenance, and removal of all signs within the city that are not specifically exempt from such application. 
(2)  No sign shall be displayed, constructed, installed, erected, or altered within the city until the city has issued a sign permit, unless the sign is exempt from this division, partially exempt from this division, or the sign (or modification) qualifies for an exception to the permit requirement. 
(b)  Exemptions. This division does not apply to: 
(1)  Signs of any type that are installed or posted (or required to be installed or posted) by the Federal government, the State of Colorado, Alamosa County, the city, or the school district (collectively, "governmental entities"), on property owned or controlled by the governmental entity. Such signs include but are not limited to street signs and permanent traffic control devices, temporary signs that are used in conjunction with traffic control, and other signs that said entities display, require, or license to be displayed upon property that they own or control. 
(2)  Decorations that are clearly incidental, customary, and commonly associated with a holiday. 
(c)  Partial exemptions. The following signs are subject only to section 21-4-703, design characteristics, and shall not require a sign permit: 
(1)  Signs that are required by applicable building codes (e.g., address numbers) or health and safety regulations (e.g., the Occupational Safety and Health Act ("OSHA")); or to comply with other laws or regulations (collectively, "required signs"). 
(2)  Signs that are not visible from any of the following areas due to the configuration of the building(s) or structure(s) or the topography of the site upon which the signs are located: 
a.  Residential lots; 
b.  Abutting property not under common ownership; or 
c.  Public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Signs that are not legible from abutting property or rights-of-way due to the configuration of the building(s) or structure(s) or the topography of the subject property or the orientation or setback or typeface of the sign, provided that the sign area is not more than thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(4)  Signs that are applied to or painted on a utility cabinet or pedestal, provided that: 
a.  The cabinet or pedestal is in use for its principal purpose as a utility cabinet or pedestal and the sign does not interfere with such use; 
b.  The cabinet or pedestal is not larger than four (4) feet in horizontal dimension and five (5) feet in vertical dimension; and 
c.  The owner of the utility cabinet or pedestal consents to the installation of the sign. 
(5)  Historic signs. 
(6)  Flags that are hung from not more than three (3) rigid, straight, building-mounted or ground-mounted flagpoles per one hundred (100) feet of property frontage or fraction thereof, provided that: 
a.  No more than three (3) flags are flown from any one (1) flagpole; 
b.  No flag obstructs pedestrian, bicycle, or vehicular traffic, or a required sight triangle; and 
c.  No flag exceeds thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
(7)  Small signs. 
a.  Signs that are affixed to a building or structure, that do not exceed one (1) square foot in sign area, provided that only one (1) such sign is present on each elevation that is visible from public rights-of-way or neighboring property; and 
b.  Signs that are less than one (1) square foot in area that are affixed to machines, equipment, fences, gates, walls, gasoline pumps, public telephones, or utility cabinets. 
(8)  Temporary signs. 
(d)  Exceptions to permit requirement. 
(1)  Maintenance of or incidental changes to existing signs. No permit is required for routine sign maintenance, painting, replacing a panel in a cabinet sign (except that the installation of a new manual changeable copy message center or electronic message center does require a permit), or replacing light sources with lighting of comparable brightness. 
(2)  Signs that do not require permits. Section 21-4-702, types of signs permitted, lists some signs that may be displayed without a sign permit. However, such signs are subject to all applicable provisions of this division: 
(e)  Relationship to other regulations. 
(1)  In addition to the regulations set out in this division, signs may also be subject to applicable state laws and regulations (e.g., State of Colorado, Department of Highways, "Rules and Regulations Pertaining to Outdoor Advertising," effective January 1, 1984, as may be amended from time to time), federal laws and regulations, and applicable adopted building and electrical codes. Exceptions to the sign permit requirement do not constitute exemptions to other applicable codes or permit requirements. 
(2)  Where any provision of this division covers the same subject matter as other regulations of the city, the more specific regulation shall control the more general one, unless the city determines that the more restrictive regulation is facially content-based or otherwise clearly unenforceable as a matter of law. 
(3)  Where any provision of this division covers the same subject matter as other regulations of the State of Colorado or the United States, the applicant is advised that nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a defense to a violation of applicable state or federal law except as may be provided in the state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-702. - Types of signs permitted. 
(a)  Generally. The types of signs that are allowed in the various zones of the city are specified in Table 21-4-702(a), Permitted Signs by Type, Characteristics, and Zoning District. 
The limitations set forth in Table 21-4-702(a) concerning temporary freestanding signs shall not apply to the following locations, where any number of temporary freestanding signs of up to thirty-two (32) square feet each may be displayed at any time: 
(1)  The City's train pavilion; 
(2)  Olympian Park; 
(3)  Sunset Park. 
Table 21-4-702(a) 
PERMITTED SIGNS BY TYPE, CHARACTERISTICS, AND ZONING DISTRICT 
Key: P = Allowed without sign permit; S = Allowed with sign permit; N = Not allowed 
	Zones 
Sign Type 
Sign Area 
Placement 	Residential 	Mixed-Use or Nonresidential 
	EN, RE, RL, RM, RH 	MU 	CB 	I 	CBD 	CA 	A 
Attached to Buildings 
Canopy 	N-N 1 	N-S 1 	S 	S 	S 	S 	N 
Max. Sign Area 	— 	50% of vertical surface area of awning or 50% of fascia of canopy 	— 
Placement Standards 	— 	? Allowed on valence of awning or on fascia of canopy; 
? Awning or canopy must shelter door, window, outdoor activity area, or outdoor seating area; 
? 8 ft. min. vertical clearance is required 	— 
Marquee 	N-N 	N-S 	S 	N 	S 	S 	N 
Max. Sign Area 	— 	70 sf. 	— 	70 sf. 	— 
Placement Standards 	— 	? 1 per building, above principal entrance 
? 8 ft. min. vertical clearance 
? Not allowed if projecting sign or v sign is on same elevation 	— 	? 1 per building, above principal entrance 
8 ft. min. vertical clearance 
? Not allowed if projecting sign or v sign is on same elevation 	— 
Projecting 	N-N 	N-S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	N 
Max. Sign Area 	— 	40 sf. 	— 
Placement Standards 	— 	? 1 per street-facing building elevation 
? 8 ft. min. vertical clearance is required 
? Not allowed if marquee sign or v sign is on same elevation 	— 
Roof 	N-N 	N-S 	S 	N 	S 	S 	N 
Max. Sign Area 	— 	50 sf. 	— 	50 sf. 	— 
Placement Standards 	— 	? 1 per building 
? Not to exceed lesser of 8 ft. above roof or maximum building height 
? Not allowed if integral roof sign is present 	— 	? 1 per building 
? Not to exceed lesser of 8 ft. above roof or maximum building height 
?  Not allowed if integral roof sign is present 	— 
Roof, Integral 	N-N 	N-S 	S 	N 	S 	S 	N 
Max. Sign Area 	— 	25% of vertical surface of roof structure 	— 	25% of vertical surface of roof structure 	— 
Placement Standards 	— 	Not allowed if roof sign is present 	— 	Not allowed if roof sign is present 	— 
Suspended 	N-N 	N-S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	N 
Max. Sign Area (per sign) 	— 	3 sf. 	— 
Placement Standards 	— 	? 1 per building entrance 
? 8 ft. min. vertical clearance required 	— 
Temporary 	P-P 	P 2 -P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Max. Sign Area per Building (per sign/total) 	4 sf./4 sf. 	32 sf./96 sf. 	48 sf./96 sf. 	32 sf./96 sf. 	16 sf./16 sf. 	32 sf./96 sf. 	32 sf. 
Placement Standards 	— 	? Notwithstanding previous row, temporary signage attached to building shall not exceed 10% of wall area upon which such signs are attached 
? Temporary wall signs shall be securely fastened to avoid wrinkles and movement in the wind; fasteners shall be concealed 
V-sign 	N-S 	N-S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	N 
Max. Sign Area 	40 sf. 	— 
Placement Standards 	? 1 per street-facing building elevation 
? 8 ft. min. vertical clearance is required 
? Not allowed if marquee sign or projecting sign is on same elevation 	— 
Wall (painted or applied) 	N-S 	N-S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 
Max. Total Sign Area (% wall) 	5% of front walls; 100% of all other walls 	10% of front walls; 100% of all other walls 	5% of front walls; 100% of all other walls 
Placement Standards 	# of signs not limited 
Wall (cabinet or channel letter) 	N-S 	N-S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	N 
Max. Total Sign Area (sf.) 	1 sf./lf. of elevation 	1.5 sf. / lf. of elevation 	— 
Placement Standards 	# of signs not limited 
Window 	P-N 	P 2 -P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Max. Sign Area (% of window) 	10% 	40% 	50% 	40% 	40% 	40% 	10% 
Placement Standards 	# of signs not limited 
Freestanding 
Permanent 	P-S 	N-S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 
Max. Sign Height 	5 ft./8 ft. 3 	8 ft. 	1 ft./10 ft. of frontage, not to exceed 30 ft. 	8 ft. 	1 ft./10 ft. of frontage, not to exceed 30 ft. 	8 ft. 
Max. Sign Area 	6 sf./20 sf. 3 	40 sf. 	5 x height, not to exceed 80 sf. 	40 sf. 	5 x height, not to exceed 80 sf. 	12 sf. 
Min. Setbacks 
Max. Number 	  
1 per frontage 	5 ft. from property lines; 15 ft. from building walls 
1 per 200 lf. of frontage, plus 1 sign per ingress and egress not to exceed 4 ft. in height and 8 sf. in area 	  
1 per lot 
Temporary 	P-P 	P 2 -P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	32 sf. 
Max. Sign Height 	5 ft. 	4 ft. 	8 ft. 	8 ft. 	4 ft. 	8 ft. 	8 ft. 
Max. Sign Area (per sign) 	6 sf. 	8 sf. 	32 sf. 	32 sf. 	8 sf. 	32 sf. 	16 sf. 
Min. Setbacks 	2 ft. from property lines 	3 ft. from property lines; all temporary signs except sidewalk signs shall be set back 10 feet from building walls 
Max. Number 	1 per 5 lf. frontage 	1 per building 	1 per 200 lf. of frontage 	1 per lot 	1 per 200 lf. of frontage 
Other Standards 	Temporary signs shall not block sidewalks or other areas that are intended for pedestrian or vehicular use; sidewalk signs shall leave not less than 4 feet of clear sidewalk for pedestrian circulation 
Table Note: 
1 In this column, the first letter regarding whether and how a sign is allowed applies to single-family detached, manufactured home, duplex, and townhome uses, and the second letter applies to multifamily and nonresidential uses. The standards that appear in the rows below are not applicable to lots where the sign type is not allowed. 
2 Single-family detached, manufactured home, duplex, and townhome uses are subject to the standards for such uses that are set out in the "Residential" zone column 
3 The first number applies to single-family detached, manufactured home, duplex, townhome, and vacant land uses. The second number applies to multifamily and nonresidential uses. 
 
(b)  Vacant land. 
(1)  Permanent signs shall not be installed on vacant lots or parcels unless the lots or parcels are part of an approved subdivision plat. 
(2)  Temporary freestanding signs may be installed on vacant lots or parcels as follows: 
a.  A zone standards apply if the subject property is greater than 2 acres in area 
b.  CBD zone standards apply if the subject property is two (2) acres or less in area, except that the maximum sign area (per sign) for such freestanding temporary signs on vacant lots shall be thirty-two (32) square feet. 
c.  During the periods from May 1 to November 15 in any given calendar year, the limitation on maximum number of temporary freestanding signs shall not apply, and the limit on sign area of each sign shall be thirty-two (32) square feet regardless of the zoning district in which the sign is located. 
d.  In addition to the periods set forth in subsection c, above, any person may, by permit issued by the director of public works or his or her designee, display a freestanding temporary sign of no more than thirty-two (32) square feet which causes the lot on which the sign is located to exceed the maximum number set forth in Table 21-4-702(a) by no more than two (2) signs, which permit shall be valid for a period of time not exceeding, in the aggregate, fourteen (14) days in any calendar year for any given person. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17; Ord. No. 21-2018 , §§ 1—4, 7-18-18)  
Sec. 21-4-703. - Design characteristics. 
(a)  Prohibited elements. The following elements and materials shall not be incorporated as an element of any sign or sign structure, whether temporary or permanent: 
(1)  Animated or moving parts, including any moving, swinging, rotating, or spinning parts or flashing, blinking, scintillating, fluctuating, or otherwise animated light, except electronic message centers, standard flags, feather flags, banners, temporary holiday displays, and clocks. 
(2)  Cardboard, card stock, or paper, except when laminated or used as a window sign. 
(3)  Motor vehicles, unless: 
a.  The vehicles are operational, and either: 
1.  Automobile dealer inventory; or 
2.  Regularly used as motor vehicles, with current registration and tags; 
b.  The display of signage on the motor vehicle would not interfere with the immediate operation of the motor vehicle (e.g., signs that are held in place by an open hood or trunk are not allowed; signs that cover windows are not allowed; and signs that would fall off of the vehicle if the vehicle were in motion are not allowed); and 
c.  The motor vehicle is legally parked in a designated parking space. 
(4)  Semi trailers, shipping containers, or portable storage units, unless: 
a.  The trailers, containers, or portable storage units are: 
1.  Structurally sound and capable of being transported; 
2.  Used for their primary purpose (e.g., storage, pick-up, or delivery); and 
3.  If subject to registration, have current registration and tags; and 
b.  The display of signage is incidental to the primary purpose; and 
c.  The semi trailer, shipping container, or portable storage unit is parked or placed in a designated loading area or on a construction site in an area that is designated on an approved construction staging plan. 
(5)  Stacked products (e.g., tires, soft drink cases, bagged soil or mulch). 
(6)  Unshielded bare light bulbs that are larger than C9 format or brighter than fifty (50) lumens per bulb, except that neon tubing shall not be considered a "bare light bulb" for the purposes of this standard. 
(7)  Materials with a high degree of specular reflectivity, such as polished metal, installed in a manner that creates substantial glare from headlights, street lights, or sunlight. This prohibition does not include retroreflective materials that comply with the standards set forth in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices ("MUTCD"), published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration. 
(b)  Prohibited obstructions. In no event shall a sign, whether temporary or permanent, obstruct the use of: 
(1)  Building ingress or egress, including doors, egress windows, and fire escapes. 
(2)  Operable windows (with regard to movement only; obstruction of transparency is allowed as provided herein). 
(3)  Equipment, structures, or architectural elements that are related to public safety, building operations, or utility service (e.g., standpipes, downspouts, fire hydrants, electrical outlets, lighting, vents, valves, and meters). 
(4)  Any required vision clearance area. 
(c)  Prohibited mounts. No sign, whether temporary or permanent, shall be posted, installed, mounted on, fastened, or affixed to any of the following: 
(1)  Any tree or shrub. 
(2)  Any utility pole or light pole, unless: 
a.  The sign is a banner or flag that is not more than ten (10) square feet in area; 
b.  The owner of the utility pole or light pole consents to its use for the display of the banner or flag; 
c.  The banner or flag is mounted on brackets or a pole that extend not more than thirty (30) inches from the utility pole or light pole; and 
d.  The banner or flag is either situated above an area that is not used by pedestrians or vehicles, or the bottom of the banner or flag has a sign clearance of at least eight (8) feet. 
(3)  Utility cabinets or pedestals (except signs that are applied by or with the consent of the owner of the utility cabinet or pedestal). 
(4)  An exposed, unfinished metal pole that is more than six (6) feet in height, except that this standard does not apply to flags that are flown from flagpoles. 
(d)  Prohibited locations. In addition to applicable setback requirements and other restrictions set out in this division, no sign shall be located in any of the following locations: 
(1)  In or over public rights-of-way (which, in addition to streets, may include other sidewalks, parkways, trails, multi-use pathways, retaining walls, utility poles, traffic calming devices, medians, and center islands that are within public rights-of-way), except: 
a.  Signs painted on or affixed to transit shelters and bus benches as authorized by the provider of the shelter or bench, but not extending beyond the physical structure of the shelter or bench; or 
b.  Signs that are the subject of a revocable license agreement with the city, installed and maintained in accordance with the terms of that agreement. 
c.  Temporary yard signs, so long as they are erected and maintained in accordance with the following limitations: 
1.  Signs may only be placed on rights of way in residential zoning districts. 
2.  Signs may only be placed on the right-of-way immediately adjacent to a residential lot if the owner or tenant of such lot has given permission for such placement. 
3.  Signs may only be in place during the periods of time between May 1 and July 5; and September 1 and November 15 in any given year. 
4.  The top of the sign must be less than three (3) feet from ground level. 
5.  Signs must be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches behind the back of the curb, and twelve (12) inches from the edge of any sidewalk. 
6.  Signs may not be larger than ten (10) square feet. 
(2)  Within twelve (12) inches from building corners, cornice or eave lines, or ground planes, or within six (6) inches of doors, windows, downspouts, or dimensional architectural details, except that a sign located within a sign band that is eighteen (18) inches or less in height may extend to within two (2) inches of the border of the sign band. 
(e)  Illumination. Internal and external illumination of permanent signs is allowed in all nonresidential and mixed-use zones, and for multifamily and nonresidential uses in residential zones, as follows: 
(1)  All illumination shall comply with the standards set out in division 4, lighting. 
(2)  External lights, electrical equipment, and wiring shall be concealed from view. 
(3)  Flashing, blinking, or chasing lights are not allowed. 
(4)  Lighted signs in residential zones shall be turned off by 10:00 p.m. 
(f)  Electronic message centers. Electronic message centers are allowed on freestanding permanent signs in the CB and CBD zones, as follows: 
(1)  Electronic message centers are subject to the requirements of division 4, lighting. 
(2)  Electronic message centers shall appear to be integrated into a permanent freestanding sign, and shall not comprise more than thirty-five (35) percent of the sign area of sign to which they are attached. 
(3)  Not more than one (1) electronic message center is allowed per subject property. 
(4)  Electronic message centers are not allowed if a changeable copy panel is present on the subject property. 
(5)  Electronic message centers that are both visible from, and located within one hundred (100) feet from, a residential zone shall be turned off by 10:00 p.m. 
(g)  Changeable copy. Changeable copy panels are allowed as a component of freestanding permanent signs in the CB zone and on lots that contain nonresidential uses in residential zones, as follows: 
(1)  Changeable copy panels shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the sign area of the freestanding permanent sign, and shall be located beneath the permanent sign elements. 
(2)  Changeable copy panels shall be secured and protected against weather. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17; Ord. No. 15-2018 , § 1, 6-6-18)  
Sec. 21-4-704. - Content. 
(a)  Generally. Except as provided in this section, no sign shall be approved or disapproved based on the message it displays. 
(b)  Prohibition on certain types of unprotected speech. The following content is prohibited without reference to the viewpoint of the individual speaker: 
(1)  Text or graphics of an indecent or immoral nature that is harmful to minors under state or federal law; 
(2)  Text or graphics that advertise unlawful transactions, except as provided in subsection (c) of this section; 
(3)  Text or graphics that are obscene, fighting words, defamation, incitement to imminent lawless action, or true threats; or 
(4)  Text or graphics that present a clear and present danger due to their potential confusion with traffic control signs or signs that provide public safety information (for example, signs that use the words "Stop," "Yield," "Caution," or "Danger," or comparable words, phrases, symbols, or characters in such a manner as to imply a safety hazard that does not exist). 
(c)  Commercial speech related to marijuana. Federal law prohibits the advertising and sale of marijuana. Colorado law specifically allows the advertising and sale of marijuana, subject to comprehensive state regulation. As of the effective date of this UDC, the U.S. Department of Justice has indicated that it will use prosecutorial discretion to (in general) not enforce federal marijuana laws in states that have legalized marijuana under state law and enacted comprehensive regulations for the marijuana industry. Accordingly, if the city permits marijuana uses, the city will allow a limited exception to subsection (b)(2) of this section for the signs of marijuana businesses, provided that the businesses are licensed and operated in compliance with applicable state statutes and regulations. The exception created by this subsection does not create a defense to the enforcement of federal law, nor shall the city be liable for any damages of any type caused by the enforcement of federal law. If the federal policy regarding prosecutorial discretion officially changes such that federal marijuana prohibitions are enforced in Colorado, then the limited exception created by this section shall automatically terminate, and signs advertising marijuana shall be considered prohibited signs. 
(d)  Severability. The narrow classifications of content that are prohibited by this section are either not protected by the United States or Colorado Constitutions, or are offered limited protection that is outweighed by the substantial and compelling governmental interests in protecting the public safety and welfare. It is the intent of the city council that each subsection of this section (e.g., subsections (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4) or subsection (c)) be individually severable in the event that a court holds one (1) or more of them to be inconsistent with the United States or Colorado Constitutions. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 4-8. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 21-4-801. - Purpose and application of division. 
(a)  Generally. The design standards set out in this division are intended to be applied to certain types of development or within certain areas of the city. Each section of this division includes an applicability statement that describes the type of development or the geographic area (or both) to which the standards of the section apply. With the exception of the alternative design standards that may be created by section 21-4-801, the standards of this division are applied administratively. 
(b)  Alternative design standards. The city council may allow the use of alternative design standards instead of otherwise applicable design standards from this division, as set out in section 21-4-801, alternative design standards. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-802. - Alternative design standards. 
The design standards set out in this division are not necessarily the only techniques by which the objective of quality design and development may be achieved. They are intended as minimum standards which, if met, will create the character and quality that the city expects from new large-scale retail sales and services uses. Alternative methods for achieving the objectives of this Division may be approved if, due to innovative design, the use of natural features or screening, intensive landscaping, or other techniques, it is demonstrated that the design objectives are achieved and that the level of design as expressed in these standards is either met or exceeded. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-803. - Large-scale retail ("big box") design standards. 
(a)  Applicability. The standards of this section apply to all new development or redevelopment that has all of the following characteristics: 
(1)  The development is located in the CB or MU zone; 
(2)  The development is principally intended for retail sales and services (type 1 or type 2), heavy retail, business services, personal services, liquor stores, or restaurant uses; and 
(3)  The development includes more than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of floor area within a single building, even if the building is divided into multiple tenant spaces. 
(b)  Architectural standards. 
(1)  Building articulation and detailing. 
a.  Street-facing and parking lot-facing building elevations that are more than one hundred (100) feet wide shall be articulated in order to mitigate the appearance of building mass and to provide visual interest, as follows: 
1.  Wall plane projections or recesses that are offset at least three (3) feet for a distance of at least five (5) feet shall be included on the building elevation. 
2.  The cumulative total width of the required offsets shall not be less than twenty (20) percent of the width of the building elevation. 
b.  Street-facing and parking lot-facing building elevations shall have no rectangular area of "blank wall" that is taller than fifteen (15) feet or wider than forty (40) feet. 
c.  Building elevations that include principal public entrances shall include arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings, or other comparable features in the area within ten (10) feet above ground level along not less than: 
1.  Forty (40) percent of their horizontal width in the CB zone; or 
2.  Sixty (60) percent of their horizontal width in the MU zone. 
d.  The features that are required by subsection (b)(1)c., above, must be integral parts of the building's architecture, and not appear as superficially applied trim, graphics, or paint. 
(2)  Vertical articulation and roof structures. 
a.  Variations in apparent building height shall be used to break up building scale (e.g., tower elements, varying roof heights, or varying parapet height). 
b.  Where sloped roof systems are used: 
1.  Roof pitch shall be not less than four (4) feet of vertical rise for every twelve (12) feet of horizontal run (4:12 pitch) and not more than twelve (12) feet of vertical rise for every twelve (12) feet of horizontal run (12:12 pitch). 
2.  The roof system shall have a compound form. 
c.  Where flat roof systems are used: 
1.  Parapets shall conceal the roof system and any rooftop equipment (such as HVAC units) from street-level public view. 
2.  Parapet height, on average, shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the height of the supporting wall, and shall not at any point exceed one-third (?) of the height of the supporting wall. 
3.  Parapets shall include three-dimensional cornice treatment. 
(3)  Cladding materials. 
a.  The following shall not be used as primary cladding materials: 
1.  Smooth-faced concrete block; 
2.  Tilt-up concrete panels; 
3.  Vinyl siding; 
4.  Corrugated, "R-panel," "U-panel," or standing-seam metal panels; or 
5.  Exterior insulation finishing systems ("EIFS"). 
b.  The following are permitted as primary cladding materials: 
1.  Brick or thin brick; 
2.  Sandstone or other native stone; 
3.  Tinted textured or split face concrete masonry units; 
4.  Pre-finished structural or architectural insulated metal panel systems; or 
5.  Stucco. 
c.  The administrator may allow additional materials that are not prohibited by subsection (b)(3)a. to be used as primary cladding materials if it is demonstrated that they are of comparable quality, durability, and appearance to the materials that are listed in subsection (b)(3)b. 
(4)  Colors. 
a.  Principal building colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral, or earth tones. High-intensity colors, primary colors, metallic colors, black, or fluorescent colors are not allowed. 
b.  Building trim and accent areas may be painted or finished with brighter colors (including primary colors). 
(5)  Accent lighting. Neon tubing (or comparable lighting systems), whether shielded or not, shall not be used to highlight building trim or accent areas. 
(c)  Building access. 
(1)  CB Zone. In the CB zone: 
a.  Primary public entrances shall be located on the elevation of the building that is closest in distance to the majority of off-street parking spaces. If that elevation is more than one hundred (100) feet wide, it shall include at least two (2) public entrances. 
b.  If there is only one (1) primary public entrance to the building, it shall be located near the center of the building, or in a location that tends to optimize the accessibility of the entrance from the parking lot. 
c.  If there are multiple public entrances, they shall be distributed in a manner that tends to optimize accessibility to the building from the parking lot. 
d.  Parking areas shall be designed to provide routes for safe pedestrian access from sidewalks on adjoining rights-of-way to the primary public entrances. 
(2)  MU Zone. In the MU zone: 
a.  Primary public entrances shall be located on a street-facing elevation. Access shall also be provided from elevations that face parking lots that serve the use, if those elevations are not street-facing. 
b.  Parking areas shall be designed to provide routes for safe pedestrian access to the primary public entrances. 
(d)  Additional setbacks. 
(1)  CB Zone. In the CB zone, buildings shall be set back not less than thirty-five (35) feet from all property lines. 
(2)  MU Zone. In the MU zone, buildings shall be set back not less than thirty-five (35) feet from zone boundaries, unless the zone boundary is a street, in which case standard front or street side setbacks apply. 
(e)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks of at least six (6) feet in width shall be provided along all adjoining public streets, and shall be connected to routes that provide safe access to the building. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-804. - Downtown design standards. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the downtown design standards is to promote the long-term economic prosperity of Downtown Alamosa as a vital, pedestrian-friendly urban center for government, culture, office, finance, tourism, specialty shopping, dining, and entertainment. These standards are intended to promote: 
(1)  Safe and convenient pedestrian circulation, 
(2)  Complementary new development and redevelopment that respects the existing character and historic qualities of Downtown Alamosa; 
(3)  Adaptive re-use of existing historic buildings; and 
(4)  Coordinated design to sustain and further encourage a cohesive downtown core. 
(b)  Applicability. This section applies to all development (hereafter referred to as "renovations/development") within the CBD zone that affects the exterior of properties that are visible from public ways, including alterations, renovations or additions to and replacement of existing buildings, new construction, the erection of a sign, or that involves site disturbance. 
(c)  Building setbacks and frontage. Buildings shall reinforce the traditional building alignment found on the same block. Such alignments vary within the downtown, as follows: 
(1)  Buildings that are located on the following street segments shall be built to the front property line along one hundred (100) percent of the street frontage (except at recessed building entries or upper-story step-backs): 
a.  400 through 700 blocks of Main Street; and 
b.  300 through 500 blocks of State Avenue. 
(2)  Where buildings are built to the front property line as required by subsection (c)(1), above, recessed building entrances shall be provided for principal public entrances to ground floor uses. Such recessed building entrances are allowed elsewhere in the CBD zone if historically used in the immediate area. 
(3)  In areas of the CBD zone not specifically described in subsection (c)(1), above, buildings shall be constructed to the established building line. 
(d)  Building mass, form, and orientation. New development, redevelopment, and additions to existing buildings shall be consistent with the traditional mass, scale, orientation, fenestration, and architectural character of the existing buildings in the CBD zone within the immediate area (except buildings with single-family form), as follows: 
(1)  Building forms shall be comparable to those seen traditionally on the same block. Simple rectangular solids are typically appropriate. 
(2)  Building widths shall appear to be similar to those found historically on the same or adjacent blocks. Buildings that are wider than the traditional pattern shall be designed to appear as a series of individual buildings that fit into the traditional pattern (for buildings that are located on corners, this standard applies only to the primary street frontage). 
(3)  Facade proportions shall reinforce those present on historic buildings that are visible from the subject property and the street in front of the subject property, as follows: 
a.  The ratio of the width to height of the building shall appear to be maintained with respect to renovations to existing buildings, such that: 
1.  Expansions of building that extend the building elevation more than ten (10) feet in horizontal width shall be designed so that addition to the building appears to be a separate building. 
2.  Expansions of the building that add a floor to the building shall be designed so that the vertical addition is stepped back from all vertical building planes along street frontages not less than one (1) foot for each additional foot in height that the addition adds to the building. 
b.  All renovation and development construction shall maintain the original proportions of the facades and storefront openings, including the spacing of storefront bays to one (1) another, in a manner that is consistent with the historic buildings within the downtown. 
c.  The facades of buildings shall include architectural treatments and details that are commonly used on traditional or historic storefronts in Alamosa. Such treatments and details include parapets or cornices, sign bands, upper-story windows, awnings, display windows, and kickplates below display windows. New buildings may utilize contemporary interpretations of traditional or historic treatments and details. 
(4)  No area of blank wall shall be larger than twenty (20) feet wide or twelve (12) feet high. 
(5)  Roof forms shall be consistent with to those of existing and traditional buildings that are visible from the subject property and the street in front of the subject property. 
(6)  The standards of this subsection (d) shall not apply to modifications of single-family detached residential building forms, unless the applicant proposes to change the essential form of the building to a commercial building form. If a single-family detached building form is maintained, the building and roof forms and proportions shall be comparable to the existing building or comparably-aged residential buildings within a one-quarter mile radius. For example, large expanses of glass, such as oversized display windows, or false building fronts are inappropriate on single-family detached residential building forms that are used for commercial purposes. 
(e)  Building materials. 
(1)  On existing buildings, historical cladding materials shall be maintained, repaired, or replaced in-kind wherever feasible. For example, a brick facade shall generally be maintained, repaired, or replaced with brick, and not stucco or other material. 
(2)  New construction shall use exterior cladding materials that are consistent with traditional or historic downtown buildings in terms of texture, color, scale, durability, and quality. Such materials may include brick, stone, historically appropriate ornamental pressed metal, wood, and stucco. 
(3)  Exterior renovations to existing buildings shall utilize cladding materials that are consistent with the historic materials original to the structure. 
(4)  The following shall not be used as primary cladding materials: 
a.  Smooth-faced concrete block; 
b.  Tilt-up concrete panels; 
c.  Vinyl siding; 
d.  Corrugated, "R-panel," "U-panel," or standing-seam metal panels; or 
e.  Exterior insulation finishing systems ("EIFS"). 
(f)  Building access. If a subject property is located on a corner lot within the CBD zone, it shall provide access at the corner or along both the primary street and the side (or "secondary") street. Display windows or outdoor seating areas may be provided along the side or secondary street in lieu of (or in addition to) building access in that location. 
(g)  Off-street parking. 
(1)  Where parking is provided on-site and in conjunction with a building, all parking shall be located at the rear or to one (1) side of the building. To the maximum extent feasible, ingress and egress to parking lots shall be from an alley. 
(2)  Parking that is located to the side of the building shall be buffered from the public sidewalk (except at points of vehicular ingress and egress) with a three-foot high masonry wall that includes a "seat wall" component that is between eighteen (18) and twenty (20) inches high (including the cap) and at least twelve (12) inches in depth (at the cap). If the parking lot is accessed from the street, the wall shall be set back three (3) feet from the public sidewalk. 
(3)  Parking structures shall be integrated with the architectural character of surrounding buildings. 
a.  To the maximum extent practicable, where parking structures front on streets, retail and other uses along ground floor frontage should be provided to minimize interruptions in pedestrian interest and variety. 
b.  Where such uses are not practicable, parking structures shall be designed so that the use of the building for parking is not obvious (except at points of vehicular ingress and egress) from the building's architecture and finishes. 
(h)  Pedestrian amenities and streetscape. 
(1)  Street-facing yards, if larger than ten (10) feet in depth and five hundred (500) square feet in area and not used for parking, shall be landscaped with: 
a.  One (1) tree per one thousand (1,000) square feet (dropping fractions); and 
b.  Shrubs, perennials, bulbs, a seeded or sodded lawn, hardscaped (e.g., brick pavers) plazas, fountains, sculptures, or xeriscaping. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be provided in all areas of Downtown Alamosa. Sidewalks shall be constructed in such a way as to maintain continuity and historical character of the street. 
(3)  Pedestrian-scaled streetscape elements that create visual interest at the sidewalk edge, such as awnings, canopies, planters, seating, and displays may be allowed to encroach upon the portion of the right-of-way used for a sidewalk, subject to a revocable license executed by the city and the owner of the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-4-805. - Manufactured home park and manufactured home subdivision design standards. 
(a)  Generally. Manufactured homes may only be placed in manufactured home parks or manufactured home subdivisions. Mobile homes are not permitted anywhere within the City of Alamosa. Manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions shall be designed according to the minimum standards of this section. 
(b)  Manufactured home installation. 
(1)  All manufactured homes shall meet the following installation specifications: 
a.  The average elevation of a manufactured home frame above ground elevation, measured at ninety (90) degrees to the frame, shall not exceed four (4) feet from the top of the foundation pad. 
b.  The wheels, axles, tongue, towing apparatus, and transporting lights shall be removed prior to final installation of the manufactured home. 
(2)  Within manufactured home subdivisions, the space between the finished grade of the property on which a manufactured home is located and the exterior edges of the finished floor of the unit must be skirted with rock, brick, or concrete masonry construction installed on a concrete footing so there is not a visible gap between the finished floor and the ground. All skirting materials shall be compatible in appearance with the home and shall allow for adequate ventilation and drainage. The skirting must be a continuous, complete, opaque, and rigid surface that lends permanency to the appearance of the manufactured home and totally screens the crawlspace under the manufactured home. 
(c)  Vehicular circulation and configuration of internal streets. 
(1)  Manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions that are designed to accommodate more than twenty (20) manufactured homes shall be designed with a minimum of two (2) points of vehicular ingress and egress. 
(2)  Generally, internal streets must be interconnected or looped. However, where site constraints required a dead-end, a cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided with a minimum radius that will provide an appropriate turnaround for service and emergency vehicles. 
(3)  Access to all manufactured home lots (or spaces) shall be from interior streets. 
(d)  Perimeter setbacks. There shall be a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet from any portion of a manufactured home or accessory structure to any exterior boundary of the manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision. 
(e)  Pedestrian circulation. An internal circulation system of sidewalks, trails, or multi-use pathways shall be installed within the manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision to provide for safe and convenient pedestrian access and circulation. 
(f)  Lighting. All interior streets and sidewalks shall be lighted for safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. Such lights shall be shielded to prevent glare on adjacent properties and external streets, and to avoid sky glow. 
(g)  Individual storage buildings. One detached storage building is permitted on each manufactured home lot or space, for use by the resident of that lot or space. All such storage buildings shall be located in the rear one-half (½) of the lot or space. 
(h)  Community storage areas. A manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision may also include outdoor storage areas for use by all residents for large items such as recreational vehicles, boats, trailers, or commercial vehicles. Such storage areas must be set back not less than fifty (50) feet from the boundaries of the manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision, and must be completely screened from off-site views. Such storage areas shall not be used for the storage or disposal of junk. 
(i)  Fences and accessory structures. Fences and dog runs are allowed upon lots or spaces that are used for individual manufactured homes, provided that fences are located behind the front building line of the manufactured home and dog runs are located in the back yard. 
(j)  Accommodation of tiny homes or occupied recreational vehicles. A manufactured home park may include areas for tiny homes or recreational vehicles ("RVs"), as follows: 
(1)  Such areas shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the total area of the manufactured home park. 
(2)  The period of occupancy of RVs shall not exceed thirty (30) consecutive days. The period of occupancy of building code-compliant tiny homes is not limited. 
(3)  In areas designated for RVs, the following additional minimum design standards shall be met: 
a.  The minimum area designated for each RV space shall be not less than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet, with a minimum width and frontage of thirty-five (35) feet. 
b.  The minimum depth of each RV space shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
c.  All RVs parked in a manufactured home park shall be in good repair. Motorized camper vehicles shall have a valid motor vehicle inspection sticker. 
(k)  Buffers. Manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions shall be screened from adjacent streets with a Class B bufferyard, and screened from adjacent properties with not less than a Class C bufferyard. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
ARTICLE V. - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS  
DIVISION 5-1. - SITE DESIGN, CIRCULATION, AND CONNECTIVITY 
 
Sec. 21-5-101. - Purpose and application. 
(a)  Generally. Review pursuant to this division is intended to ensure quality design, but, in general, not to require a density or intensity reduction. It is the policy of the city that the principles of this division be applied to the maximum extent possible without imposing restrictions that reduce the density or intensity of development that is permitted on the subject property by this UDC. 
(b)  Modifications to plans. The city may require modifications to proposed site plans or subdivision plats that otherwise conform to the standards of the UDC in order to enhance the quality of the design in accordance with the qualitative principles of this division. The standards of this division shall be applied and interpreted in the context of the other applicable standards that are set out in other parts of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-102. - General site design principles. 
(a)  Generally. Sites should be planned and developed to provide functional and desirable settings for the buildings that are to be constructed, to mitigate impacts on adjacent properties, and to enhance connectivity to other areas of the city for motor vehicles, pedestrians, and bicyclists, as provided in this section. 
(b)  Compatibility. The proposed site plan or subdivision plat shall be designed in a way that: 
(1)  Provides appropriate space for buffers and transitions between incompatible land uses or obvious changes in density or intensity along side or rear boundaries of the subject property; 
(2)  In areas where such uses are located or planned in close proximity to each other, provides appropriate linkages between residential uses and retail, restaurant, personal service, entertainment, and office uses, providing access while protecting neighborhood integrity; 
(3)  Protects downstream property and public infrastructure from flooding, erosion, or sedimentation from stormwater runoff; 
(4)  Appropriately addresses natural hazards, if present; 
(5)  Anticipates and provides for future connections to neighboring properties that are likely to be developed, redeveloped, or expanded with similar or supportive land uses within ten (10) years; 
(6)  Minimizes interference with existing access to adjacent and nearby properties, unless new and improved access is provided by the proposed development; 
(7)  Protects significant natural features or views where possible; and 
(8)  Does not materially reduce the level of service of public services or utilities that are provided to surrounding development. 
(c)  Future adjacent development. The proposed development shall be designed in a way that shows how future development of adjacent parcels under common ownership (if any) will relate to the subject property in terms of transportation linkages, utilities, and drainage. 
(d)  Flood damage prevention. Development within a special flood hazard area is restricted as provided in Chapter 8, Flood Damage Prevention, City of Alamosa Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-103. - Circulation and connectivity. 
(a)  Internal circulation. 
(1)  Internal circulation systems shall be interconnected. 
(2)  Pedestrian routes shall be located along (or visible from) all streets, except that, where street connections are not feasible or the administrator determines that they are undesirable, off-street trails and paths may be used instead to provide pedestrian connections among buildings and land uses, and between abutting properties. 
(3)  If proposed development includes more than one (1) street or more than one hundred (100) parking spaces, then the internal circulation system (e.g., new streets, sidewalks, or trails) shall be designed such that alternative travel routes are provided through the development. 
(b)  Access. For multifamily, nonresidential, and vertically mixed-use development, the following access standards apply: 
(1)  Access to off-street parking lots or parking structures shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic, provide maximum safety of traffic ingress and egress, and maximum safety for pedestrians and vehicular traffic on the site. 
(2)  The number of access points shall be limited to the minimum that will allow the property to accommodate the traffic to be anticipated. 
(3)  Access points shall not be more than twenty-four (24) feet in width unless the city engineer determines that a wider access is necessary (e.g., for tractor-trailers or additional access lanes) and shall be clearly and permanently marked and defined. 
(4)  If there are multiple access points on the same frontage of a subject property, such access points shall be separated not less than sixty-four (64) feet, measured centerline to centerline. For every foot that the lot frontage exceeds one hundred (100) feet, the minimum required separation shall be increased by one (1) foot. The minimum spacing requirement shall not be greater than two hundred (200) feet (except where required by CDOT on a State Highway), although spacing wider than two hundred (200) feet is allowed if proposed. 
(5)  In the case of a corner lot, access points shall be located not closer than thirty (30) feet to the intersecting street flowlines. 
(6)  Access points shall not be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to an interior side lot line, except that a common access to two (2) adjoining properties may be provided at the shared lot line. 
(c)  Cross access/external connections. 
(1)  Cross-access shall be provided among nonresidential and mixed-use parcels where practicable, in order to manage curb cuts and balance the need for mobility with the need for access to lots and buildings. 
(2)  Proposed development shall connect to existing and planned streets where necessary to complete planned street networks. 
(3)  Paths, sidewalks, and trails shall not be routed through parking lots (except to make connections to buildings) if other practical alternatives exist. Where paths, sidewalks, or trails must be routed through parking lots, they shall be located between parking modules and protected by curbs. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-104. - On-site snow storage. 
(a)  Generally. Adequate areas for snow storage shall be provided for all development that includes streets or on-site parking. 
(b)  Location and configuration. Snow storage areas shall be located and configured to safely and efficiently melt snow, and to minimize and manage the impacts of pollutants from the resulting runoff, as follows: 
(1)  Snow storage areas shall be located to drain away from pedestrian and vehicular use areas, and into vegetated buffer strips or other appropriate best management practices ("BMPs"), such that water quality is improved and off-site drainage impacts are mitigated. 
(2)  Snow storage areas shall be configured so that stored snow does not obstruct any of the following: 
a.  Sight triangles at driveways and intersections; 
b.  Emergency access routes; 
c.  Required parking spaces; 
d.  Pedestrian routes; and 
e.  Drain inlets. 
(3)  To the greatest extent feasible, snow storage areas shall be located in areas with solar exposure, away from streets, sidewalks, and trails. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-105. - Street, alley, and pedestrian way design. 
(a)  Generally. Streets shall be designed in accordance with the standards of this section. 
(b)  Street plans. Streets shall be located and configured to implement adopted plans of the city that show the general location and classification of new streets, and new arterial and collector streets shall align with existing streets of the same classification. The exact location and classification of new streets will be determined during the development review process. 
(c)  Right-of-way dimensions. 
(1)  Street, alley, and pedestrian way right-of-way widths and curves shall meet the standards of Table 21-5-105(c), Right-of-Way Specifications, unless otherwise approved by the planning commission upon a demonstration that an alternative right-of-way width will: 
a.  Provide for appropriate levels of multimodal use that meets city level of service standards and provides for safe travel during all seasons; 
b.  Reduce costs to the city for routine and periodic maintenance; 
c.  Include appropriate connections to existing streets; and 
d.  Improve the character of the area served by the street. 
Table 21-5-105(c) 
RIGHT-OF-WAY SPECIFICATIONS 
Classification 	Right-of-way width (ft.) 	Minimum centerline curve radius (ft.) 
Local 	60 	100 
Collector 	60 	300 
Minor arterial 	80 	300 
Marginal access 	40 	100 
Alley 	20 	100 
Pedestrian way 	10 	N/A 
 
(2)  Principal arterial streets shall conform to state highway standards. 
(3)  Minimum grade shall be determined by the city engineer. 
(4)  Maximum grade through intersections shall be four (4) percent. The maximum grade shall extend a minimum of fifty (50) feet each direction from the centerline of the intersecting streets. 
(5)  Pedestrian ways, not less than ten (10) feet wide, may be required to provide access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, open space areas, or other community facilities. 
(6)  Sidewalks that are at least four (4) feet in width shall be provided along all sides of a lot that abut a public street or way. Sidewalks shall be constructed within the street right-of-way, parallel to the street, unless: 
a.  A different configuration of the pedestrian circulation system is desirable in order to preserve topographical or natural features, or to provide visual interest; 
b.  It is demonstrated that the alternative pedestrian circulation system will provide safe and convenient circulation; and 
c.  The applicant provides for the perpetual maintenance of the alternative pedestrian circulation system through a homeowners' association, special district, or appropriate easements that allocate maintenance responsibilities. 
(d)  Alleys. Paved alleys that are open at both ends shall be provided in commercial and industrial areas, unless the administrator determines that other appropriate provisions (other than an alley) are made for service access. 
(e)  Fire lanes. Fire lanes shall be required where necessary to protect the subject property and adjoining properties during the period of development and when developed, and an easement to such effect shall be dedicated to the city. The easement shall be sixteen (16) feet in width, remain free of obstructions, and provide access at all times. 
(f)  Integration. 
(1)  Except where interruptions of the street network are necessary due to significant features such as ditches, railroads, parks, or limited access roadways, new streets shall integrate into the existing street pattern so as to: 
a.  Address the new development's access and circulation needs; 
b.  Provide a pattern of streets that facilitates mobility and provides a choice of routes and travel modes, in that existing and planned streets (including streets that are shown on pending applications for development approval on adjacent property) are continued in a similar alignment on the subject property and at a comparable right-of-way and pavement width, except where: 
1.  There is a demonstrated need to change the street cross-section in order to improve the safety of the traveling public, or to provide on-street parking in areas where it is appropriate; 
2.  The right-of-way or pavement section of the existing street is substandard; or 
3.  The continuation would create incompatibility or materially concentrate through-traffic in residential neighborhoods. 
(2)  When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lot(s) or parcel(s), such lot(s) or parcel(s) shall be so arranged as to permit the logical location and opening of future streets and appropriate resubdivision, with provision for adequate utility easements and connectors for such resubdivision. 
(3)  Where the subject property is adjacent to land that is likely to be developed or redeveloped in the future, streets, bicycle paths, sidewalks, trails, and access ways in the development's proposed transportation system shall continue through to the boundary lines of the subject property to provide for the orderly subdivision and development of the adjoining land, or the transportation and access needs of the city. 
(g)  Intersections. Streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles as possible. 
(h)  Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs are allowed where necessary due to site constraints such as topography, site dimensions, or the presence of ditches or railroads; however, no cul-de-sac shall be longer than six hundred (600) feet from the point of connection to the street to the middle of the cul-de-sac end, and the turnaround right-of-way diameter shall be at least one hundred (100) feet. Surface drainage of the cul-de-sac shall be toward the intersecting street, or if such drainage is not possible, a drainage easement must be provided through the cul-de-sac. 
(i)  Offsets. Street jogs are not allowed on arterial streets, and may be allowed on collector streets only if it is demonstrated that the physical conditions of the subject property require the offset, and the design will not compromise public safety. Streets with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet will not be accepted. 
(j)  Interim turnarounds. Where a street will eventually be extended beyond the boundaries of the subject property, but is temporarily dead-ended, an interim turnaround (e.g., a hammerhead or cul-de-sac with a ninety (90) foot diameter) may be required. 
(k)  Half-streets. Half streets are not allowed. 
(l)  Reserve strips. Reserve strips in private ownership that purport to control access to streets are prohibited. Reserve strips that are dedicated to the city are allowed. 
(m)  Natural resources. New streets shall be located with appropriate regard for topography, vegetation, waterways, ditches, open spaces, and comparable resources that are environmentally sensitive, legally protected, or potential amenities. 
(n)  Engineering specifications. New streets shall have such dimensions, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and pavements as may be required by city engineering specifications promulgated by the public works director, and rights-of-way shall be sufficient to accommodate underground utility lines. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-106. - Blocks. 
(a)  Generally. Block lengths and widths shall be suitable for the uses or lot sizes that are contemplated, and shall be adequate for requirements pertaining to minimum lot areas, dimensions, and setbacks. 
(b)  Block length. Blocks shall be at least four hundred (400) feet and not more than one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet in length unless adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, park, arterial street, natural area, ditch, or similar feature that makes street intersections impractical. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-107. - Lots. 
(a)  Size and shape. Lots shall meet all applicable zoning requirements. 
(b)  Floodplains. New lots shall not be created that include portions of the floodplain unless a reasonable building envelope exists on a portion of the lot that is outside of the floodplain. 
(c)  Access. All lots shall take access from a public street. Single-family detached, duplex, townhome, and multiplex lots shall take access only from local streets, or from alleys or parking courts that are connected to local streets. 
(d)  Lot frontage. The minimum lot frontage shall be the least of: 
(1)  The minimum lot width required by this UDC for the particular lot type; 
(2)  Fifty (50) feet for lots that do not front on a cul-de-sac; or 
(3)  Thirty-five (35) feet for lots that front on a cul-de-sac. 
(e)  Double-frontage lots. Double-frontage lots shall be prohibited except: 
(1)  Where essential to provide separation from arterial streets or state highways; or 
(2)  Where lots that span an existing block are assembled for nonresidential or mixed-use development. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-108. - Sight triangles. 
No building, fence, wall, sign, hedge, shrub, planting, tree, or other sight obstruction between two and one-half (2 ½) feet and eight (8) feet above the elevation of the crown of the street shall be located within the triangular area formed by the edge of the surface of the street or curb line and a line connecting them at points 35 feet from their point of intersection. See Figure 21-5-108, Sight Triangle. 
Figure 21-5-108 
SIGHT TRIANGLE 
  
  
DIVISION 5-2. - PARKING AND LOADING 
 
Sec. 21-5-201. - Purpose and application of division. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to ensure that: 
(1)  Adequate off-street motor vehicle parking is provided for uses that are approved pursuant to this UDC, in order to: 
a.  Promote economic development; and 
b.  Protect the character and quality of life in residential neighborhoods that may be impacted by overflow parking; 
(2)  The utilization of parking resources may be optimized based on shared parking programs that allow for the utilization of a parking lot or structure by different uses that have different peak demands for parking, and based on the "internal trip capture" of areas of the city such as the MU, CBD, and CA Zones; 
(3)  Appropriate parking areas and accessible routes will be provided for persons with disabilities when parking lots or structures are developed, expanded, or reconfigured; 
(4)  Adequate loading areas and (where appropriate) stacking areas are provided that do not interfere with the function of adjoining streets or on-site vehicular use areas; and 
(5)  Sites that are used for infill, adaptive re-use, or redevelopment have flexibility and multiple alternatives for compliance with this division, such that investments in upgrades to real property are promoted. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  Number of required parking and loading spaces. 
a.  Section 21-5-202 establishes the methodology for calculating the number of required parking spaces, including measurement of independent variables and application of available credits and reductions. 
b.  Section 21-5-203 sets out the number of required parking spaces for each land use set out in the use tables, based on the parking district in which the use is located. 
c.  Section 21-5-204 sets out the number of parking spaces that must be designed, located, and configured as accessible parking spaces to meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
d.  Section 21-5-205 sets out the requirements for special parking studies, which are generally used to determine parking requirements for certain land uses. 
e.  Section 21-5-206 allows an allocation of on-street parking spaces within a development to the individual land uses in the development. 
f.  Section 21-5-207 sets out the methodology for calculating the number of required parking spaces in locations where different types of uses create different peak parking demands on a particular parking area. 
g.  Section 21-5-208 sets out standards for the provision of parking on a property that is off-site from the subject property. 
(2)  Parking, loading, and stacking design. 
a.  Section 21-5-209 sets out requirements for parking lot design, including the minimum dimensions for parking spaces and drive aisles. 
b.  Section 21-5-210 sets out the standards for how parking spaces must be delineated, and cross-references standards for traffic control devices. 
c.  Section 21-5-211 sets out standards for the design of truck loading areas. 
d.  Section 21-5-212 sets out standards for stacking lanes for drive-through uses. 
(3)  Construction, operation, and maintenance. Section 21-5-213 sets out standards for the construction, operation, and maintenance of parking lots. 
(c)  Relationship to certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Required parking spaces shall be improved as required and made available for use before the final inspection is completed by the building inspector. 
(2)  The building inspector may grant an extension of time for completion of parking if: 
a.  The parking space is not required for immediate use; 
b.  The applicant executes an improvements agreement for the parking spaces and provides appropriate security in the form of a letter of credit or cash deposit equaling one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the cost to complete the improvements as estimated by a professional engineer and approved by the building inspector; and 
c.  The improvements agreement provides that in event the parking spaces are not constructed within one (1) year after the date of extension, the city may apply the security to complete the parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-202. - Calculation of required parking spaces. 
(a)  Generally. Section 21-5-203, parking tables, sets out the number of parking spaces that are required for each land use that is listed in article 2, division 2, land use. The number of parking spaces is based on one (1) or more independent variables, which are measured as provided in this section. 
(b)  Independent variables. The independent variables for parking calculations are measured as follows: 
(1)  Floor area. Where the independent variable is square feet ("sf."), the number of parking spaces is based on the number of square feet occupied by the use (or occupied by a component of the use that is specified in the table). 
(2)  Dwelling unit. Where the independent variable is a dwelling unit ("U"), the number of parking spaces is calculated based on the number of dwelling units. In some cases, the parking requirements are based on the number of bedrooms (per "#" BRU) in each dwelling unit. 
(3)  Bed. Where the independent variable is "bed," the number of parking spaces is based on the number of beds in the facility instead of the number of bedrooms or some other measure. Per-bed calculations are typically applied to uses that offer residential care or overnight accommodations with shared rooms. 
(4)  Employee. The phrase "per employee" means that the number of parking spaces is based on the number of employees (full-time and part-time equivalent) on the maximum shift, that is, the work shift in which the maximum number of employees are present. 
(5)  Seat/seat design capacity. If the independent variable is "seat," the number of parking spaces is based on the number of seats that are provided to guests (patrons, members, etc.). If the independent variable is "seat design capacity," the number of parking spaces is based on the maximum seating capacity of the use as established by applicable fire code. 
(6)  Maximum capacity. If the independent variable is "maximum capacity," the number of parking spaces is based on the lesser of: 
a.  The maximum number of people who may occupy the use pursuant to applicable fire code; or 
b.  The maximum number of people who may occupy the use pursuant to other applicable regulatory or operational standards. 
(7)  Others. Other independent variables are measured according to their common meanings. 
(c)  Rounding. When the calculation of required parking spaces results in a fractional parking space, the result of the parking calculation shall be rounded to the nearest whole number using standard rounding techniques. 
(d)  Parking reductions. Generally, the total number of required parking spaces is equal to the sum of the required parking for each use of a subject property. However, parking requirements may be reduced according to the methodology of section 21-5-207, shared parking. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-203. - Parking tables. 
(a)  Generally. Parking requirements for individual land uses shall be as set out in this section. 
(b)  Residential and special residential parking standards. The residential and special residential land use parking standards are set out in Table 21-5-203(b), Residential and Special Residential Parking Standards. 
Table 21-5-203(b) 
RESIDENTIAL AND SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL PARKING STANDARDS 
Land Use 	Parking Standard 
Residential Uses 
Single-family detached (all types) 	2 sp./U 
Duplex or twin house 	2 sp./U 
Townhouse or rowhouse 	2 sp./U 
Multiplex or multifamily 	1.5 sp./studio or 1 BRU; 2 sp./2 BRU; 3 sp./3+ BRU 
Manufactured home 	2 sp./U + 1 sp./10 U visitor parking in manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision 
Cottage clusters or co-housing clusters 	1 sp./tiny home; 2 sp./cottage 
Live-work 	3 sp./U 
Special Residential Uses 
Assisted living or congregate care 	2 sp./3 U 
Boarding or rooming house 	2 sp. + 1 sp./guest room 
Convalescent center, Alzheimer's care, memory care, nursing home 	1 sp./4 beds 
Group home 	1 sp./3 occupants at maximum capacity 
Sheltered care facility 	1 sp./2 beds 
 
(c)  Civic, education, and health care parking standards. The civic, education, and health care parking standards are set out in Table 21-5-203(c), Civic, Education, and Health Care Parking Standards. 
Table 21-5-203(c) 
CIVIC, EDUCATION, AND HEALTH CARE PARKING STANDARDS 
Land Use 	Parking Standard 
Civic 
Cemetery or Mausoleum 	1 sp./acre; but If cemetery includes internal roads and grave sites are set back 8 ft. from roads, formal parking is not required. 1 
City Facilities 	As determined by City based on facility type 
Funeral Home or Crematorium 	Greater of: (i) 1 sp./3 seats in principal assembly area; or (ii) 1 sp./21 sf. of principal assembly area (if no fixed seats) + 2 sp. for crematorium 
Place of Assembly 	Greater of: 1 sp./3 seats in principal assembly area; or 1 sp./21 sf. of principal assembly area (if no fixed seats) 
Protective Care 	1 sp./2 beds 
Day Care 
Adult Day Care 	3 sp./1,000 sf. 
Child Care Center, Small 	1 sp./employee 
Child Care Center, Large 	5 sp./4 employees 
Family Child Care Home 	Same as dwelling unit; additional parking not required for family child care home unless dwelling unit is nonconforming 
Education 
School 	Middle, elementary or pre-school: 1 sp./10 students at maximum capacity); high school: 1 sp./2 students at maximum capacity 
College or University 	By special study (see Sec. 21-5-205, Special Studies ) 
Vocational School/Job Training Center 	3 sp./2 students during peak use 
Health Care 
Hospital or Emergency Room 	Greater of: (i) 3 sp./2 beds; or (ii) 2 sp./exam or treatment room 
Medical Office or Clinic 	1 sp. / 150 sf. 
TABLE NOTE: 
1 See Chapter 16, Article IV for cemetery design requirements. 
 
(d)  General commercial and motor vehicle parking standards. The general commercial and motor vehicle parking standards are set out in Table 21-5-203(d), General Commercial and Motor Vehicle Parking Standards. 
Table 21-5-203(d) 
GENERAL COMMERCIAL AND MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING STANDARDS 
Land Use 	Parking Standard 
General Commercial 
Heavy Retail 	1 sp./600 sf. 
Liquor Stores 	1 sp./250 sf. 
Personal Services 	1 sp./250 sf. 
Retail Sales and Services Type 1 	1 sp./250 sf. 
Retail Sales and Services Type 2 	1 sp./250 sf. 
Professional or Business Offices 	3 sp./1,000 sf. 
Recording or Television Studio 	By special study (see sec. 21-5-205, special studies) 
Veterinary and Animal Facilities 	3 sp./1,000 sf. 
Motor Vehicle Land Uses 
Fueling/Charging Stations or Light Motor Vehicle Repairs and Services 	1.5 sp./fueling station (including station itself); 2 sp./service bay (not including space inside bay) 
Heavy Motor Vehicle Repairs and Services 	3 sp./service bay (not including space inside bay) 
Motor Vehicle Wash 	1 sp./bay for self-serve wash systems; 4 sp./conveyor for conveyor-based wash systems; areas used for hand finishing or detailing shall not be counted towards parking requirement 
Motor Vehicle Parking 	N/A 
Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental 	3 sp./1,000 sf. used for showroom and sales offices + 3 sp./service bay (not including space inside bay); spaces that are used for inventory shall not be counted towards parking requirement 
 
(e)  Hospitality, recreation, and entertainment parking standards. The hospitality, recreation, and entertainment parking standards are set out in Table 21-5-203(e), Hospitality, Recreation, and Entertainment Parking Standards. 
Table 21-5-203(e) 
HOSPITALITY, RECREATION, AND ENTERTAINMENT PARKING STANDARDS 
Land Use 	Parking Standard 
Hospitality 
Bar, Tavern, or Nightclub 	Greater of: (i) 1 sp./3 seats; or (ii) 11 sp./1,000 sf. 
Bed and Breakfast 	1 sp. + 1 sp./guest room 
Campground or RV Park 	1 sp./campsite, RV space, or cabin 
Hotel or Motel 	1.1 sp./guest room + 50% of required parking for accessory restaurant, retail, bar, tavern, or nightclub 
Restaurant, Drive-In or Drive-Through 	11 sp./1,000 sf. 
Restaurant, Indoor 	11 sp./1,000 sf. 
Restaurant, Outdoor 	11 sp./1,000 sf. (including outdoor areas used for dining) 
Recreation and Entertainment 
Commercial Equestrian Facility 	1 sp./4 stables 
Indoor Amusement, Recreation, and Entertainment 	Seated entertainment: 1 sp./2 fixed seats; or 1 sp./21 sf. of seating area (if no fixed seats); Bowling alley: 4 sp./lane + 1 sp./75 sf. of dining, billiards, or arcade; All others: 1 sp. / 75 sf. 
Indoor Gun Ranges 	2 sp./3 stations 
Outdoor Commercial Amusement 	Batting cages: 2 sp. + 1.25 sp./station; Go-cart racing, bumper boats, or bumper cars: 1.25 sp. per car or boat; All other: by special study (see sec. 21-5-205, special studies) 
Park 	By special study (see sec. 21-5-205, special studies) 
Sexually-Oriented Business 	Retail: 1 sp./250 sf. Entertainment: 1 sp./21 sf. of area accessible to patrons 
Stadium or Amphitheater 	By special study (see sec. 21-5-205, special studies) 
Zoo 	By special study (see sec. 21-5-205, special studies) 
 
(f)  Industry, transportation, storage, and disposal parking standards. The industry, transportation, storage, and disposal parking standards are set out in Table 21-5-203(f), Industry, Transportation, Storage, and Disposal Parking Standards. 
Table 21-5-203(f) 
INDUSTRY, TRANSPORTATION, STORAGE, AND DISPOSAL PARKING STANDARDS 
Land Use 	Parking Standard 
Industry 
Heavy Industry 	By special study (see sec. 21-5-205, special studies) 
Light Industry 	2 sp./1,000 sf. 
Marijuana Testing Facility 	3 sp./1,000 sf. 
Resource Extraction, Minerals 	By special study (see sec. 21-5-205, special studies) 
Resource Extraction, Oil and Gas 	By special study (see sec. 21-5-205, special studies) 
Transportation 
Airport 	By special study (see sec. 21-5-205, special studies) 
Heavy Logistics 	1 sp./5,000 sf. 
Helistop 	4 sp./helistop pad 
Storage 
Outdoor Storage Yard 	4 sp./acre, but not less than 2 sp. 
Self-Storage 	2 sp. + 1 sp./10,000 sf. 
Disposal 
Salvage or Junk Yard 	4 sp./acre, but not less than 6 sp. 
Transfer Station 	By special study (see sec. 21-5-205, special studies) 
 
(g)  Utility and communications parking standards. The utility and communications parking standards are set out in Table 21-5-203(g), Utility and Communications Parking Standards. 
Table 21-5-203(g) 
UTILITY AND COMMUNICATIONS PARKING STANDARDS 
Land Use 	Parking Standards 
Utilities 
Major Utility Facilities (110+ kV Power Lines) 	N/A 
Communications 
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities 	N/A 
Telecommunications Towers 	1 sp. (formal marking and paving are not required) 
 
(h)  Agricultural parking standards. The agricultural parking standards are set out in Table 21-5-203(h), Agricultural Parking Standards. 
Table 21-5-203(h) 
AGRICULTURAL PARKING STANDARDS 
Land Use 	Parking Standards 
Agricultural or Commercial Crop Production 	N/A 
Community Garden 	1 sp./1 st 20 plots + 1 sp./10 plots thereafter 
Keeping and Pasturing of Livestock 	N/A 
Wholesale Nursery or Greenhouse 	1 sp./acre of nursery + 1 sp./10,000 sf. of greenhouse 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17; Ord. No. 12-2018 , § 7, 5-2-18)  
Sec. 21-5-204. - Required accessible parking spaces. 
(a)  Generally. Parking spaces that are accessible to persons with disabilities ("accessible parking spaces") shall be provided as set out in this section. Such spaces shall be counted toward the total number of spaces that are provided for the purposes of compliance section 21-5-203, parking tables, after applicable reductions. 
(b)  Number of required spaces. Accessible parking spaces shall be provided as set out in Table 21-5-204(b), Number of Accessible Parking Spaces, or as required by the most current revision of the ADA Standards for Accessible Design, Section 208 (as may be amended or re-titled from time to time), whichever requires more parking spaces for disabled persons. 
Table 21-5-204(b) 
NUMBER OF ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES 
Number of Parking Spaces Required by this Division 	Number of Accessible Spaces 	Number of Spaces that 
Must be Van Accessible 
1 to 25 	1 	1 
26 to 50 	2 	1 
51 to 75 	3 	1 
76 to 100 	4 	1 
101 to 150 	5 	1 
151 to 200 	6 	1 
201 to 300 	7 	1 
301 to 400 	8 	1 
401 to 500 	9 	2 
501 to 1,000 	2 percent of total number of parking spaces 	1 out of 8 accessible parking spaces, rounded up 
1,001 and over 	20, plus 1 for each 100 parking spaces in excess of 1,000 parking spaces 	1 out of 8 accessible parking spaces, rounded up 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-205. - Special studies. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Some of the uses that are listed in the tables set out in section 21-5-203, have nonlinear or widely varying parking demand characteristics. Accordingly, their parking requirements are listed in the tables as "special study." Required parking for these uses shall be established according to the standards of this section. 
(2)  Special studies may also be submitted to support a request to reduce the number of required parking spaces to less than that set out in section 21-5-203, due to the nature of the operations or specific location of a proposed use. Such special studies shall include and support all requested reductions in parking. 
(b)  Special study requirements. 
(1)  A special study shall be conducted by a qualified transportation planner or traffic engineer at the applicant's expense. The administrator shall be responsible for determining whether the qualifications of any proposed transportation planner or traffic engineer are acceptable to the city for this purpose. 
(2)  The special study shall provide: 
a.  A peak parking analysis of at least three (3) functionally comparable uses. 
b.  Documentation regarding the comparability of the referenced uses, including: name, function, location, gross floor area, parking availability, access to transportation network (including vehicular, bicycle, pedestrian, and transit), use restrictions, and other factors that could affect the parking demand. 
(c)  Approval of special study. 
(1)  The city may rely upon the special study or may request additional information or analysis, including, but not limited to alternative or new data points, or consideration of additional or alternative factors related to comparability or peak demand, as supported by sound engineering principles. 
(2)  As a condition of approval of a special study, the city may require that land be reserved or land-banked for additional parking if there is a demonstrably high probability that: 
a.  The variability of the parking study may result in a materially higher parking demand than anticipated; 
b.  The use of the improvements on the subject property could change, resulting in a materially higher demand for parking. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-206. - Credit for on-street parking. 
In mixed-use developments that provide new on-street parking along internal streets, the on-street parking may be credited to particular uses. The number of parking spaces to be credited equals (Sa x P), where: 
Sa = the buildable area of the subject property divided by the developed and buildable area of the mixed-use development in which it is located; and 
P = the total parking that is available on-street in the mixed-use development. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-207. - Shared parking. 
(a)  Generally. In locations where a mix of uses allows for synergy with respect to the utilization of parking spaces due to differences in the timing of peak parking demand, the city may reduce the minimum required number of parking spaces according to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Shared parking table. Shared parking allows a reduction in the total number of required parking spaces when a subject property is occupied by two (2) or more uses that generally do not have peak parking demands at the same time. When any land or building is used for two (2) or more categories of uses that are listed below, the minimum total number of required parking spaces may be determined by the following procedures: 
(1)  Multiply the minimum required parking for each individual use, excluding spaces reserved for use by specified individuals or classes of individuals, by the appropriate percentage listed in Table 21-5-207(b)(1), Shared Parking Table, for each of the designated time periods. 
(2)  Calculate a sum for all uses for each of the five (5) time periods (each of the columns). The minimum parking requirement is the highest of these sums, plus any reserved spaces that were excluded from the calculation in the first step. Figure 21-5-207(b)(2), Illustrative Shared Parking Credit Calculation, provides an example of how to use Table 21-5-207(b)(1), Shared Parking Table, to calculate required parking. 
Table 21-5-207(b)(1) 
SHARED PARKING TABLE 
	Weekday 	Weekend 
Use 	Night (12 a.m. to 6 a.m.) 	Day (6 a.m. to 6 p.m.) 	Evening (6 p.m. to 12 a.m.) 	Day (6 a.m. to 6 p.m.) 	Evening (6 p.m. to 12 a.m.) 
Residential 	100% 	60% 	90% 	80% 	90% 
Office 	5% 	100% 	10% 	10% 	5% 
Retail / Commercial 	5% 	70% 	90% 	100% 	70% 
Commercial Lodging 	80% 	80% 	100% 	50% 	100% 
Restaurant 	10% 	50% 	100% 	50% 	100% 
Entertainment 	10% 	40% 	100% 	80% 	100% 
All Others 	100% 	100% 	100% 	100% 	100% 
 
Figure 21-5-207(b)(2) 
ILLUSTRATIVE SHARED PARKING CREDIT CALCULATION 
EXAMPLE: A mixed-use building has 4 two-bedroom apartments, 5,000 square feet of office space, and 5,000 square feet of retail space. Individually, these uses would separately require 43 parking spaces ((4 du. x 2 sp. / unit) + (5,000 sf. x (3 sp. / 1,000 sf.)) + (5,000 sf. x (1 sp. / 250 sf.)) = 43). However, combined, they could share 34 parking spaces, as shown in the calculation below. 
	Weekday 	Weekend 
Use 	Night (12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.) 	Day (6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.) 	Evening (6:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m.) 	Day (6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.) 	Evening (6:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m.) 
Residential (8 spaces) 	100% x 8 = 8 	60% x 8 = 4.8 1 	90% x 8 = 7.2 	80% x 8 = 6.4 	90% x 8 = 7.2 
Office (15 spaces) 	5% x 15 = 1 	100% x 15 = 15 	10% x 15 = 1.5 	10% x 15 = 1.5 	5% x 15 = 0.8 
Retail/Commercial (20 spaces) 	5% x 20 = 1 	70% x 20 = 14 	90% x 20 = 18 	100% x 20 = 20 	70% x 20 = 14 
Commercial Lodging 	80% x 0 = 0 	80% x 0 = 0 	100% x 0 = 0 	50% x 0 = 0 	100% x 0 = 0 
Restaurant 	10% x 0 = 0 	50% x 0 = 0 	100% x 0 = 0 	50% x 0 = 0 	100% x 0 = 0 
Gaming and Entertainment 	10% x 0 = 0 	40% x 0 = 0 	100% x 0 = 0 	80% x 0 = 0 	100% x 0 = 0 
All Others 	100% x 0 = 0 	100% x 0 = 0 	100% x 0 = 0 	100% x 0 = 0 	100% x 0 = 0 
Column Totals 	10 	34 1,2 	27 	30 	22 
TABLE NOTES: 
1 Round to the nearest 1/10 th space for each individual calculation, then apply standard rounding to the column total (in this case, round 33.8 to 34). 
2 The largest number, 34, is the number of parking spaces that are required. In this example, the number of required parking spaces is reduced by 21 percent due to the optimization of the peak use periods in the parking lot. 
 
(c)  Special shared parking study. 
(1)  In the alternative to the methodology in Table 21-5-207(b)(1), Shared Parking Table, an applicant may submit a shared parking study to demonstrate that the parking that is required to serve a certain mix of uses is less than the sum of the parking requirements for each individual use. 
(2)  The special study shall be conducted by a qualified transportation planner or traffic engineer at the applicant's expense (the administrator shall be responsible for determining whether the qualifications of any proposed transportation planner or traffic engineer are acceptable to the city for this purpose), and shall: 
a.  Review peak parking demand periods for the proposed uses during a 24-hour weekday and each weekend day, and shall propose a required number of parking spaces based on the combined peak hour demand for parking. 
b.  Provide data on the following: 
1.  The sensitivity of the proposed uses to change. For example, a center with no restaurant could have significant changes in parking if a restaurant was added. 
2.  Similar mixes of uses in other areas of the region or comparable cities in other regions. 
3.  Degree of variability of parking for individual uses (average, range, and standard deviation). 
(3)  The city may require a reserved open area if it finds that the risk of parking needs changing over time so warrants. Once the project is occupied and well-established, if there is a surplus of parking, the Applicant may petition for additional development capacity and parking using the reserved area. 
(d)  Shared parking among lots under different ownership. A shared parking reduction may be applied to uses on several properties that are under different ownership, provided that long-term maintenance of the arrangement is assured by: 
(1)  An approved parking plan that provides for interconnected parking lots and a pedestrian circulation system that connects the various uses and parking areas, such that it is convenient to move among the various uses; and 
(2)  Recorded access and parking easements, approved as to form by the city attorney, that provide, at a minimum, for: 
a.  Cross-access among the parking areas and connections that allow for parking by any of the different uses anywhere among the parking areas; 
b.  Allocation of maintenance responsibilities; 
c.  A right of enforcement by the city; and 
d.  A requirement for city consent in order to terminate the easements. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-208. - Remote parking. 
(a)  Generally. In the CA, MU, and CBD zones, remote parking may be provided in lieu of on-site off street parking, pursuant to the standards of this section. Remote parking is not allowed for residential uses unless they are located within a CA Zone and the purpose of the campus is academic. 
(b)  Location of remote parking. 
(1)  The remote parking must be in a zone that allows surface parking as a principal use. 
(2)  The distance from the nearest wall of the building to be served by remote parking and the nearest boundary of the remote parking lot shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet. 
(3)  No street that is higher order than a collector shall separate the subject property from the remote parking. 
(c)  Parking plan required. 
(1)  All applicants that propose remote parking shall provide a parking plan that addresses the following: 
a.  The location of the parking area and the distance between it and the subject property; 
b.  The path of safe pedestrian travel (e.g., sidewalk, across certain streets, parking lot(s), trails) between the buildings or land uses and the remote parking facility; 
c.  The total number of parking spaces that are required for the subject property; 
d.  The number of proposed remote parking spaces; and 
e.  Information on total parking demand served by the remote parking facility, including: 
1.  The location and names of all buildings, structures, or land uses for which the parking spaces are provided; 
2.  Days and hours of operation of the uses that utilize the facility; 
3.  Peak days and hours of operation of such uses; 
4.  Parking calculations for each use that utilizes the facility, including the measurement of the independent variable use to calculate required parking; 
5.  Shared parking calculations, if used; and 
6.  A loading and unloading plan for the subject property and the remote parking facility; and 
f.  If required by the administrator, a study by a parking or traffic consultant to demonstrate that there is no substantial conflict (e.g., materially increased risk of vehicular-pedestrian conflict or unreasonable traffic congestion) inherent in the proposed remote parking arrangement. 
(d)  Required legal documentation. An executed legal agreement, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, by and among the owners of the properties for which remote parking arrangements are proposed, shall include at a minimum the following: 
(1)  The parking plan; 
(2)  A legal description of the properties to be bound; 
(3)  Allocation of responsibilities for permanent improvement and maintenance of off-site parking areas; 
(4)  Termination only if the city consents, upon demonstration by the applicant to the city that the affected uses fully comply with minimum parking requirements in the absence of the remote parking area(s) provided for in the agreement; and 
(5)  Recognition of the authority of the city to base decisions regarding development approvals for the properties that are subject to the agreement upon the remote parking provided for in the agreement, and to seek enforcement against any or all parties if the parking is not provided according to the terms of the agreement. 
(e)  Recording. A copy of the approved parking plan and fully-executed legal agreement shall be recorded at the office of county clerk, and shall thereafter be binding upon the applicants, their heirs, successors, and assigns. Such recordation shall thereafter limit and control the issuance of permits and certificates and the operation of all properties that are subject to the parking plan. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-209. - Parking lot design standards. 
(a)  Parking lot design. 
(1)  All surface parking spaces for multifamily and nonresidential uses shall be set back ten (10) feet from the front lot line and five (5) feet from all other lot lines, except that parking lots on adjoining lots may be connected. 
(2)  Parking spaces for live-work, multiplex, multifamily, and nonresidential uses shall be so located and served by a driveway that their use will require no backing movements or other maneuvering within a street right-of-way other than an alley. 
(b)  Relationship to buildings. 
(1)  In the MU Zone, parking lots shall be located to the rear or sides of nonresidential, multifamily, and mixed-use buildings. 
(2)  The location of parking lots in relation to buildings in other zones or for certain development types may be subject to requirements set out in div. 4-8, design standards. 
(c)  Standard parking space dimensions. Standard parking spaces shall have the following dimensions: 
(1)  Parallel parking spaces: Eight (8) feet stall width x twenty-five (25) feet stall length. 
(2)  Surface angled parking spaces (thirty (30) to ninety (90) degrees from centerline in the direction of travel): Nine (9) feet stall width x twenty (20) feet stall length. 
(3)  Structured or enclosed angled parking spaces (thirty (30) to ninety (90) degrees from the centerline in the direction of travel): Nine (9) feet stall width x eighteen (18) feet stall length. 
(d)  Compact parking spaces. Up to five (5) percent of required parking spaces may be "compact parking spaces." Compact parking spaces may only be provided in angled configurations. The dimensions of a compact parking space are eight (8) feet stall width x fifteen (15) feet stall length. 
(e)  Accessible parking space dimensions, design, and location. 
(1)  The design and location of disabled parking spaces shall be as required by the 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design, Section 502 (as may be amended or subsequently titled or numbered from time to time, "ADA 502"), at the time the parking space is striped; 
(2)  Accessible routes to and from accessible parking spaces shall be provided as required by ADA 502, at the time the parking spaces are striped; and 
(3)  Accessible routes shall be graded according to the standards of ADA 502, at the time the parking lot is developed or any time it is re-graded. 
(f)  Vertical clearance. A vertical clearance of not less than eight (8) feet shall be provided over all parking spaces. Additional clearance shall be provided for larger vans, sport utility vehicles, and light trucks that require such clearance if parking demand from such vehicles is anticipated. All parking structure entrances shall include an overhead bar to alert oversized vehicles regarding vertical clearance. 
(g)  Parking aisle widths. Parking aisles shall be dimensioned as shown in Table 21-5-209(g), Minimum Parking Aisle Width. 
Table 21-5-209(g) 
MINIMUM PARKING AISLE WIDTH 
	Parking Space Angle (from Centerline in the Direction of Travel) 
Measurement 	0°/Parallel Parking 	45° 	60° 	75° 	90° 
Min. One-Way Drive Aisle Width 	13 ft. 	14 ft. 	16 ft. 	18 ft. 	24 ft. 
Min. Two-Way Drive Aisle Width 	19 ft. 	Not allowed 	Not allowed 	Not allowed 	24 ft. 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-210. - Parking space markings, traffic control devices, and parking stops. 
(a)  Generally. All parking spaces shall be marked and maintained on the pavement and any directional markings or signs shall be installed and maintained as required by the approved parking plan. 
(b)  Accessible parking spaces. Each accessible parking space shall be marked with a free-standing or wall mounted sign using the standard symbol that signifies the space as designed to be accessible to persons with disabilities, along with the phrase "Accessible Parking." In addition, the standard symbol shall be painted on the pavement within the parking space. (See Figure 21-5-210(b), Illustrative Accessible Parking Spaces.) This requirement shall automatically change to conform to any amendments to the 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design (as may be amended, re-titled or renumbered from time to time) that are in effect at the time the parking space is striped. 
Figure 21-5-210(b) 
ILLUSTRATIVE ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES 
  
 
(c)  Traffic control devices. All traffic control devices (signs, markings, and signals) shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), latest edition. 
(d)  Parking stops. 
(1)  Parking stops, curbs, or bumper rails shall be installed in all parking spaces (except parallel parking spaces) at the perimeter of the parking lot and in all ADA-accessible parking spaces (except parallel parking spaces). 
(2)  Parking stops or curbs shall be at least four (4) inches high and set back a minimum of four (4) feet from the sidewalk line. Bumper rails, if used, shall be set back a minimum of one (1) foot from the sidewalk line. 
(3)  The city may require the installation of parking stops, curbs, or bumper rails in other locations if they are needed to prevent traffic from cutting across the parking lot outside of the drive aisles. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-211. - Required truck loading areas. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Buildings or structures to be built or substantially altered which receive and distribute material or merchandise by truck shall provide and maintain off-street loading berths in sufficient numbers and size to adequately handle the needs of the particular use. 
(2)  If loading space has been provided in connection with an existing use or is added to an existing use, the loading space shall not be eliminated if elimination would result in less space than is required to adequately handle the needs of the particular use. 
(3)  Off-street parking areas used to fulfill the requirements of this section shall not be used for loading and unloading operations except during off-peak parking periods. 
(b)  CBD and MU exception. In the CBD Zone and MU Zone, over-the-curb loading from local streets or alleys is allowed in lieu of the off-street loading requirements of this section, provided that the loading occurs during off-peak hours and the areas that are used for loading are approved by the public works director. 
(c)  Loading space dimensions. 
(1)  Minimum width of loading bay (side to side): Twelve (12) feet. 
(2)  Minimum length of loading bay (front to back): 
a.  For semi-trailers: Sixty (60) feet. 
b.  All other loading spaces: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Minimum vertical clearance: Fourteen (14) feet. 
(d)  Use of rights-of-way. Where off-street loading areas are required, at no time shall any part of a truck or van be allowed to extend into a public right-of-way while the truck or van is being loaded or unloaded. 
(e)  Maneuvering space. Adequate off-street truck maneuvering space shall be provided on-site (and not within any public street right-of-way or other public land) so that trucks can maneuver to the loading area. 
(f)  Location. 
(1)  Generally, all loading areas are required to be located on the same lot as the building or lot served by the loading area. 
(2)  Loading areas may be shared if: 
a.  The development is laid out as blocks with alleys, the size and number of loading spaces is calculated based on the development in each block, and the shared loading spaces are accessed via the alleys of the blocks they are intended to serve; or 
b.  The uses that share loading areas meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  The uses are adjacent; 
2.  Convenient, complimentary hours are established for loading and unloading, and such hours are posted; 
3.  The loading spaces are easily accessible and well-lit; and 
4.  The loading areas are not located on through traffic streets, and whenever possible, are located behind one (1) of the buildings served by the loading areas. 
(g)  Relationship to building. 
(1)  Except in the I Zone, loading areas shall be located behind the principal building or may be located on the side of the principal building if the loading areas are screened from front and side views by wing walls or a shed structure. 
(2)  In the I Zone, the location of loading areas in relation to buildings is not restricted. 
(h)  Design. Off-street loading facilities shall be designed so that they do not interfere with fire exits or emergency access routes. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-212. - Vehicle stacking requirements. 
(a)  Generally. Stacking spaces are used to measure the capacity of a drive-through lane to hold cars while transactions are taking place at drive-through stations. Stacking spaces measure eight (8) feet wide by twenty (20) feet long and provide direct access to a service window. The position in front of a drive-through station (e.g., a service window, ATM, or station at a drive-through bank) is counted as a stacking space. 
(b)  Requirements. Uses that include drive-through service shall provide not less than the following numbers of stacking spaces: 
(1)  Financial institutions, drive-through convenience retail, or pharmacies: Three (3) stacking spaces per drive-through station. 
(2)  Drive through restaurants: 
a.  If two (2) service windows are provided (one (1) for payments and one (1) for pick-up): 
1.  Four (4) stacking spaces to each menu board (including the position at the menu board); 
2.  Four (4) stacking spaces between the menu board and the first window (including the position at the first window); and 
3.  Two (2) spaces between the first window and the second window (including the position at the second window). 
b.  If one (1) service window is provided (for both payments and pick up): 
1.  Six (6) stacking spaces to the menu board; and 
2.  Five (5) stacking spaces between the menu board and the service window. 
(3)  Drive-through only uses in buildings with less than three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area and no separate menu board (e.g., coffee stands): Three (3) stacking spaces per service window. 
(4)  Dry cleaners: Two (2) stacking spaces, including the position at the window. 
(5)  Vehicle Wash: 
a.  Three (3) stacking spaces for each bay in a self-service vehicle wash facility; 
b.  Five (5) stacking spaces for each conveyor vehicle wash facility; and 
c.  If the facility provides detailing, manual drying or polishing, and/or vacuuming, sufficient area to provide those services without creating additional demand for stacking at the vehicle wash entrance. 
(6)  Stacking spaces for other uses are determined by the administrator. 
(c)  Design. 
(1)  Stacking lanes shall be clearly marked, and shall not interfere with on-site or off-site traffic circulation. 
(2)  Stacking areas shall not be located between the facade of a building and the public street upon which the building fronts unless a parking bufferyard separates the stacking area from the street. 
(3)  Stacking lanes shall be designed with an adjoining eight-foot wide bypass lane. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-213. - Construction, operation, and maintenance. 
(a)  Driving and parking surface. Areas used for parking, standing, and maneuvering of vehicles shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete or other material of comparable quality approved by the administrator, and must be maintained adequately for all-weather use. 
(b)  Operation of parking lots. Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of operable passenger automobiles of residents, customers, patrons, and employees only, and shall not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for the parking of trucks used in conducting the business or use. 
(c)  Operation of loading areas. The long-term storage of trucks and trailers in loading spaces is prohibited. Such spaces shall be available for routine use by delivery vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 5-3. - LANDSCAPING AND OPEN SPACE 
 
Sec. 21-5-301. - Purpose and application of division. 
(a)  Generally. This division includes standards for three (3) categories of landscaping: 
(1)  General landscaping. General landscaping is the landscaping that is required regardless of the location of the subject property with respect to other uses. 
(2)  Parking lot landscaping. Parking lot landscaping is the landscaping within and on the boundaries of surface parking lots. 
(3)  Bufferyard landscaping. Bufferyard landscaping is contextual. That is, bufferyards are required (or not) based on the zoning, development type, or right-of-way type that adjoins the subject property. 
(b)  Relationship to open space ratio or landscape surface ratio. The landscaping areas that are defined in this division are counted towards the open space ratio and landscape surface ratio of the subject property. 
(c)  Applicability of standards; general exceptions. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(2), the standards of this division apply to all new development, redevelopment, or substantial improvements to existing sites or buildings. 
(2)  The standards of this division do not apply to: 
a.  Individual lots that are used for existing single-family detached or duplex dwellings. 
b.  Modifications to nonresidential buildings where the redevelopment does not expand the floor area of the use by more than ten (10) percent. 
(d)  Landscape calculations. No area of a subject property shall be counted more than once for the purposes of applying landscaping requirements. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-302. - Landscape design principles. 
(a)  Generally. Landscapes for nonresidential and multifamily development that involve more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of landscaped area shall be designed by a qualified landscape architect or design professional. The administrator shall develop and maintain a list of qualifications or certifications that are acceptable to the city for this purpose. 
(b)  Plant spacing. Plant spacing shall allow for adequate growth of plants at maturity and for intersection visibility. 
(c)  Family, genus, and species selection. 
(1)  Within each category of required planting (i.e., canopy trees, understory trees, evergreens, and shrubs): 
a.  Not more than thirty (30) percent shall be of any one (1) family; 
b.  Not more than twenty (20) percent shall be of any one (1) genus; and 
c.  Not more than ten (10) percent shall be of any one (1) species. 
(2)  Native and low-water demanding plants and turf shall be used where practicable. 
(3)  Native species and natural drainage ways shall be protected if practicable. 
(4)  Plants shall be compatible with project soils. 
(5)  Russian Olive (Elaeagnus angustifolia), Salt Cedar (Tamarix ramosissima), and plants that are identified as noxious, invasive, or prohibited by the United States or the State of Colorado shall not be planted in the city. 
(d)  Irrigation and soil moisture control. 
(1)  Plants with similar water requirements shall be grouped together on the same irrigation hydrozone; 
(2)  High-irrigation turf and plantings shall be limited to appropriate high-use areas with high visibility and functional needs; 
(3)  Soil improvements shall be incorporated where necessary for healthy plant growth; and 
(4)  In permeable areas that are not covered by groundcover vegetation, mulch or rock shall be applied to help retain water in the soil and to help prevent erosion. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-303. - Size and quality of landscape plants; tree preservation credits. 
(a)  Size and quality of landscape plants. In general, plant materials that are installed according to the requirements of this division shall meet the standards that are set out in this section. However, larger sizes may be required to ensure survival or to implement a condition of approval of a limited or conditional use. 
(b)  Minimum size of landscape materials. The minimum sizes of landscape materials used to satisfy the requirements of this division are set out in Table 21-5-303(b), Minimum Size of Landscape Materials. 
Table 21-5-303(b) 
MINIMUM SIZE OF LANDSCAPE MATERIALS 
Type of Plant Material 	Minimum Caliper, Height, or Container Size 
Evergreen Trees 	6 ft. Height 
Deciduous Shade Trees 	2 in. Caliper 
Deciduous Ornamental Trees 	2 in. Caliper 
Shrub 	5 gallon minimum; If used in bufferyards, estimated growth to 3 ft. in height within 3 years 
 
(c)  Specification of landscape materials. All plant material shall be true to type, form, species, quality and free of injury, broken root balls, pests and diseases as well as conform to the minimum requirements described in "American Standards for Nursery Stock" (ANSI Z60.1), published by AmericanHort, as may be amended from time to time, and follow the Green Industries of Colorado ("GreenCo") Tree Planting Recommendations, as may be amended from time to time. Plant materials shall have normal, well-developed branches and vigorous root systems. 
(d)  Tree preservation credits. 
(1)  Existing trees that are preserved on a subject property count towards the planting requirements of this division, provided that: 
a.  They are established for at least five (5) years and not prohibited by subsection 21-347(c)(5); and 
b.  They are not: 
1.  Overmature; 
2.  Diseased; 
3.  Poor in form; 
4.  Leaning heavily over buildings; 
5.  Too close to building foundations; 
6.  Damaging sidewalks and driveways; or 
7.  Impacting utilities. 
(2)  Preserved trees may count as more than one (1) tree for the purposes of the landscaping requirements, as set out in Table 21-5-303(d)(2), Tree Preservation Credits. 
Table 21-5-303(d)(2) 
TREE PRESERVATION CREDITS 
DBH of Tree to be Preserved 		
Min. Diameter 	Up to, But Not Including 	Tree Credit 	Landscape Area Where Credit May Be Applied 
none 	10 inches 	1 	Location of preserved tree. 
10 inches 	15 inches 	2 	Location of preserved tree. 
15 inches 	20 inches 	3 	Location of preserved tree, or any other location except a bufferyard. 
20 inches 	no limit 	5 	Location of preserved tree, or any other location except a Class C or Class D Bufferyard. 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-304. - General landscaping. 
(a)  Generally. General landscaping is required as set out in this section. 
(b)  Applicability. The standards of this section apply in all zones except CBD, and except as provided in subsection 21-5-301(c)(2). 
(c)  General landscape area. 
(1)  The general landscape area is the permeable area of the subject property, except for the following areas: 
a.  Parking lot landscape areas (see sec. 21-5-305, parking lot landscaping); 
b.  Bufferyards (see Sec. 21-5-306, bufferyard landscaping); 
c.  Areas within and extending up to fifteen (15) feet from plazas, play fields, or other outdoor gathering spaces or recreation areas, the use of which would be diminished by the presence of trees; 
d.  Areas within designated outdoor storage areas or work areas; 
e.  Areas within irrigation ditch easements, or within thirty (30) feet of the ditch bank if the easement does not have delineated boundaries; 
f.  Areas used for gardens; 
g.  Wetlands and waterbodies; 
h.  Stormwater detention facilities; 
i.  Utility and drainage easements; 
j.  Wooded areas; 
k.  Areas where ground-mounted solar panels (of any type) are installed, and any areas around them that must be kept clear of vegetation to avoid shading of the panels in order to optimize their use; 
l.  Permeable areas that are less than eighty (80) square feet that are enclosed by any combination of buildings, structures, impermeable surfaces such as asphalt or concrete, or any of the areas described in subsection (c)(1), above; and 
m.  Areas in which the soils or topography are not suitable for the establishment and growth of healthy trees. 
(d)  Waiver or reduction of tree planting requirements. The administrator may waive or decrease planting requirements if the total number of trees that are required exceeds the number that can be reasonably planted on the subject property without materially increasing fire risk, compromising the health of the trees, or diminishing the use of the property. 
(e)  Tree planting requirements. Trees shall be planted in all general landscaping areas at a rate of not less than one (1) tree per two thousand (2,000) square feet of general landscaping area, with fractions dropped. 
(f)  Landscape design. The tree planting requirements are not spacing requirements. Trees may be planted in formal or informal arrangements. Trees that reach a mature height of more than twenty-five (25) feet shall not be planted within twenty (20) feet of an overhead utility line. 
(g)  Groundcovers. Groundcovers shall be planted as necessary to stabilize soil and prevent erosion. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-305. - Parking lot landscaping. 
(a)  Generally. Parking lot landscaping is required as set out in this section. 
(b)  Applicability. The standards of this section apply to surface parking lots associated with all nonresidential and multifamily uses, except parking lots that contain fewer than sixteen (16) parking spaces, and except in the CBD Zone. 
(c)  Parking lot landscape areas. Landscaping is required in all of the following areas: 
(1)  At the ends of parking aisles, planted in endcap islands that are not less than nine (9) feet wide and thirty-six (36) feet long (eighteen (18) feet where the parking module does not adjoin another parking module), with 10 foot curb radii on the side that faces outward from the parking aisle; 
(2)  Between the endcaps of parking rows, either: 
a.  Planted in interior islands that are not less than nine (9) feet wide and thirty-six (36) feet long (eighteen (18) feet where the parking module does not adjoin another parking module), with five (5) foot curb radii at both ends; or 
b.  Planted in interior landscape strips that are at least five (5) feet wide that are located between parking modules, or at the edges of parking modules where parking modules do not adjoin each other. 
(3)  At the corners of parking lots, planted in corner islands, which are the area defined by the extension of the outer edges of intersecting parking modules. 
(d)  Spacing of parking lot landscape areas. Parking lot landscape areas shall be spaced so that no parking lot landscape area is more than one hundred (100) feet from any other parking lot landscape area, measured from curb to curb. 
(e)  Planting requirements. 
(1)  Each endcap island, interior island, and corner shall be planted with a minimum of one (1) canopy tree or two (2) understory trees. 
(2)  Each landscape strip shall be planted with not less than one (1) canopy tree or two (2) understory trees per one hundred (100) linear feet. Formal arrangement of the trees in the landscape strip is not required. 
(3)  The administrator may waive the planting requirements of this subsection, or allow the landscaping to be planted in an alternative location on the subject property (if reasonably available), for any particular landscape area or portion thereof if: 
a.  The tree or trees will interfere with sight triangles that are necessary for safe ingress to or egress from the parking lot; or 
b.  The landscape area is not conducive to the healthy growth of trees (e.g., due to topography, solar orientation, or soil types); or 
c.  The landscape area is part of a stormwater conveyance system, and is not suitable for tree planting. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-306. - Bufferyard landscaping. 
(a)  Generally. Bufferyard landscaping is required as set out in this section, and as set out in this UDC for specific uses or situations. 
(b)  Applicability. The standards of this section apply to all required bufferyards. 
(c)  Bufferyard classifications. For the purposes of this UDC, there are five (5) classifications of bufferyards, as set out in Table 21-5-306(c), Bufferyard Classifications. 
Table 21-5-306(c) 
BUFFERYARD CLASSIFICATIONS 
		Required Plantings per 100 Linear Feet 	
Bufferyard Classification 	Width 	Canopy Trees 	Understory Trees 	Evergreen Trees 	Shrubs 	Berm, Opaque Fence, or Wall 1 
Class A 	5 ft. 	1 	1 	1 	10 	Not required 
Class B 	10 ft. 	2 	1 	1 	20 	Not required 
Class C 	25 ft. 	2 	2 	4 	30 	6 ft. high 
Class D 	30 ft. 	3 	3 	4 	30 	8 ft. high 
Parking Bufferyard 	5 ft. 	0 	0 	0 	40 	3 ft. high allowed as alternative to shrubs 2 
TABLE NOTE: 
1 If a fence or wall is used, all understory trees and shrubs, and not less than 50 percent of the canopy trees and evergreen trees shall be planted on the outside of the wall. If a berm is used, all shrubs shall be planted on the outside (or outside slope) of the berm. 
2 For nonresidential uses that are located within or adjacent to a residential zone, an opaque fence or wall that is not less than five nor more than six feet in height is required on all boundaries of the subject property that are shared with properties that are in a residential zone. 
 
(d)  Parking bufferyards. Surface parking lots for multifamily and nonresidential land uses shall be buffered from adjoining streets and adjoining residential property. Unless another type of bufferyard is required along the same boundary of the subject property, the minimum bufferyard for this purpose shall be a Parking Bufferyard. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-307. - Maintenance standards. 
(a)  Generally. All landscaping elements and irrigation equipment shall be maintained in good condition. Ongoing maintenance, including the replacement of dead or unhealthy plantings, is required for areas that are landscaped pursuant to an approved landscape plan. 
(b)  Restrictions within dripline or critical root zone of trees used for credit. The following restrictions apply within the larger of the dripline or the critical root zone of trees that are used for credit pursuant to section 21-5-303: 
(1)  Prohibited activities. The following are not allowed: 
a.  Cutting or filling; 
b.  Storage of building materials or debris; 
c.  Disposal of wastes; 
d.  Installation of impervious paving. 
(2)  Barricades required. The dripline or critical root zone shall be barricaded during construction to prevent damage to the trees and their roots by construction equipment. 
(c)  Tree pruning techniques. 
(1)  The following pruning techniques are prohibited on trees that are preserved or planted pursuant to an approved landscape plan: 
a.  Topping (cutting large vertical branches of the tree to reduce its height). 
b.  Tipping (cutting branches between nodes). 
c.  Bark ripping (cutting branches so that the bark rips when the branch falls). 
d.  Flush cuts (cutting the branch too close to the collar, the area where the branch connects to the tree). 
e.  Stub cuts (cutting branches too far away from the collar, the area where the branch connects to the tree). 
(2)  All pruning of trees within the public right-of-way or on public property shall be performed in accordance with ANSI A300, Part 1 (Pruning), as amended from time to time, and Tree Pruning Best Management Practices or Best Management Practices - Utility Pruning of Trees, as applicable (published by the International Society of Arboriculture), as either may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-308. - Open space. 
(a)  Generally. The area of land or water that is designated as open space for the purposes of satisfying the minimum open space ratio shall be physically suited for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Any landscape area that is required by this division; 
(2)  Conservation of open land in its natural state (e.g., woodlands, stream corridors, grasslands, floodplains, and the like); 
(3)  Active or passive recreation (see Section 21-6-202, parks); or 
(4)  Agriculture, horticulture, forestry, or fishery uses (including barns, stables, and other structures accessory or incidental to such uses, provided that such structure cover less than ten (10) percent of the site), where permitted under the appropriate zoning classification. 
(b)  Location and form. 
(1)  Open space shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be compact and contiguous and connected to existing or anticipated protected open space on adjacent properties. 
(2)  The exact location and configuration of the land to be dedicated shall be determined by the city in consultation with the applicant, and shall take into consideration the suitability of the proposed open space sites for their stated purposes, and their proximity to other open space, parks, trails, or recreational lands. 
(3)  The following areas shall be given priority in dedicating or setting aside open space: 
a.  Sensitive environmental areas such as steam corridors and wetlands. 
b.  Wildlife habitat. 
c.  Woodlands. 
d.  Parks. 
e.  Recreational paths and trails. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 5-4. - LIGHTING 
 
Sec. 21-5-401. - Single-family detached, duplex, and townhome lighting standards. 
Exterior lighting on single-family detached, duplex, and townhome lots shall either be provided with fixtures that emit one thousand five hundred (1,500) lumens or less, or be configured so that lights do not cause glare that is visible outside of the property lines of the subject property. All exterior lighting on single-family, duplex, or townhome lots is subject to section 21-5-404, public safety and public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-402. - Multifamily, nonresidential, and mixed-use lighting standards. 
(a)  Generally. Exterior lighting on multifamily, nonresidential, and mixed-use sites shall conform to the requirements of this section. Exterior lighting that does not produce glare or sky glow and is not visible from outside of the subject property is exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Fixture types. 
(1)  Generally, light fixtures (wherever mounted) shall be "cut-off" fixtures that are oriented to limit illumination that is visible or measurable at the property line. 
(2)  "No cut-off" fixtures may be used only for decorative purposes, provided: 
a.  Their luminaires that produce no more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) lumens (approximately equal to a traditional 100W incandescent bulb); and 
b.  They are not installed above a height of eight (8) feet. 
(c)  Maximum freestanding fixture height. No freestanding light fixture shall be greater than twenty-five (25) feet in height, except that greater heights may be approved by the administrator if it is demonstrated that the greater height improves site lighting compared to fixtures that are twenty-five (25) feet in height or less. 
(d)  Maximum illumination levels. 
(1)  Outdoor lighting shall be deflected, shaded and focused away from adjacent properties, and shall not be a nuisance to such adjacent properties. 
(2)  Outdoor lighting shall be designed so that any overspill of lighting onto adjacent properties shall not exceed three-tenths of a foot-candle, measured vertically, and three-tenths of a foot-candle, measured horizontally, on adjacent properties. 
(e)  Canopy lighting. Canopy lighting for uses that have sheltered outside work or service areas or porte-cocheres, shall meet the standards of this section. All lighting fixtures shall be recessed into the canopy so that they cannot be viewed from off-site from an eye height of four (4) feet. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-403. - Exterior lighting for outdoor recreation. 
(a)  Generally. Ball diamonds, playing fields, driving ranges, tennis courts, and similar amusement or recreation uses have unique requirements for nighttime visibility and, generally, have limited hours of operation. The standards of this section, and not section 21-5-402, apply to outdoor recreation uses. 
(b)  Fixture type. Light fixtures for illumination of playing courts and athletic fields shall be "cut-off" fixtures that are oriented to limit sky glow and direct lighting that is visible or measurable at the property line. 
(c)  Maximum freestanding fixture height. No freestanding light fixture shall be greater than forty (40) feet in height, except that greater heights may be approved by the administrator if it is demonstrated that the greater height improves site lighting compared to fixtures that are forty (40) feet in height or less. 
(d)  Maximum illumination. 
(1)  Field and court lighting shall be deflected, shaded and focused away from adjacent properties and shall not be a nuisance to adjacent properties. 
(2)  Field and court lighting shall be designed so that any overspill of lighting onto adjacent properties shall not exceed one-half foot-candle, measured vertically, and one-half foot-candle, measured horizontally, at the property line. 
(3)  Buffering may be used to reduce impacts of outdoor recreation lighting in order to achieve compliance with the requirements of this subsection (d). 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-404. - Public safety and public nuisance. 
(a)  Generally. The city may require the modification or removal or limited operation of existing or new lighting fixtures if they are found to be a public hazard or public nuisance according to the criteria of this section. 
(b)  Hazards. Criteria for finding illumination to be a public hazard are as follows: 
(1)  Light trespass or glare which is sufficiently intense or contrasts excessively with surrounding illumination, regardless of the intensity of the surrounding illumination, in a manner to cause impairment of visual performance or to distract from or impair the safe operation of a vehicle. 
(2)  Light trespass or glare that impairs a person's visual performance or ability to avoid obstacles in their path. 
(c)  Nuisance. Criteria for finding illumination to be a public nuisance are as follows: 
(1)  Light trespass or glare that deprives an owner or occupant of usual and reasonable use and enjoyment of their property. 
(2)  A high frequency or duration of periods when light trespass or glare is sufficient to interrupt or interfere with usual and reasonable use and enjoyment of property other than the subject property. 
(3)  Light trespass or glare that causes visual discomfort or impairment of visual performance in a manner that deprives the average person from the usual and reasonable enjoyment of the public streets and properties of the city. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 5-5. - GRADING, EROSION, AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
 
Sec. 21-5-501. - Intent and liability 
(a)  Legislative intent. The intent of this division is to enhance the quality of water in the city's drainage ways and subsequent receiving waters in order to promote the safety, public health, convenience, and general welfare of the city by: 
(1)  Establishing requirements for stormwater quantity and quality control as part of new development and redevelopment to prevent impacts on the storm sewer system and receiving waters from runoff leaving new development and redevelopment within the city. 
(2)  Establishing requirements for grading permits for construction activities and development to prevent soil erosion, sedimentation, and other pollutants from leaving construction sites. 
(b)  Liability. Any person who undertakes or causes to be undertaken any activity which involves disturbance of the land's surface shall ensure that soil erosion, sedimentation, increased pollutant loads, and changed water flow characteristics resulting from the activity are controlled so as to minimize pollution of receiving waters. The requirements of this Division are the minimum standards, and a person's compliance with the same shall not relieve such person from the duty of enacting all measures necessary to minimize pollution of receiving waters. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-502. - General standards for grading. 
(a)  Generally. Stormwater discharges from construction activities shall not cause, nor have the reasonable potential to cause pollution, contamination, or degradation of waters of the state. Grading activities (except agriculture) that affect more than one (1) acre of land, or that affect land within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the Rio Grande, shall be conducted in accordance with an approved stormwater management plan ("SWMP") that details the best management practices ("BMPs") to be used during construction and upon completion of construction. 
(b)  Best management practices (BMPs) during construction. 
(1)  Construction BMPs. Construction site operators shall protect water quality and control runoff and erosion through the implementation of appropriate construction BMPs. 
(2)  Timing of installation. All temporary or permanent erosion control BMPs that are intended to function during earth disturbance operations shall be installed before any construction activities take place. 
(3)  Selection of BMPs. The selection, design, and installation of appropriate structural and nonstructural BMPs must be done in accordance to the latest revision of the Urban Drainage and Flood Control District's ("UDFCD") Urban Storm Drainage Criteria Manuals ("USDCM"). BMPs must be adequately designed and scaled to provide control for all potential pollutant sources associated with construction activity to prevent pollution or degradation of surface waters. 
(4)  Types of construction BMPs. Construction BMPs shall include appropriate erosion control BMPs, sediment control BMPs, material management BMPs, and site management BMPs. 
a.  Erosion control BMPs (e.g., mulching, erosion blankets, check dams etc.) limit the amount and rate of erosion occurring on disturbed areas. 
b.  Sediment control BMPs (e.g., silt fence, inlet/outlet protection, sediment traps/basins etc.) attempt to capture the soil that has been eroded before it leaves the construction site. 
c.  Material management BMPs (e.g., stockpile management, good housekeeping practices etc.) limit contact of runoff with pollutants commonly found at construction sites, such as construction materials and equipment-related fluids. 
d.  Site management BMPs (e.g., construction phasing or sequencing, protection of existing vegetation, street sweeping etc.) minimize erosion and sediment transport by considering construction phasing, scheduling, and sequencing of land disturbing activities. These BMPs minimize the duration of exposure or quantity of exposed soils that are susceptible to erosion. Site management also ensures BMPs implemented at the site are properly selected, installed, inspected, maintained, and repaired to reduce erosion and sediment transport. 
(5)  Management of flows. Any temporary or permanent facility designed and constructed for the conveyance of water around, through, or from the earth disturbance area shall be designed to limit the water flow to a non-erosive velocity. 
(c)  Grading operations. 
(1)  Any earth disturbance shall be conducted in a manner that effectively reduces accelerated soil erosion and resulting sedimentation, and does not exceed the erosion expected to occur for the subject property in its totally undeveloped state. 
(2)  All earth disturbances shall be completed diligently so that the exposed area of any disturbed land shall be limited to the shortest possible period of time. 
(3)  Sediment caused by accelerated soil erosion shall be removed from runoff water before it leaves the site of the disturbed area. 
(4)  Construction site operators shall control waste such as, but not limited to, discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality. 
(5)  Concrete washout water shall not be discharged to the storm sewer system, public right-of-way, or waters of the state. On-site permanent disposal of concrete washout waste is not allowed. 
(6)  Off-site vehicle tracking of sediments shall be controlled and minimized. 
(7)  Bulk storage structures for petroleum products and other chemicals shall have secondary containment or equivalent adequate protection so as to contain all spills and prevent any spilled material from entering surface waters. 
(8)  Solids, sludges, or other pollutants removed in the course of treatment or control of wastewaters or runoff shall be properly disposed of in a manner such as to prevent any pollutant from such materials from entering surface waters. 
(9)  No building material wastes or unused building materials shall be buried, dumped, or discharged at the site. 
(10)  The city may require sampling and testing on a case-by-case basis in the event that there is reason to suspect that compliance with the SWMP is a problem, or to measure the effectiveness of the BMPs. 
(d)  Stabilization and planting. 
(1)  Exposed areas of cut and fill shall be planted with at least two (2) genera of native plants that are selected for their ability to stabilize the soil and prevent erosion. 
(2)  Generally, planting shall be timed within ninety (90) days of the completion of final grading unless other construction activities are planned within ninety (90) days of that date. If final grading is completed between October 1 and March 15, planting is required by no later than June 15. 
(3)  The administrator may require financial guarantees in the form of cash deposits or letters of credit to guarantee completion of the work. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-503. - Permanent best management practices (BMPS). 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The latest revision of the Urban Drainage and Flood Control District's ("UDFCD") Urban Storm Drainage Criteria Manuals ("USDCM") shall be used to establish criteria for new development and redevelopment planning, water quality protection, and the selection and design of appropriate permanent BMPs. 
(2)  Appropriate BMPs for the proposed project shall be designed and implemented according to the UDFCD-USDCM specifications and following good engineering, hydrologic, and pollution control practices. 
(3)  BMPs that are not included within the latest revision to the UDFCD-USDCM may be used only with the approval of the city engineer. 
(b)  Types of permanent BMPs. Permanent (post-construction) stormwater BMPs are generally divided into two (2) categories: Treatment BMPs and source control BMPs. 
(1)  Treatment BMPs. Treatment BMPs include a variety of alternatives generally categorized as conveyance practices and storage practices (e.g. a grass swale, retention pond, or sand filter) that provide treatment of the stormwater runoff quantity and quality. 
(2)  Source control BMPs. Source control BMPs stop or redirect pollutants before they enter the storm sewer system. A source control BMP can be a structural component of a planned site (e.g. a covered area for material storage) or a procedural BMP. Procedural BMPs involve public education, training, and development of standard operating procedures. 
(c)  Location of structural BMPs. 
(1)  Treatment or source control BMPs that involve structures shall be located on private property when possible. 
a.  When so located, the BMP shall be owned and operated by the owner of the property on which the BMP is located. 
b.  As a condition of approval of the BMP, the owner shall agree to operate and maintain the BMP to its design capacity unless and until the City relieves the property owner of that responsibility in writing. 
c.  The obligation to maintain the BMP shall be memorialized on a subdivision plat, annexation plat, or in another form acceptable to the city attorney, and shall be recorded in the office of the Alamosa County Clerk and Recorder. 
(2)  When the BMP must be located within the public right-of-way or within property owned by the city, the city shall own, operate, and maintain the facility. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-5-504. - Design of permanent drainage systems. 
(a)  Generally. Open drainage systems and underground drainage systems shall be designed according to the standards of this section. 
(b)  Design objectives for open drainage systems. Site drainage using open systems shall be planned such that it: 
(1)  Minimizes negative impacts on natural site features (e.g., through grading or erosion) and minimizes obstructions or alterations of natural drainageways; 
(2)  Creates an amenity that is incorporated into the overall landscape plan, as follows: 
a.  Detention and drainage areas with a volume of less than one thousand (1,000) cubic feet should be designed as natural landscape amenities; 
b.  If feasible, detention and drainage areas with a volume of one thousand (1,000) cubic feet or more should be designed as recreational amenities; and 
(3)  Appears natural in character, even if stabilized for erosion control. For example: 
a.  Natural drainage ways should be incorporated into the drainage plan and the site design should feature them as amenities. 
b.  Storm drains may be developed as an open landscaped feature that is lined with native grasses and indigenous plants, while also meeting technical engineering standards. 
c.  The use of riprap and other devices that do not appear natural in character should be avoided in favor of treatments that appear more natural in the context of the city and the region, such as local stone, native trees and shrubs, and drought tolerant grasses. 
(c)  Underground systems. When a drainage system cannot be designed as a site amenity, or the drainage system is located in the CB, CBD, or I Zone, an underground drainage system may be used instead of a surface drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
ARTICLE VI. - MITIGATION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS  
DIVISION 6-1. - IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Sec. 21-6-101. - Fiscal and infrastructure impact analysis. 
(a)  Generally. A fiscal and infrastructure impact analysis is required for all proposed development that includes more than sixteen (16) dwelling units or more than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of gross floor area of nonresidential uses. 
(b)  Timing of submittal. The fiscal and infrastructure impact analysis shall be submitted with the preliminary plat or site plan (if no plat is required). 
(c)  Contents. 
(1)  The fiscal and infrastructure impact analysis shall evaluate the impact of the proposed subdivision or development on the capacity or quality of the city's existing infrastructure, including the city's water and sewage treatment systems and the school system, and provide analysis and recommendations as follows: 
a.  The projected service demands for city utilities, services, and infrastructure, including water, sewer, and schools, that are directly generated by the proposed subdivision or development; 
b.  An analysis of the capacity of existing and planned municipal facilities and infrastructure to meet future demands directly generated by the proposed subdivision or development, and a determination of any resulting capacity shortfalls or degradation in service or quality; 
c.  An estimate of the costs associated with the provision of municipal utilities and services to the proposed subdivision; and 
d.  A list of recommendations for infrastructure improvements, if any, that are needed to ensure that the proposed subdivision or development will not have a significant, adverse impact on the city's infrastructure capacity or quality. 
(2)  The city engineer may waive some of, or add to the requirements on a case-by-case basis as circumstances warrant based on the nature of the proposed development. 
(d)  Mitigation of adverse impacts required. In no instance shall the city approve a preliminary plat or site plan if the fiscal and infrastructure impact analysis shows there will be a significant, adverse impact on the city's infrastructure capacity or quality, unless the applicant provides on-site or off-site measures acceptable to the city that will substantially or completely mitigate the adverse impacts created by the proposed subdivision or development, or the city council determines that the benefits of the project, including potential tax revenues, jobs, or public services to be provided, outweigh the anticipated adverse impacts. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-6-102. - Traffic impact analysis. 
(a)  Generally. A traffic impact analysis is required for all proposed development that includes more than sixteen (16) dwelling units or more than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of gross floor area of nonresidential uses. 
(b)  Timing of submittal. The traffic impact analysis shall be submitted with the preliminary plat or site plan (if no plat is required). 
(c)  Contents. 
(1)  The traffic impact analysis shall evaluate the impact of the traffic projected to be generated by proposed subdivision or development on the capacity of the existing streets in the city, and provide analysis and recommendations as follows: 
a.  An inventory of existing conditions within one (1) mile of the proposed subdivision or development, including: 
1.  Roadway network and traffic control; 
2.  Existing traffic volumes in terms of peak hours and average daily traffic ("ADT"); 
3.  Planned roadway improvements by others; and 
4.  Intersection levels of service. 
b.  Projected site-generated traffic volumes in terms of: 
1.  Peak hours and ADT; 
2.  Approach/departure distribution (including method of determination); 
3.  Site traffic volumes on roadways; and 
4.  Comparison of existing conditions to proposed site generation. 
c.  An analysis of future traffic conditions including: 
1.  Future design year (development fully completed) combined volumes (site traffic plus future roadway traffic); and 
2.  Intersection levels of service. 
d.  A description and schematic plan of recommended access and on-site circulation. 
e.  A description of proposed on-site and/or off-site mitigation measures necessary to meet the level of service ("LOS") standard set forth in subsection (d), below. 
(2)  The city engineer may waive some, or add to the requirements on a case-by-case basis as circumstances warrant based on the nature of the proposed development. 
(d)  Mitigation of adverse impacts required. The street system within the proposed subdivision or development shall: 
(1)  Provide LOS C on all proposed streets and at all proposed intersections; and 
(2)  Maintain LOS C, or current level of service (if lower), on all adjoining streets and intersections, unless the city council determines that the benefits of the project, including potential tax revenues, jobs, or public services to be provided, outweigh the anticipated adverse impacts. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 6-2. - REQUIRED DEDICATIONS AND FEES-IN-LIEU 
 
Sec. 21-6-201. - Form of dedication. 
Dedications of right-of-way for public streets, drainage easements, utility easements, parks, schools, or other public purposes shall be required and shall be made by the applicant on the plat, or, in the case of a site plan, by separate instrument approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-6-202. - Parks. 
(a)  Generally. Land for parks shall be dedicated, or a fee-in-lieu paid, for residential and special residential development as provided herein. Dedicated parks are counted towards the required open space ratio of the development. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  The requirements of this section do not apply to cases in which dedication arrangements were approved at the time of annexation or previous subdivision of the same property. 
(2)  In the case of redevelopment, the requirements of this section apply only to the net new dwelling units that are created by the redevelopment. 
(c)  Park dedication requirements. 
(1)  Land for parks shall be dedicated at the rate of six (6) acres per one thousand (1,000) residents in a proposed residential development. Dedication requirements for individual housing types are set out in Table 21-6-202(b), Park Dedication Requirements by Housing Type. 
Table 21-6-202(b) 
PARK DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS BY HOUSING TYPE 
Housing Type 	Estimated Persons Per Unit 	Acres Per Unit 	Square Feet Per Unit 
Single-family detached 	3.07 	0.018 	802 
Duplex or twin house 	3.07 	0.018 	802 
Townhouse or rowhouse 	2.37 	0.014 	619 
Multiplex or multifamily 	2.16 	0.013 	565 
Manufactured home 	2.37 	0.014 	619 
Cottages 	2.37 	0.014 	619 
Tiny homes 	1.00 	0.006 	261 
Live-work 	2.16 	0.013 	565 
 
(2)  Special residential housing types with ambulatory populations who are not restricted to the premises shall provide 0.006 acres (two hundred sixty-one (261) square feet) per bed. 
(3)  Park land shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
a.  The area shall be located so as to serve all of the residents of the subdivision or development; 
b.  The land shall be suitable for the types of recreational facilities that are proposed; 
c.  The area shall be accessible from a public street or shall adjoin and become part of or connect with an already existing public park, trail, or open space area that is accessible from a public street; 
d.  Detention or retention areas or other storm water control facilities may be included if it is demonstrated that the land is accessible and usable for recreational purposes; and 
e.  The land shall be free of all liens or other financial encumbrances, and of all non-financial encumbrances that may limit its use as a public park. 
(d)  Fee-in-lieu of park dedication. The applicant shall pay to the city, in lieu of the dedication, an amount of cash equal to the fair market value of the required dedication as an improved park if: 
(1)  The total land dedication required by subsection (b), above, is less than one (1) acre; or 
(2)  The development is located in the CBD Zone; or 
(3)  The planning commission determines that a fee-in-lieu is appropriate, after considering: 
a.  The size of the development and its adequacy for accommodating a suitable public use site; 
b.  The community facility aspects of the comprehensive development plan and the school district's master plan; 
c.  Existing parks and other public uses in the area; 
d.  The topography, geology, and location of land in the subdivision that is available for dedication; 
e.  The needs of the people in the area; and 
f.  The availability of resources for operating and maintaining the park. 
(e)  Public use reservations. Portions of a subject property that is being subdivided may be reserved for later acquisition for public use. Such reservation shall be delineated on the final plat and related provisions shall be clearly noted. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 6-3. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, SITE IMPROVEMENTS, AND EASEMENTS 
 
Sec. 21-6-301. - Public improvements and site improvements. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Public improvements. Depending upon the nature of the application for development approval, public improvements that must be constructed, installed, or otherwise provided by the applicant may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Permanent survey monuments, range points and lot pins; 
b.  Streets, alleys, acceleration or deceleration lanes, sidewalks, and curb and gutter, in accordance with the city standards; 
c.  Street name signs and traffic-control signs or other street control devices; 
d.  Bridges, culverts, or open drainage channels; 
e.  Street lights; 
f.  Water lines and fire hydrants; 
g.  Sanitary sewer lines; and 
h.  Storm drainage improvements and storm sewers. 
The public improvements contemplated by this section are intended to provide services to the subject property or to offset the impacts of the development of the subject property. 
(2)  Landscaping. Depending upon the nature of the application for development approval, the city may require collateral and warranties for landscaping. 
(b)  Engineering specifications. Engineering specifications for public improvements are promulgated by the public works director. 
(c)  Improvements agreement. All applicants whose development applications require construction, installation, or provision of public improvements or fees-in-lieu thereof, or the installation of required landscaping, shall be required to execute an improvements agreement. The city has a standard form of improvements agreement, a copy of which is available from the administrator. 
(d)  Standards for public improvements. All public improvements and required landscaping shall be constructed to comply with all applicable city standards, regulations, and specifications. No subdivision or other development for which public improvements or required landscaping are proposed shall be finally approved or recorded without the execution of the improvements agreement, along with the required financial security, in a form approved by the city. 
(e)  Cost of processing. Applicants are required to pay the costs of processing the development application and improvements agreement, including all consultant costs, legal fees, and other fees incurred by the city. 
(f)  Collateral for improvements. 
(1)  Prior to the recordation of any final plat or issuance of any permits for development of a subdivision or other development for which public improvements or required landscaping are proposed, the applicant shall provide to the city collateral in the amount of one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the total estimated cost of construction of the improvements, in the form of either: 
a.  A cash deposit; or 
b.  A letter of credit issued by a financial institution authorized to do business in the State of Colorado. 
(2)  The applicant shall ensure that the collateral remains unencumbered and free from claims of others so that any requests of the city for payment or enforcement may be immediately and unequivocally honored without cost to the city. 
(3)  The applicant shall provide an independent, third-party report of the status of the improvements every six (6) months during construction. 
(4)  Such collateral shall be maintained, in the amount required by the agreement, through the warranty period as set forth herein. 
(5)  If, at any time prior to final acceptance and expiration of the warranty period, the city determines that the collateral is not sufficient to cover all costs of construction of the improvements and provides the applicant with a written basis for the requested increase to collateral, the applicant shall be required to post additional or supplemental collateral in an amount deemed reasonably sufficient and approved by city to pay for all costs of construction, including any administrative costs and contingency amount. 
(6)  After preliminary acceptance, the city may reduce the amount of required collateral during the warranty period to an amount reasonably determined by the administrator, based on the potential cost of repair or restoration of the improvements. 
(g)  Completion and acceptance of improvements. 
(1)  The applicant shall complete construction of the improvements within a specified period of time from the date of the improvements agreement. 
(2)  The city will perform periodic inspections of the public improvements and landscaping, and the applicant shall promptly modify, alter, or repair, at its own cost and expense, any improvements or landscaping that are not constructed or installed in accordance with the approved plans, such that the improvements conform to the approved plans. 
(3)  Upon completion of construction of the improvements and landscaping according to the approved plans, the applicant shall make a written request for preliminary acceptance of such improvements and landscaping ("preliminary acceptance"). With said request, the applicant shall: 
a.  File with the city an original and digital copy (in a form approved by the administrator) of the as-built construction plans of public improvement(s), stamped and certified by the engineer of record who shall also be a state-registered professional engineer; and 
b.  Submit to the city a sworn affidavit and documentary evidence that there exists no lien or encumbrance upon or against the public improvements resulting from unpaid amounts owing to contractors, subcontractors, material persons or other persons involved or engaged in the construction or installation of the public improvements. 
(4)  Upon request for preliminary acceptance, the city shall determine whether the improvements and landscaping are installed according to approved plans. If so, the city shall issue to the applicant a certificate of preliminary acceptance, granting preliminary acceptance of the public improvements and approval of the landscaping, and setting the terms of the warranty period. The warranty period ("warranty period") shall terminate two (2) years from the date of preliminary acceptance. 
(5)  Upon expiration of the warranty period: 
a.  The city shall re-inspect the improvements and landscaping and require correction of all defects and failures of the improvements prior to the issuance of final acceptance of the improvements and the release of any remaining collateral. 
b.  Upon completion of any required warranty repairs, reconstruction, or replacement, public improvements shall become the property of the city (and thereby the city's maintenance responsibility) by final acceptance of the public improvements by the city. 
(h)  Timing of certificates of occupancy. No certificates of occupancy shall be issued for any building permits until such time as the city has issued (at a minimum) preliminary acceptance of the public improvements and landscaping that are identified in the improvements agreement. A conditional certificate of occupancy may be issued if installation of landscaping is delayed due to season or adverse weather conditions, and the amount and duration of the security identified in the improvements agreement is sufficient to cover the cost of installation. 
(i)  Reimbursement for off-site or oversized improvements. In the event oversized utilities or off-site improvements are required, arrangements for reimbursement may be made whereby the applicant may be allowed to recover the cost of the utilities or off-site improvements that have been provided by the applicant to the extent they are scaled beyond the requirements of the proposed development. The method and time of payment under the reimbursement shall be established in accordance with the current policies of the city related to the placement of such oversized utilities or off-site improvements. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-6-302. - Utilities. 
(a)  Utility easement widths. 
(1)  Utility easements shall be provided along lot lines in new subdivisions as follows: 
a.  Boundary lot lines (any lot line that is also a boundary of the subject property): At least ten (10) feet. 
b.  Rear lot lines: Eight (8) feet. 
c.  Side lot lines (where necessary): Five (5) feet. 
(2)  If the location of utility easements along lot lines is unsuitable for the use of the utility companies due to drainage, irrigation ditches, timbered area, or other obstructions, easements of appropriate width shall be provided adjacent to the areas of obstruction. 
(b)  Underground installation required; exceptions. 
(1)  The applicant shall underground all electric, gas, and communications lines (collectively, "utilities") within the boundaries of the subject property or subdivision plat, and that are required to be relocated pursuant to this UDC or as a condition of approval of the development. 
(2)  Transformers, switching boxes, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, ducts, street lighting, or other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such underground utilities may be installed or placed above ground. 
(3)  High-voltage electric transmission and distribution feeder lines and necessary appurtenances thereto may be installed or placed above ground. 
(4)  The administrator may waive the underground requirement with regard to power and communications lines if: 
a.  The subject property has existing service via overhead lines on the date of application; 
b.  No new utility poles will be installed as a result of the proposed development; and 
c.  The subject property has less than two hundred (200) feet of frontage, or the scale of the proposed development does not justify the cost of undergrounding the existing lines. 
(c)  All utilities that serve proposed development shall be located within dedicated and platted public utility easements or public street rights-of-way, which shall be approved and thereafter subject to acceptance by the city with respect to those utilities that are municipally operated. The applicant shall be responsible for arranging connections from the subject property to existing utility systems. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-6-303. - Stormwater maintenance easements. 
(a)  Generally. No later than the date of preliminary acceptance of public improvements, the applicant shall deliver to the city an executed stormwater maintenance easement agreement in a form approved by the city attorney that authorizes the city to access and inspect stormwater improvements, and to maintain, repair, or replace the stormwater improvements at the property owners' expense if the property owner fails to do so within fourteen (14) days after notice from the city that such maintenance, repair, or replacement is required for the proper operation of the improvements. 
(b)  Natural drainageways. Where a subject property is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream (but not including an irrigation ditch), there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the boundaries of such watercourse, and such further width as may be required for necessary flood control measures. The requirements for such easements are set out in chapter 8, City of Alamosa Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 6-4. - OPERATIONS PLANS—MINERAL EXTRACTION AND HEAVY TRUCK ROUTING 
 
Sec. 21-6-401. - Purpose and application of division. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to set out requirements for operations plans that ensure that the operational impacts of certain uses are anticipated and mitigated. 
(b)  Application. This division applies when the requirements for approval of a land use include one (1) or both of the plans set out in section 21-6-401 or section 21-6-403, or where the city determines that such plans are necessary to mitigate the projected impacts of a land use that involves unusual amounts of heavy truck traffic. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-6-402. - Master plan for extraction. 
(a)  Generally. Minerals shall not be extracted except according to a master plan for extraction prepared by the applicant and approved by the planning commission. 
(b)  Contents of master plan for extraction. The master plan for extraction shall address: 
(1)  Any system adopted by the Colorado geological survey grading commercial mineral deposits according to such factors as magnitude of the deposit and time of availability for and feasibility of extraction of a deposit; 
(2)  The potential for effective multiple sequential use which would result in the optimum benefit to the landowner, neighboring residents, and the community as a whole; 
(3)  The development or preservation of land to enhance development of physically attractive surroundings compatible with the surrounding area; 
(4)  The quality of life of the residents in and around areas which contain commercial mineral deposits; 
(5)  The comprehensive plan and specific area or topical plans; 
(6)  Maximization of extraction of commercial mineral deposits; 
(7)  The ability to reclaim the area pursuant to the provisions of Section 32-101, et seq., 34 C.R.S., Colorado Mined Land Reclamation Act; and 
(8)  The ability to reclaim an area owned by the city or other governmental authority, pursuant to an adopted plan, to be used for public purposes by the city or governmental authority consistent with such proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-6-403. - Heavy truck routing plan. 
(a)  Generally. A heavy truck routing plan is required for uses as specifically identified in this UDC and for uses that the administrator determines will involve the use of semi-trailers, dump trucks, trash hauling trucks, or comparable heavy vehicles at a frequency of more than ten (10) heavy vehicle trips per week. 
(b)  When required. For the uses that require heavy truck routing plans, such plans shall be submitted with site plans. 
(c)  Updates. Heavy truck routing plans shall be updated when: 
(1)  New routes are proposed by the applicant. 
(2)  The applicant proposes to increase heavy truck traffic by more than twenty (20) percent compared to that set out in the approved heavy truck routing plan. 
(3)  Routes are changed by the city or other relevant transportation authority in a manner that affects the approved heavy truck routing plan. 
(d)  Contents. The heavy truck routing plan shall include, at a minimum: 
(1)  The type or class of heavy trucks that will be used by the applicant's proposed land use; 
(2)  The anticipated frequency of delivery and departures of heavy trucks; 
(3)  The hours of heavy truck traffic; 
(4)  A map illustrating the route(s) to and from a state highway (or to and from anticipated destinations in the city), of all heavy trucks used by the proposed land use; and 
(5)  A map illustrating the routing and flow of heavy trucks within the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
ARTICLE VII. - NONCONFORMITIES  
DIVISION 7-1. - PURPOSE AND APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 
 
Sec. 21-7-101. - Purpose. 
(a)  Generally. The application of new regulations to existing development may create circumstances in which existing lot dimensions, density, intensity, land uses, buildings, structures, landscaping and buffering, lighting, parking areas, or signs do not strictly conform to the requirements of the new regulations. For existing lots or development (including uses, buildings, structures, and signs) that are "legally nonconforming," this article sets out equitable rules for whether, when, and how the regulations of this UDC apply. 
(b)  Conversion of nonconformities. Generally, nonconforming uses, buildings, structures, and signs are not allowed to be enlarged, expanded, increased, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses that are now prohibited in the same zone. This article provides standards by which minor nonconforming uses can be made "conforming" through a public hearing process. 
(c)  Reduction of nonconformities. It is the policy of the city to encourage reinvestments in property that increase its value and utility and reduce its external impacts. Since bringing a developed parcel into full compliance with this UDC may involve substantial costs that may discourage reinvestment, division 4, other physical nonconformities, provides a set of thresholds for determining when new construction or modifications to development trigger a requirement for increasing conformity with the various requirements of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-7-102. - Application. 
(a)  Generally. This article applies to uses, buildings, structures, landscaping, buffering, signs, lighting, parking, density, and lots that were: 
(1)  Lawfully established, constructed, installed, planted, or created prior to the effective date but do not conform to the requirements of this UDC; or 
(2)  Lawfully established, constructed, installed, planted, or created in one (1) zone, but no longer conform to the requirements of this UDC after the subject property is rezoned. 
(b)  Effect of article. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to require a change in plans, construction, or designated use of any building in which a building permit was lawfully obtained from the city prior to the effective date of this UDC or subsequent amendment, provided that construction: 
(1)  Was commenced before the expiration of the building permit; and 
(2)  Work is proceeding diligently toward completion. 
(c)  Changes of ownership. Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect or restrict changes in ownership, nor shall changes in ownership affect the application of any of the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Evidence of status. Evidence that a nonconforming situation is a legal nonconformity and not a violation of this UDC shall be submitted by the owner of the property or use upon request of the administrator. 
(e)  Exceptions to article. 
(1)  EN Zone. Lots of record within the NC Zone, regardless of their size, and existing buildings on said lots of record, are "conforming lots" and "conforming buildings," respectively. 
(2)  Vested rights. This article does not apply to site-specific development plans for which rights are vested, during the period of vested rights. 
(3)  Unlawful uses, buildings, or structures. This article does not allow for the perpetuation of unlawful development. Such development is not "legally nonconforming," but instead, "unlawful," and is subject to all of the provisions of this UDC (including enforcement provisions) and any other applicable law. 
(4)  Natural shifts of zone boundaries. If a zone boundary changes as a result of a change in location of a river, stream, or ditch channel centerline, other natural boundary-defining feature, or street, such change of zone boundary does not render existing development nonconforming. 
(5)  Taking for public use. Any nonconforming building, structure, parking, or lot that is expressly created or caused by a conveyance of privately-owned land to a federal, state, or local government to serve a public purpose is conforming for the purposes of this UDC, and is not subject to limitations in this article. This exemption applies in cases where private land is obtained by a governmental entity for a public purpose, through condemnation, threat of condemnation, or otherwise, when that transaction creates a nonconformity in the remainder parcel in terms of setback, lot area, or other standards of this UDC. However, this exemption does not apply to right-of-way dedication or other public conveyances of land required by the city in the course of subdivision, site plan, or other development approvals. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 7-2. - NONCONFORMING USES 
 
Sec. 21-7-201. - Continuation of nonconforming use. 
(a)  Generally. Subject to the provisions of this article, a nonconforming use may be continued and maintained in reasonable repair, but shall not be altered or extended. The extension of a nonconforming use to a portion of a structure that was arranged or designed for the nonconforming use at the time of adoption of this UDC is not an extension of a nonconforming use. 
(b)  Casualty loss. If the building or structure in which a nonconforming use is damaged to the extent that the cost of repair exceeds fifty (50) percent of the appraised value of the property (including the building) for tax purposes, then the nonconforming use of the property shall not be resumed. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-7-202. - Change of nonconforming use. 
If a nonconforming use is changed to a different use, the new use shall be a use that conforms to the regulations of the zone in which the use is located. After such change, all future use of the subject property shall comply with applicable provisions of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-7-203. - Discontinuance of a nonconforming use. 
(a)  Nonconforming uses that involve structures. If a nonconforming use involving a structure is discontinued from use for a period of six (6) months, further use of the subject property shall conform to the requirements of this UDC. 
(b)  Nonconforming uses that do not involve structures. If a nonconforming use not involving a structure is discontinued for a period of three (3) months, further use of the subject property shall conform to the requirements of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-7-204. - Conversion of a nonconforming use to a conforming use. 
(a)  Generally. In many instances, nonconforming uses may be integral parts of the city's fabric, that is, its character and function, so their continuing existence promotes the city's policy of retaining existing businesses or protecting its character and neighborhoods. In these instances, the classification "nonconforming use" and resulting restriction on investment may not be what the community desires. As such, a nonconforming use may be made "conforming" pursuant to this Section in order to remove the potential stigma associated with the "nonconforming" designation. 
(b)  Limitation. Unlawful uses may not be made conforming under this section. 
(c)  Conversion by conditional use approval; standards. A conditional use approval may be granted to make a nonconforming use "conforming," if: 
(1)  The criteria for approval of a conditional use set forth in section 21-2-302, are met; and 
(2)  The use has minimal nonconformities and has been integrated into the function of its surrounding neighborhood or zone, as evidenced by the following: 
a.  Nearby city residents regularly patronize the use or are employed by the use (for nonresidential uses in or abutting residential neighborhoods). 
b.  Management practices eliminate nuisances such as: 
1.  Spillover of noise or light; 
2.  Odors and appearance of waste materials and litter; 
3.  Unreasonably congested on-street parking; or 
4.  Comparable conflicts with abutting and nearby properties. 
c.  There is no material history of complaints about the use (a history of complaints is justification for denying the conditional use permit, unless the conditions of the permit will eliminate the sources of the complaints). 
d.  If the use is nonresidential, it is licensed in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the city. 
e.  The use has been maintained in good condition and its classification as a nonconforming use would be a disincentive for such maintenance. 
(d)  Conditions. Conditions may be imposed relative to bufferyards, landscaping, or other site design provisions, or other limitations (including limitations on future expansion or operational characteristics) necessary to ensure that, as a conforming use, the use will not become a nuisance. Such conditions may relate to the lot, buildings, structures, lighting, landscaping, parking, drainage, or operations of the use. 
(e)  Effect of approval. Uses that comply with the terms of a conditional use approval that is issued in accordance with this section are converted from "legally nonconforming uses" to "conforming uses" by virtue of the issuance of the conditional use permit, and subject to its terms. Conditional use approvals shall be provided to the applicant in writing and may be recorded by the applicant at the applicant's expense. 
(f)  Effect of denial. If an application for conversion of a nonconforming use is denied, the use may thereafter continue as a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 7-3. - NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 21-7-301. - Modifications to a nonconforming building or structure. 
A building or structure that contains a conforming use, but is nonconforming as to height, setback, or coverage, may be altered or extended, provided that the alteration or extension does not result in a further violation of this UDC or applicable building code. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-7-302. - Completion of building or structure. 
Nothing contained in this division shall require any change in the plans, construction, alteration, or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been issued and construction work has commenced prior to the effective date of this UDC, except that if the designated use will be nonconforming it shall, for the purpose of section 21-7-203, be a discontinued use if not in operation within eighteen (18) months after the date of issuance of the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-7-303. - Damage to a nonconforming building or structure. 
(a)  Cost of repair is fifty (50) percent or more of appraised value. If a nonconforming building or structure is damaged to the extent that the cost of repair is fifty (50) percent or more of the appraised value of the property (including the building) for tax purposes, then future construction on the subject property shall conform to the requirements of this UDC. 
(b)  Cost of repair is less than fifty (50) percent of appraised value. If cost of repair is less than fifty (50) percent of the appraised value of the property (including the building) for tax purposes, then restoration is allowed, provided that it is commenced within six (6) months of the damage and completed within eighteen (18) months after commencement. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 7-4. - OTHER PHYSICAL NONCONFORMITIES 
 
Sec. 21-7-401. - Conforming uses with physical nonconformities. 
(a)  Generally. A use that is permitted by article II, division 2, land use, or that meets all applicable limited use standards (in the case of a limited use) or conditional use standards (in the case of a conditional use), may be established, continued, maintained, modified, enlarged, or extended, even if other nonconformities are present on the subject property, such as: 
(1)  The use is located on a nonconforming lot; 
(2)  The use occupies a nonconforming building; 
(3)  The use occupies or otherwise utilizes a nonconforming structure; 
(4)  The use is located on a lot with nonconforming landscaping or buffering; 
(5)  The use utilizes a nonconforming sign; 
(6)  The use is illuminated by nonconforming lighting; or 
(7)  The use has nonconforming parking. 
(b)  No implied waivers. The authorization in subsection (a), above, shall not be construed as a waiver of the requirements of division 3 of this article, or this division with respect to the nonconformities that are present on the subject property. Modifications to buildings, structures, landscaping and buffering, signage, lighting, or parking may require correction or partial correction of nonconforming situations, as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-7-402. - Nonconforming landscaping or buffering. 
(a)  Building expansions, parking lot improvements, and expansions of existing uses. If an existing building, parking lot, or use is expanded or improved, additional landscaping and buffering is required only with respect to the new area of the building or use, or the new or modified area of the parking lot. 
(b)  Change of use. Modifications to nonconforming landscaping or buffering are not required if the use of a building changes from one (1) use to another without further changes to the subject property or the exterior of the building, unless: 
(1)  A change of use requires additional parking, in which case the parking that is provided to meet that requirement must also comply with the standards in article V, division 3, landscaping. 
(2)  A change of use requires limited or conditional use approval, in which case the conditions for approval may include requirements for additional landscaping or buffering upgrades. 
(c)  Redevelopment. If an existing property is redeveloped, landscaping and buffering shall be provided as required by article V, division 3, and any applicable limited or conditional use standards. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-7-403. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Continuance. A nonconforming sign may be continued and maintained in reasonable repair, but shall not be altered. 
(b)  Historic signs. Historic signs shall not be considered nonconforming signs, and may be rehabilitated or altered in accordance with the preservation brief published by the U.S. Department of the Interior, "The Preservation of Historic Signs," copies of which are available through the department of public works. 
(c)  Discontinuance. The right to maintain a nonconforming sign shall terminate immediately if: 
(1)  The sign is abandoned; 
(2)  The owner of the subject property commits any violation of this article, with respect to such nonconforming sign; 
(3)  The sign is damaged, from any cause whatsoever, and the cost of repairing such damage exceeds fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost of such sign on the date of such damage or destruction; or 
(4)  The sign is obsolete. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-7-404. - Nonconforming lighting. 
(a)  Building expansions, parking lot improvements, and expansions of existing uses. 
(1)  If an existing building, parking lot, or use is expanded or improved, all new or relocated lighting shall be required to meet the provisions of article V, division 4, lighting. 
(2)  Existing lighting shall be brought into compliance with this UDC when: 
a.  A building is expanded such that its floor area grows by twenty-five (25) percent or more; 
b.  The land area occupied by an outdoor land use increases by more than thirty-five (35) percent; 
c.  The value of proposed new, expanded, or upgraded buildings or improvements (collectively "new construction") on the subject property exceeds two (2) times the value of the buildings and improvements on the subject property before the new construction; or 
d.  With respect to parking lot lighting, the land area occupied by a parking lot increases by more than ten (10) percent. 
(b)  Change of use. Modifications to nonconforming lighting are not required if the use of a building changes from one (1) use to another without further changes to the site or the exterior of the building, unless: 
(1)  A change of use requires additional parking, in which case the parking that is provided to meet that requirement must also comply with the standards in div. 5-4, lighting. 
(2)  A change of use requires limited or conditional use approval, in which case the conditions for approval may include requirements for additional lighting upgrades. 
(c)  Redevelopment. If the subject property is redeveloped, lighting shall be provided as required by div. 5-4, lighting. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-7-405. - Nonconforming parking. 
(a)  Building expansions and expansions of existing uses. If an existing building or use is expanded, additional parking is required only in proportion to the new area of the building or use. 
(b)  Change of use. If the use of a building changes, resulting in a net additional demand for parking, then the number of new parking spaces that are required shall be calculated as the lesser of: 
(1)  The required parking for the new use according to div. 5-2, parking and loading; or 
(2)  (Number of existing parking spaces) + ((number of parking spaces required for the new use) - (number of parking spaces required for the existing use)) 
(c)  Redevelopment. If an existing building is redeveloped, parking shall be brought into conformity with this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-7-406. - Nonconforming density. 
If a subject property contains more dwelling units than are allowed by the zone in which the subject property is located, the building or buildings may be expanded or extended as may be allowed by this UDC, but the physical aspects of such expansions or extensions shall be in compliance with this UDC, and no new dwelling units shall be created. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-7-407. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)  Generally. In any zone in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family residence and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record that exists on the effective date of this UDC. Such a lot must have been in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots under the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements of the zone in which it is located for area, or width, or both, provided that the requirement of the zone for minimum yard dimensions shall be met unless a variance to the requirements has been granted by the zoning board of adjustment. 
(b)  Combination required. If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record on the effective date, and part, or all of the lots do not meet the requirements of the zone in which they are located as to minimum area or frontage or both, the lands shall be considered for the purpose of this chapter to be an undivided parcel, and no portion of the parcel shall be sold or used in a manner that diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
ARTICLE VIII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 8-1. - ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES 
 
Sec. 21-8-101. - Administrator. 
(a)  Generally. The administrator is the public works director or his or her designee, or such other employee of or contractor to the city as may be designated by the city manager from time to time. 
(b)  Authority and responsibilities. 
(1)  The administrator is designated to administer and enforce this UDC. 
(2)  The administrator shall have the power to make inspections of buildings and premises to carry out the duties of the enforcement of this UDC. 
(c)  Recommendations. The administrator shall make recommendations to the planning commission, zoning board of adjustment, and city council as to recommendations or decisions that said bodies are assigned under this UDC. 
(d)  Decisions. The administrator shall decide the following types of applications: 
(1)  Temporary use permits; 
(2)  Use permits or change in use permits; 
(3)  Limited use permits; 
(4)  Final plats; 
(5)  Site plans; 
(6)  Standard-form development agreements; 
(7)  Minor modifications. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-102. - City engineer. 
(a)  Generally. The city engineer is the official who is responsible for the approval, inspection, and acceptance of public improvements. The city engineer shall be the public works director or his or her designee. 
(b)  Authority and responsibilities. The city engineer has the following authority and responsibilities: 
(1)  The city engineer shall review plans for public improvements and verify that the proposed collateral for same is sufficient under this LDC. 
(2)  The city engineer shall inspect public improvements and grant preliminary and final acceptance of same. 
(3)  The city engineer shall conduct such other activities as directed by the city manager from time to time. 
(c)  Decisions. The city engineer shall decide the following types of applications: 
(1)  Stormwater management plans; and 
(2)  Construction plans for public improvements. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-103. - Planning commission. 
(a)  Generally. The planning commission is established pursuant to Article XIV, Section 1, of the Charter of the City of Alamosa ("Charter"). 
(b)  Powers and duties. The planning commission shall have the powers and duties set forth in Article XIV, Section 2, of the Charter, and shall perform the following additional functions described in this UDC. 
(c)  Decisions. The planning commission shall hear and decide or make recommendation upon, as the case may be, the following types of applications: 
(1)  Conditional use (subject to ratification by the city council as set forth in subsection 21-8-105(c)(1), below). 
(2)  Preliminary plat (subject to ratification by the city council as set forth in subsection 21-8-105(c)(2), below). 
(3)  Final development plans (subject to ratification by the city council as set forth in subsection 21-8-105(c)(3), below). 
(4)  Comprehensive plan amendments. 
(5)  Variances that are applied to subdivision plats. 
(d)  Recommendations. The planning commission shall make recommendations with respect to the following types of applications: 
(1)  Rezoning; 
(2)  Certificate of designation; 
(3)  Preliminary development plan (and major amendments to PDP); 
(4)  Vacation of plats; 
(5)  Abandonment of easements or rights-of-way; 
(6)  Text amendments to this UDC. 
(e)  Membership and qualifications. Membership and qualifications shall be as set out in Article XIV, Section 1, of the Charter. 
(f)  Appointment; term. The method and term of appointments shall be as set out in Article XIV, Section 1, of the Charter. 
(g)  Alternate members. City council may establish, modify, or abolish by resolution one (1) or two (2) additional planning commission positions to serve in the following capacities: 
(1)  The first position (the "primary alternate") may serve as an alternate in proceedings where the planning commission would otherwise be without a quorum of members eligible to vote on an issue, or who are able to participate in proceedings on a given matter. The primary alternate may also be used to establish a fully constituted planning commission during those times when a vacancy exists for a particular ward or for an at-large position when a qualified, willing person has not been appointed, despite the city's reasonable efforts to fill such position. 
(2)  The second position (the "secondary alternate") is identical to the primary alternate, and shall operate identically, except that it shall serve when need arises only after the primary alternate is either already serving or cannot serve or vote. 
(h)  Vacancies. if a vacancy occurs during the term of a planning commission member, the vacancy shall be filled as provided in Article XIV, Section 1, of the Charter. 
(i)  Meetings. 
(1)  Meetings shall be held at the call of the chair or administrator and at such other times that the majority of the members of the commission shall determine. 
(2)  All meetings shall be open to the public, except that the commission may go into executive session in accordance with the Open Meetings Law. 
(3)  Open meetings shall be recorded. 
(4)  A quorum of the commission shall consist of three (3) voting members, and a majority vote of the members present shall constitute action by the commission. 
(5)  The chair shall decide all points of order or procedure unless otherwise directed by a motion approved by a majority of the commission members present at the time. 
(6)  The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on every matter or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and it shall also keep records of such proceedings, and such records shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(j)  Rules. The planning commission may adopt procedural rules for the conduct of its business, which shall not be inconsistent with the requirements of this UDC. 
(k)  Officers. The planning commission shall, at its first regular meeting of each calendar year, choose one (1) of its members to act as chair and one (1) member to serve as vice-chair. The chair shall preside at all meetings of the commission, except that, in his or her absence, the vice-chair shall preside. The city manager or designee shall act as secretary to the planning commission. 
(l)  Consultants. The planning commission may retain consultants and technical advisors as provided in Article XIV, Section 1, of the Charter. 
(m)  Compensation; reimbursement. Planning commission members serve without pay. Members may be reimbursed for expenses incurred upon approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-104. - Zoning board of adjustment. 
(a)  Generally. Pursuant to Article XIV, Section 5, of the Charter of the City of Alamosa ("Charter"), the Alamosa Planning Commission, established under Article XIV, Section 1, of the Charter, shall serve and act as needed, from time to time, as the zoning board of adjustment. The planning commission is appointed to this role pursuant to the power invested in the city council under Section 2(e) of said Article XIV of the Charter. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The zoning board of adjustment has the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To hear and decide all questions on appeal from final decisions of the administrator. 
(2)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official based on or made in the enforcement of this UDC. 
(3)  To hear and decide (grant or deny) applications for variances, except variances applied to subdivision plats. 
(4)  To hear and decide such other matters as the city council may prescribe by ordinance. 
(c)  Decisions. 
(1)  The zoning board of adjustment shall decide applications for variances from this UDC. 
(2)  The zoning board of adjustment shall decide administrative appeals from final decisions of the administrator. 
(d)  Membership and qualifications. The planning commission shall serve as the zoning board of adjustment. 
(e)  Meetings. The meetings shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other times as the zoning board of adjustment may determine. The chair or, in his or her absence, the vice-chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(f)  Rules. 
(1)  The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board of adjustment shall be required to overturn decisions made by the administrator presented to the zoning board of adjustment. 
(2)  Any other matters shall require a majority vote of members present of the zoning board of adjustment. 
(3)  The zoning board of adjustment may adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this UDC. 
(g)  Officers. The zoning board of adjustment shall be the same as the officers of the planning commission. 
(h)  Records. The zoning board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each decision; or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating that. It shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and filed immediately in the office of the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-105. - City council. 
(a)  Generally. The city council is formed as provided in the Article III, of the Charter of the City of Alamosa. The city council delegates certain responsibilities for the administration of the UDC as provided herein. 
(b)  Decisions. The city council retains the authority to decide the following types of applications: 
(1)  Rezonings; 
(2)  Certificates of designation; 
(3)  Development agreements (except standard-form development agreements); 
(4)  Text amendments to this UDC; 
(5)  Preliminary development plans (and major changes to PDPs); 
(6)  Appeals from decisions of the planning commission; 
(7)  Vacations of plats; 
(8)  Abandonment of easements or rights-of-way. 
(c)  Ratifications. 
(1)  The city council ratifies the following decisions of the planning commission: 
a.  Conditional use; 
b.  Preliminary plat; 
c.  Final development plans. 
(2)  City council ratification is by consent agenda, but in extraordinary circumstances, a planning commission decision may be removed from the consent agenda and heard by the council as provided in section 21-8-512. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 8-2. - PERMITS AND APPROVALS 
 
Sec. 21-8-201. - Approvals or permits required. 
Approvals or permits are required for development in the city unless specifically exempted by this UDC. Most of the required approvals and permits are described in this division. Planned unit development approvals are detailed in division 3, planned unit development and campus master plans. Annexations are detailed in division 4, annexation and disconnection. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-202. - Administrative approvals and permits. 
(a)  Generally. Administrative approvals and permits are issued by the administrator or city engineer upon a finding of compliance with the requirements of this UDC. No public hearing is required. 
(b)  Administrative approvals and permits established. The administrative approvals and permits that are required by this UDC are set out in Table 21-8-202(b), Administrative Approvals and Permits. These approvals and permits are in addition to other reviews, approvals, and permits that may be required for compliance with other laws, statutes, or regulations, such as: 
(1)  State or federal law, including, but not limited to, the Clean Water Act, the Clean Air Act, or the Endangered Species Act; 
(2)  Adopted building and safety codes; 
(3)  Ordinances that require permits for activities on public land or within public rights-of-way; or 
(4)  Business licensing ordinances. 
Table 21-8-202(b) 
ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVALS AND PERMITS 
Approval or Permit 	Required For 	Timing 	Exceptions 	Decision-Maker 	Reference 1 
Land Use Approvals and Permits 
Temporary Use Permit 	Operation of temporary use 	Prior to establishment of temporary use 	None 	Administrator 	Div. 2-4 
Use Permit or Change in Use Permit 	Check for zoning compliance as condition of issuance of building permit 	Simultaneously with issuance of building permit 	Building permits that are not related to the establishment of or change to a land use 	Administrator 	Div. 2-2 
Limited Use Permit 	Establishment of Limited Use 	Prior to establishment of Limited Use 	None 	Administrator 	Div. 2-2 and 3 
Site or Design Related Permits and Approvals 
Infrastructure Construction Plans 	Construction of public improvements such as streets, utilities, and stormwater management systems 	Processed with final plat or site plan; approved prior to commencement of construction of specified improvements 	N/A 	Administrator 	Engineering Standards Manual 
UDC Compliance Approval 	Check for UDC compliance as condition of issuance of building permit 	Simultaneously with issuance of building permit 	Plumbing, electrical, or other permits that do not implicate UDC standards 	Administrator 	passim 
Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control 	Authorization for site grading 	Prior to site grading, generally simultaneously with building permit or approval of infrastructure construction plans 	Traditional agricultural practices; routine landscape maintenance; ditch maintenance 	City Engineer 	Engineering Standards Manual 
Final Plat (major or minor subdivision) 	Conveying lots by reference to plat; obtaining building permits within a subdivision 	If infrastructure is provided, approval of infrastructure construction plans is prerequisite to approval of final plat; final plat required prior to sale of or construction upon individual lots 	N/A 	Administrator 	passim 
Site Plan 	All development 	Prior to issuance of building permit and grading, erosion, and sediment control permit 	Single-family detached or duplex buildings on individual lots; changes in the use of a building that do not involve exterior modifications or site work 	Administrator 	passim 
Development Agreement; Improvements Agreement; Public Improvements Agreement (however titled) 	Providing timing and security for implementation of infrastructure construction plans or landscape plans 	Prior to issuance of infrastructure construction permits, or as set out in the development agreement 	Development agreements that establish vested rights or materially depart from City-approved form 	City Manager 	Sec. 21-6-301 
Modifications and Other Relief 
Administrative (Minor) Modification 	Minor modifications to standards within this UDC or to approved final development plans 	Prior to the issuance of permits or approvals to which the modifications apply 	N/A 	Administrator 	Sec. 21-8-701 
TABLE NOTE: 
1 References are provided for convenience only and are not intended to limit the application of this UDC 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-203. - Discretionary approvals. 
(a)  Generally. Discretionary approvals and permits are issued by the city after compliance with all applicable requirements of this UDC is demonstrated to the respective decision-maker(s) at a hearing. 
(b)  Discretionary permits established. The discretionary approvals and permits that are required by this UDC are set out in Table 21-8-203(b), Discretionary Approvals and Permits. These approvals and permits are in addition to other reviews, approvals, and permits that may be required for compliance with other laws, statutes, or regulations, such as: 
(1)  State or federal law, including, but not limited to, the Clean Water Act, Clean Air Act, and the Endangered Species Act; 
(2)  Further administrative permits (e.g., site plans or final plats); 
(3)  Adopted building codes; 
(4)  Ordinances that require permits for activities in public the rights-of-way; or 
(5)  Business licensing ordinances. 
Table 21-8-203(b) 
DISCRETIONARY APPROVALS AND PERMITS 
Approval or Permit 	Required For 	Timing 	Exceptions 	Recommendation By 	Issued By 	Reference 1 
Land Use/Zoning 
Conditional Use Permit 	Establishment of a conditional use 	Prior to the establishment of a conditional use 	N/A 	Administrator 	PC, ratified by City Council 4 5 	Div. 2-2 and 2-3 
Rezoning 	Changing the zone that applies to a subject property 	Prior to the application of standards from the requested zone 	N/A 	PC 	City Council 3 	Sec. 21-2-106 
Certificate of Designation 	Development of solid waste disposal sites and facilities 	Prior to issuance of any permits for solid waste disposal sites and facilities 	N/A 	PC 	City Council 2 5 	C.R.S. § 25-15-201 or Title 30, Article 20, C.R.S., as applicable 
Site Development/Subdivision/Planned Unit Development 
Preliminary Plat 	Approval of a proposed major subdivision (not required for minor subdivisions) 	Prior to final plat or issuance of permits that authorize construction or site work 	N/A 	Administrator 	PC, ratified by City Council 4 	passim 
Preliminary Development Plan ("PDP") 	First step of Planned Unit Development process; if applicable, filed with preliminary plat 	Prior to approval of Final Development Plan 	N/A 	PC 	City Council 2 	Div. 8-3 
Final Development Plan ("FDP") 	Second step of Planned Unit Development process; may be filed with final plats or site plans 	Prior to approval of final plat or site plan 	N/A 	Administrator 	PC, ratified by City Council 2 4 5 	Div. 8-3, Art. VI 
Campus Master Plan 	Approval of the general layout of development and arrangement of uses within a campus in the CA Zone 	Prior to final plat, or if no final plat is required, prior to approval of site plans or building permits that authorize site work or building construction 	N/A 	PC 	City Council 2 5 	Div. 8-3, Art. II, Art. III, Art. V, Art. VI 
Development Agreement; Improvements Agreement; Public Improvements Agreement (however titled) 	Providing timing and security for implementation of infrastructure construction plans or landscape plans; vesting development rights 	Prior to issuance of construction permits, or as set out in the development agreement 	Agreements that may be approved administratively 	Administrator 	City Council 2 5 	Div. 6-3 and authority under City Charter 
Vacation/Abandonment 
Planned Unit Development Amendment, Major 	Major changes to approved Preliminary Development Plan 	Prior to implementation of major changes 	N/A 	PC 	City Council 2 5 	Div. 8-7 
Vacation of Plat or Abandonment of Easement or Right-of-Way 	Vacation of plats or abandonment of easements or rights-of-way 	N/A 	N/A 	PC 	City Council 3 5 	Sec. 21-8-520 
Amendments 
LDC Text Amendment 	Amending the text of this LDC 	N/A 	N/A 	PC 	City Council 3 	N/A 
Comprehensive Plan Amendment 	Amending the text or maps of the Comprehensive Plan 	N/A 	N/A 	Administrator 	PC 4 	N/A 
Relief 
Variance 	Authorizing development which does not strictly comply with the requirements of this UDC 	Prior to issuance of permits that authorize the construction or site work 	Variances shall not authorize uses which are otherwise prohibited in the zone, nor authorize development that does not comply with the Floodplain Management Regulations 	N/A 	ZBOA 4 5 	Sec. 21-8-702 
Administrative Appeals 	See Sec. 21-8-703, Administrative Appeals 
TABLE NOTE: 
1 References are provided for convenience only and are not intended to limit the application of this UDC 
2 Documented by resolution of City Council 
3 Documented by ordinance enacted by City Council 
4 Documented by resolution of Planning Commission 
5 Recorded in real property records of County Clerk and Recorder 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17; Ord. No. 12-2018 , § 7, 5-2-18)  
DIVISION 8-3. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT AND CAMPUS MASTER PLANS 
 
Sec. 21-8-301. - Purpose and application of division. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Establish standards and procedures to allow for creative, innovative, and beneficial development patterns, facilities, or mixes of land uses that were not contemplated by this UDC and therefore may not otherwise be allowed by this UDC. 
(2)  Establish standards for the approval and implementation of campus master plans to facilitate the development of campuses within the CA Zone. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  Planned unit development is approved in a two-step process. The first step is a preliminary development plan ("PDP"), which sets out the general parameters for the development. The second step is the final development plan ("FDP") which sets out specific development standards for some or all of the property within the boundaries of the PDP. Planned unit development is used to modify development standards as provided in this Division. If individual lots are to be created, PDP applications are processed concurrently with preliminary plats, and FDP applications are processed concurrently with final plats. 
(2)  Campus master plans are approved in a one-step process. The campus master plan details the proposed general locations and intensities of land uses, buildings, parking areas, and open spaces, conceptual traffic and pedestrian circulation systems, and the classes of buffers or techniques for transition between the CA Zone and adjoining property in other zones. The campus master plan may also include thresholds for development after which off-site improvements will be required to mitigate the impacts of the campus. Upon approval of a campus master plan, further approvals of the uses, buildings, and infrastructure set out in the campus master plan are administrative. Campus master plans are intended to be long-term documents that are implemented in conjunction with long-term capital improvements plans, and may be vested pursuant to the requirements of this UDC for periods in excess of ten (10) years. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-302. - Scope. 
(a)  Planned unit development. 
(1)  Zones where allowed. Application for a planned unit development may be made for land located in any zoning district. 
(2)  Modification of standards. Development standards for a planned unit development are controlled by the criteria and standards established in section 21-8-304. 
(b)  Campus master plan. Campus master plans are allowed in the CA Zone. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17; Ord. No. 12-2018 , § 8, 5-2-18)  
Sec. 21-8-303. - Types of planned unit development. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The following types of planned unit developments may be established by overlaying a PUD development plan over the applicable existing zoning district or districts. The overlays are as follows: 
a.  PUD-R (a planned residential development within an RE, RL, RM, or RH Zone); 
b.  PUD-C (a planned commercial development within a CB Zone); and 
c.  PUD-I (a planned industrial development within an I Zone). 
d.  PUD-A (a planned development for a use allowable within an A Zone). 
(2)  A zoning change is not required; however, the area included in each approved planned unit development shall be indicated on the zoning map. 
(b)  Planned residential development (PUD-R). 
(1)  Generally. Property within the RE, RL, RM, and RH Zones may be developed as PUD-R, planned residential development. 
(2)  Land use. Within the PUD-R district the following uses may be permitted by the city council: 
a.  Uses permitted by right, by limited use approval, or by conditional use approval in the underlying zone or zones; 
b.  Commercial uses, if the planned unit development contains six hundred (600) or more dwelling units. Such commercial uses shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Parking related to the commercial uses must be included as an integral part of the PUD and shall not occupy more than one and one-half (1½) percent of the total area of the PUD. 
2.  Commercial uses in any phase shall not be open to use prior to the completion of, and issuance of certificate of occupancy for, at least fifty (50) percent of the dwelling units in that phase. 
3.  Unless modified by the city council, all requirements applicable to the MU Zone are applicable to the commercial center in the PUD-R district. 
4.  Commercial uses shall be limited to categories reasonably necessary to efficiently serve residents of the development in which the uses are located. 
(3)  Income-restricted housing. Provision for low- and moderate-income housing may be required in a residential planned development. If required, the number of low and moderate income units shall be determined by the city council in accordance with current city policies. 
(4)  Density. Density shall be limited according to the maximum density of the underlying zone. 
(c)  Planned commercial development (PUD-CB). The PUD-CB district is created to provide for the development of planned business and shopping centers. It is intended to promote the grouping of professional and commercial uses and to provide areas large enough to establish harmonious relationships between structures, people and the automobile through the use of well-planned parking, access, pedestrian walkways, courtyards, malls and open spaces. Any commercial zoned area may be developed as a PUD-C district. Uses that are permitted by right, by limited use approval, or by conditional use approval in the underlying zone may be permitted in the PUD-C district. 
(d)  Planned industrial development (PUD-I). The PUD-I district is created to provide for the development of planned industrial areas. It is intended to promote the grouping of industrial uses and to group these uses in such a manner that they provide well-planned parking and access, landscaped open areas, and harmonious relationships among buildings and structures. Any industrial zoned area may be developed as a PUD-I development. Uses that are permitted by right, by limited use approval, or by conditional use approval in the underlying zone may be permitted in the PUD-I district. 
(e)  Planned agricultural development (PUD-A). The PUD-A district is created to provide for the development of large planned uses allowed in agricultural areas, such as RV parks. It is intended to promote the development of these uses in such a manner that they provide well-planned parking and access, landscaped open areas, and harmonious relationships among buildings and structures and in relation to adjoining property. Any agricultural zoned area may be developed as a PUD-A development. Uses that are permitted by right, by limited use approval, or by conditional use approval in the underlying zone may be permitted in the PUD-A district. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17; Ord. No. 12-2018 , §§ 8, 9, 5-2-18)  
Sec. 21-8-304. - Standards that may be modified in a planned unit development. 
(a)  Generally. The standards that are set out in this section may be modified in a planned unit development. 
(b)  Open space. 
(1)  Open space, in addition to required landscape areas and park and school dedications may be required by the city council upon recommendation by the planning commission. The requirement for additional open space will be based on the following factors: 
a.  The city's adopted comprehensive plan; 
b.  Drainage, vegetation, natural features, and other physical conditions of the subject property; 
c.  The types, densities, and intensities of development, employment, and residential use; 
d.  The overall projected demand for open space and recreational facilities by residents or employees of the development. 
(2)  Such open space shall be owned and maintained as common open space by the developer or an organization established for the ownership and maintenance of common open space, unless the city council accepts dedication of the open space. 
(c)  Residential lot and building standards. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirements as set out in div. 4-2, housing palette, apply to the planned unit development, except that the city council may modify such requirements to allow for new housing types or configurations that meet market demands within the city and that provide comparable private or public outdoor use areas. 
(d)  Other lot and building standards. Other lot and building standards, including building height, may be modified by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-305. - Approval criteria for modification of standards in a planned unit development. 
(a)  Generally. The standards identified in section 21-8-304, may be modified if the development plan demonstrates compliance with the criteria set out in this section. 
(b)  Approval criteria. A final development plan that proposes modification of the standards in this UDC shall meet each of the following criteria (or demonstrate that the criteria are not applicable): 
(1)  There is an appropriate relationship to the surrounding area; 
(2)  Circulation in terms of internal street circulation system is designed for the type of traffic generated, safety, separation from living areas, convenience, access, and noise and exhaust control, and there is proper circulation in parking areas in terms of safety, convenience, separation and screening; 
(3)  If residential uses are proposed, there is consideration of, and provision for, low and moderate income housing; 
(4)  Functional open space is provided in terms of optimum preservation of natural features including trees and drainage areas, recreation, views, density relief, and convenience of function; 
(5)  The development provides a variety of housing types, densities, facilities and open space; 
(6)  The development provides for privacy in terms of the needs of individuals, families, and adjoining property; 
(7)  Pedestrian and bicycle traffic is facilitated in terms of safety, separation from vehicular traffic, convenience, access points of destination and attractiveness; 
(8)  Building types are appropriate in terms of density, site relationship, bulk, and massing; 
(9)  Building design creates a "sense of place" in terms of architectural design, orientation, relationship to open space, spacing among buildings, quality of materials, harmonious color palette, complimentary textures, screened storage areas, and appropriate lighting; 
(10)  Signs are complimentary to the scale, architecture, and cladding materials used on the principal buildings; and 
(11)  Landscaping of subject property is high quality and serves functional purposes in terms of screening, defining outdoor spaces, providing shelter for pedestrians, and softening building masses. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-306. - Construction procedures and building permits. 
(a)  Building permits. The appropriate official shall issue building permits for buildings and structures in the area covered by an approved final development plan or campus master plan, provided that: 
(1)  The time limit established by the planned unit development's tentative development schedule or the duration of the campus master plan, as applicable, has not expired; 
(2)  The final development plan or campus master plan has been recorded in the public records of Alamosa County; 
(3)  If the subject property was also subdivided, the final plat has been recorded in the public records of Alamosa County; 
(4)  All infrastructure required by an improvements agreement or campus master plan is in place and preliminary acceptance has been granted; and 
(5)  The buildings or structures are in conformity with the approved final development plan or campus master plan and with all other applicable ordinances and regulations. 
(b)  Certificate of occupancy. The appropriate official shall issue a certificate of occupancy for any completed building or structure located in an area covered by the approved final development plan or campus master plan if the completed building or structure conforms to the requirements of the approved final development plan or campus master plan, applicable building codes, and all other applicable ordinances and regulations. 
(c)  Expiration of PUD approval. If the time limit established by the development schedule has passed or if the campus master plan has expired, no building permits shall be issued until after the planning commission has reviewed the development plan or campus master plan for conformance to this UDC (the planning commission may require such modification as may be necessary to ensure such conformance) and approved a new development schedule. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-307. - Amendments to the final development plan or campus master plan. 
(a)  Generally. No changes may be made in the approved final development plan or campus master plan during the construction of the planned unit development, except upon application to the appropriate administrative body under the procedures provided below. 
(b)  Minor changes. Minor changes may be approved by the Administrator pursuant to section 21-8-701. 
(c)  Major changes. 
(1)  All changes in use or increases in the density of the final development plan or campus master plan must be approved by the city council, under the procedures authorized by this UDC for the amendment of the zoning map. 
(2)  All other changes that do not qualify for administrative approval pursuant to section 21-8-701, must be approved by the city council under the procedures authorized for final development plan or campus master plan approval. 
(d)  Recordation of amendments. Any changes that are approved for the final development plan or campus master plan must be recorded as amendments to the recorded copy of the final development plan or campus master plan. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-308. - Enforcement of development schedule. 
(a)  Generally. From time to time the planning commission shall compare the actual development accomplished in the various planned unit developments or campuses with the approved tentative development schedules. 
(b)  Revocation or extension of approval. If the owner or owners of property in the planned unit developments or campuses have failed to meet the approved development schedule, the commission may initiate proceedings to revoke the approved final development plan or campus master plan. Upon recommendation of the planning commission and for good cause shown by the property owner, the city council may extend the limits of the development schedule. 
(c)  Assurances for common open space. The city council may require adequate assurance, in a form and manner which it approves, that the common open space shown in the final development plan will be provided and developed. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-309. - Control of development following completion. 
(a)  Enforceability. Unless the subject property is owned by the State of Colorado, the provisions of a final development plan or campus master plan relating to the use of land and the location of common open space shall run in favor of the city and shall be enforceable at law or in equity by the city without limitation on any power or regulation otherwise granted by law. 
(b)  Certificate of completion for planned unit development. 
(1)  Timing. The administrator shall issue a certificate certifying the completion of the planned unit development, and the city clerk shall note the issuance of the certificate on the approved final development plan. 
(2)  Effect. After the certificate of completion has been issued, the use of the land and the construction, modification or alteration of any buildings or structures within the planned development will be principally controlled by the approved final development plan. Where the final development plan is silent as to a particular matter addressed by this UDC, this UDC shall apply unless the administrator finds that such application would collaterally prevent the exercise of rights granted by the final development plan. 
(3)  Subsequent amendment. After the certificate of completion has been issued, no changes may be made in the approved final development plan except upon application to the appropriate agency as follows: 
a.  The administrator may approve changes to single-family detached and duplex buildings as provided in Article IV, Lot, Building, and Structure Standards. 
b.  The planning commission may approve the minor extension, alteration, or modification of existing buildings or structures if the extension, alteration, or modification is consistent with the purposes and intent of the final development plan and does not increase any dimension of a building or structure by more than ten (10) percent. 
c.  The city council may approve uses that are not authorized by the approved final development plan, but otherwise may be allowed in the planned unit development as a use by right, by limited use approval, or by conditional use approval in the underlying zone in which the planned development is located. 
(c)  Restoration of damaged buildings or structures. A building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance with the final development plan or campus master plan unless an amendment to the final development plan or campus master plan is approved in accordance with this article. 
(d)  Changes of use or dimensions of open space; other changes. Changes in the use or dimensions of common space, and all other changes not listed in this section, may be authorized only by an amendment to the final development plan or campus master plan approved by the city council, which shall be processed in the same manner as a new final development plan. 
(e)  No effect on covenants. No changes in the final development plan or campus master plan that are approved under this section are to be considered as a waiver of the covenants limiting the use of land, buildings, structures, and improvements within the area of the planned unit development. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 8-4. - ANNEXATION AND DISCONNECTION 
 
Sec. 21-8-401. - Annexation and disconnection procedure. 
All annexation of unincorporated territory to the city shall comply with the requirements and procedures set out in the Municipal Annexation Act, C.R.S. § 31-12-101, et seq., as amended from time to time. Any disconnection of incorporated territory from the city shall be done in accordance with C.R.S. §§ 31-12-501 to 503 thereof, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-402. - Required annexation agreement. 
(a)  Generally. Except as to an annexation of an enclave without the consent of the property owner or owners, or as to an annexation upon election, the requirements of this division and any additional conditions determined in the discretion of the city council shall be contained in a written annexation agreement to be executed by the land owner and developer (if applicable) prior to final city council action on the annexation. 
(b)  Conditions. In addition to any conditions imposed in the discretion of the city council, the following items shall be addressed in annexation agreement unless specifically waived in the annexation agreement: 
(1)  Floodplain. The city may require that upon annexation, any area of land that is situated within an area of special flood hazard shall be dedicated to the city or protected from development by an appropriate conservation easement. 
(2)  Water rights. If the subject property will be connected to the city's water system, the annexation agreement shall contain a description of the water rights that are appurtenant to the property to be annexed, a warranty of merchantable title, and an agreement to convey such water rights as the city chooses to have conveyed. Upon the approval of both parties, the annexation agreement may provide for the lease-back of such water for a stated annual rental until the property is developed. In the absence of water rights associated with the property to be annexed in an amount or type sufficient to offset the estimated increased water usage of the property at the time of development the City may require the Applicant to provide water rights or payment of an amount to offset such estimated usage as determined by the city. 
(3)  Extensions of utility services and public improvements. The city may require the applicant to: 
a.  Pay all costs for design and construction of all public improvements and utility services necessary to serve the subject property, including but not limited to, roads, curbs, gutters, sanitary and drainage sewers, water, street lights, electricity, telephone, gas, and cable television service all in accordance with applicable city, public utility company, or service provider standards and specifications; 
b.  Dedicate to the city, public utility company, or service provider (as applicable) without charge, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances that may be inconsistent with the easement, those easements or rights-of-way that are necessary for installation and maintenance of said utility and service lines and other public improvements (including public streets and trails), and in addition shall convey the public improvements to the appropriate entity upon completion and acceptance of the improvements. 
(4)  Public dedications. In addition to those dedications required in subsection (3)b. of this section, the city may require the applicant to dedicate, without charge and free and clear of any liens and encumbrances, such real property as is required to provide for public uses that will be needed in the annexed area (e.g., parks, public schools, utility facilities, etc.). 
(5)  Title insurance. For real estate that will be dedicated to the city, the applicant shall: 
a.  Provide evidence of the status of title in the form of a title insurance commitment by a title insurance company acceptable to the city; and 
b.  Upon acceptance of the status of title by the city, shall insure title in the city on a policy form acceptable to city, in an amount designated by the administrator, which amount shall be reasonably calculated to cover the actual value to city of the affected real estate after the improvements are completed. 
(c)  Annexation handbook. The city council may approve an annexation handbook by resolution. The annexation handbook may include additional requirements for annexation, and may include standard forms for petitions, resolutions, ordinances, and agreements related to annexation. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-403. - Approval criteria. 
All annexations shall be reviewed for compliance with the following criteria. However, annexation is a discretionary legislative act. The city shall never be compelled to annex, unless otherwise required by state law, even if all these approval criteria have been satisfied. 
(1)  The proposed annexation is in compliance with the Municipal Annexation Act of 1965 (CRS § 31-12-101, et seq., as amended from time to time). 
(2)  The annexation implements or does not frustrate the comprehensive plan, and the best interests of the city would be served by annexation of the subject property. 
(3)  The property is capable of being integrated into the city and developed in compliance with all applicable provisions of this UDC. 
(4)  At the time any development of the property proposed to be annexed is completed, there will be capacity to adequately serve residents of such area with all necessary utilities and facilities. 
(5)  4-7, 9 of Annexation Handbook (p.19). 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-404. - Zoning of annexed property. 
(a)  Generally. Zoning of land in the process of annexation may be done in accordance with the procedure and notice requirements of this division. The proposed zoning amendment shall not be passed on final reading prior to the date when the annexation ordinance is passed on final reading, but the ordinance annexing the property may also zone the property. If the zoning process is commenced prior to the effective date of the annexation ordinance, the legal protest area for rezoning shall be determined solely on geographic location, irrespective of whether the land in such legal protest area is within or without or partly within and partly without the boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Application of UDC. Any area annexed shall be brought under the provisions of this chapter and the map thereunder within ninety (90) days from the effective date of the annexation ordinance, irrespective of any legal review which may be instituted challenging the annexation. During such 90-day period, or such portion thereof as is required to zone the territory, the city shall refuse to issue any building permit for any portion of all of the newly annexed area. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-405. - Execution of annexation agreement; recordation of approval. 
(a)  Annexation agreement. Following approval of an annexation or conditional approval of an annexation with all conditions being agreed to, the annexation agreement, which shall have all conditions of approval expressly noted therein, shall be signed by the mayor, and shall be attested by the city clerk. 
(b)  Recording of ordinance and map. 
(1)  The city shall file: 
a.  One (1) copy of the annexation map with the original annexation ordinance with the city clerk; 
b.  Three (3) certified copies of the annexation ordinance and map with the Alamosa County Clerk and Recorder, which shall record one (1) copy and distribute the other copies as provided in C.R.S. § 31-12-113(2). 
(2)  The applicant shall pay all required recording fees, and it shall be the applicant's responsibility to ensure that such recording was successfully completed. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 8-5. - STANDARDIZED PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 21-8-501. - Standardized review process. 
(a)  Generally. The standard development approval procedures of this division apply to all applications for approvals or permits that are set out in div. 8-2, permits and approvals. 
(b)  Process. The approval procedures set out in section 21-8-503 to section 21-8-512, inclusive, are undertaken in sequence until an application is considered and decided by the designated decision-maker for the type of application at issue. Table 21-8-501(b)(1), Standardized Procedures, lists the approval steps that are required, based on the decision-maker. Figure 21-8-501(b)(2), Standardized Procedures, illustrates the flow of application processing. 
Table 21-8-501(b)(1) 
STANDARDIZED PROCEDURES 
	Decision-Maker 
Process Step 1 	Administrator 	Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Adjustment 	City Council 
21-8-503 	Required Unless Waived by Administrator 	Required 	Required 
21-8-504 	Required 	Required 	Required 
21-8-505 	Required 	Required 	Required 
21-8-506 	Required 	Required 	Required 
21-8-507 	Required 	Required 	Required 
21-8-508 	Required 	Required 	Required 
21-8-509 	Required 	Required 	Required 
21-8-510 	Referrals may be required by Administrator if nature or location of application justifies referral 	Required 	Required 
21-8-511 	Not Required 	Required 	Required for decisions 
21-8-512 	Not Required 	Required 	Required for decisions and ratifications 
TABLE NOTE: 
1 The references in this column are to the Sections of this Division that describe the process step. 
 
(c)  Special review types. The communications uses that are listed in Table 21-37(a), Utility and Communications Land Use Table, are subject to the standardized review procedures, as modified by section 21-8-521, special procedures for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
FIGURE 21-8-501(b)(2)
STANDARDIZED PROCEDURES 
  
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-502. - Ex parte communications. 
(a)  Generally. It is the policy and practice of the city to decide applications only on the merits presented in the application, on-record public comments, and at public hearings (if public hearings are required). Therefore, ex parte communications are not allowed. 
(b)  Timing. The prohibition on ex parte communications begins on the date of application and ends when the appeal period for an issued development order has expired. 
(c)  Inadvertent communications. 
(1)  It is not always possible to prevent ex parte communications. Elected and appointed officials who hear applications required by this UDC shall not privately discuss the merits of a pending application or appeal. 
(2)  If a communication is received outside of the record (e.g., it is not in the application, agency comments, or public comments, nor was it presented at a noticed public hearing), then the official shall disclose the communication, including the speaker and the substance of the communication, on the record of the public hearing before the application is heard. 
(3)  The decision-maker or recommending body must base its decision only on the evidence presented on the record. The contents of the ex parte communication shall not be considered part of the record for decision-making unless the information in the communication is also presented at the hearing (other than through the required disclosure). 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-503. - Pre-application meeting. 
(a)  Generally. A pre-application meeting is an opportunity for the potential applicant to meet with city staff before filing an application, in order to: 
(1)  Identify the applicable review procedures and likely timelines; 
(2)  Review preliminary materials and identify potential issues and related information requirements; and 
(3)  Identify what fees will be due, including whether an escrow payment will be required for professional consultant review. 
(b)  When required. A pre-application meeting is required for all application types, except permits for signs, home occupations, and cottage industries. Informal meetings may be scheduled prior to a pre-application meeting, at the discretion of the administrator. 
(c)  Meeting logistics. 
(1)  The administrator is authorized, but not required, to establish a regular schedule for pre-application meetings. 
(2)  Pre-application meetings may be conducted in person, by telephone, or by internet-based communication tools, as may be agreed between the potential applicant and the administrator. 
(d)  Meeting materials. The potential applicant shall bring to (or submit prior to) the pre-application meeting sufficient supporting materials to explain, as applicable to the type of application to be submitted: 
(1)  For all applications: 
a.  The location of the project; 
b.  The proposed uses (in general terms); 
c.  The relationship of the proposal to existing development; and 
d.  Any other conditions or items that the potential applicant believes are relevant to the processing of the application. 
(2)  For applications that involve new construction: 
a.  The proposed arrangement of buildings, parking, access points, open spaces, and drainage facilities (including water quality and stormwater detention facilities); 
b.  The general locations and extent of natural or man-made hazards, irrigation ditches, open water, floodplains, and floodways on and adjacent to the subject property; and 
c.  For subdivisions, the proposed general lot layout. 
(3)  For applications that involve renovation, rehabilitation, or re-use of existing buildings: 
a.  A brief history of the building; and 
b.  The number of square feet of floor area affected by the application. 
(4)  The administrator may request that the applicant bring completed application forms (in draft form) for the types of permits being sought. 
(e)  Summary. Upon request by the potential applicant, within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the pre-application meeting, the administrator shall deliver to the applicant: 
(1)  A checklist of submittal materials that will be necessary for the type(s) of application(s) sought; and 
(2)  A copy of the city's application fee schedule. 
(f)  Courtesy presentations. At the pre-application meeting, a potential applicant may request an opportunity to make a courtesy presentation of a proposed development concept or conceptual subdivision map in a design charrette process. Attendees may include appropriate staff, referral agencies, design professionals, and other persons identified by the administrator or the potential applicant. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-504. - Application. 
(a)  Generally. Every application for development approval required by this UDC shall be submitted on a form approved by the administrator, along with the corresponding application fee (fees are established by resolution of the city council). Unless waived by the administrator, all applications shall include electronic versions of all attachments in a format approved by the administrator. 
(b)  Forms. 
(1)  The administrator shall promulgate and periodically revise, as necessary, forms for each type of application required by this UDC. Minimum application requirements and provisions for waiving application requirements may be provided in an appendix to this UDC. 
(2)  Application forms shall include the specific information that is required to process each type of application. The specific information requirements shall be established and periodically revised by the Administrator, and have the purpose of facilitating: 
a.  The evaluation of applications for compliance with the standards of this UDC; and 
b.  The administration of this UDC. 
(3)  The administrator is authorized to establish a standardized format for each type of required submittal, and to allow deviations from the format in instances where the administrator finds that an alternative format would provide for more efficient review. 
(c)  Schedule. The administrator is authorized, but not required, to establish regular intake days or times for any or all classifications of applications for development approval, except sign permits and administrative appeals. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-505. - Application fees and escrows. 
(a)  Generally. Fees shall be charged to offset the cost of application processing (including any application for amendments of existing approvals), reviews, public notices, hearings, and recordkeeping. Application fees to be charged by the city shall be established, from time to time, by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(b)  Recording fees. Recording fees of the Alamosa County Clerk and Recorder's Office shall be paid to the county by the applicant at the time of any required recording. 
(c)  Referral agency fees. The applicant may be required to pay any fees assessed by referral agencies in advance of their review and comment. Failure to obtain comments from referral agencies due to failure to pay review fees may result in delay or denial of an application. 
(d)  Escrow for consultant review. 
(1)  Consultant review authorized. 
a.  The administrator is authorized to retain professional consultants at the applicant's expense to assist in the review of proposed development. 
b.  The administrator may make an initial determination as to the use of consultants at the time of the pre-application meeting, and may revise the determination at the time of application if new or changed information in the application materials justifies the revision. 
(2)  Initial escrow payment. 
a.  If the administrator determines that an application will require review by professional consultants, then the applicant shall execute an escrow agreement in a form approved by the city attorney, and make an initial escrow payment in an amount sufficient to cover the estimated review costs. 
b.  The administrator shall provide the applicant with a preliminary estimate of professional consultant review fees at a time established during the pre-application meeting by agreement with the applicant. Alternatively, the administrator may advise the applicant regarding the amount of a fixed-fee that has been established in advance for the type of application presented. 
(3)  Use of escrow payment. The city may draw upon the escrow to pay the fees and expenses of professional consultants retained by the City to review the application. 
(4)  Additional escrow funds. The administrator may require additional escrow funds to be paid for additional services related to the application, should they become necessary. If a balance is due at the time an application is approved, it shall be paid by the applicant as a condition of approval. 
(5)  Return of escrow funds. Escrow funds shall be returned to the applicant as follows: 
a.  If the administrator decides not to use consultants, then escrow funds shall be returned to the applicant within thirty (30) days of the decision. 
b.  If the applicant withdraws the application, then the administrator shall notify the consultants to stop work within twenty-four (24) hours of the withdrawal. The administrator shall then return the escrow to the applicant, less the amount required to pay the consultant for work actually performed. 
c.  When the application is decided, any positive escrow balance shall be returned to the applicant within sixty (60) days. 
(6)  Account reports. Applicants shall be provided with a monthly accounting of the use of escrow funds. 
(7)  Fixed-fee consultant review. The administrator is authorized to establish: 
a.  A roster of consultants that are pre-qualified to conduct reviews of various types; and 
b.  For routine application types with predictable review fees, a schedule of fixed-fees for consultant review. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-506. - Completeness review. 
(a)  Generally. The administrator shall review all submitted applications for completeness. A complete application includes all of the materials required on the application forms, materials requested at the pre-application conference, any required professional certifications, and all fees and escrows that are required for application processing. 
(b)  Schedule. Generally, all applications shall be reviewed for completeness within seven (7) calendar days after an application is submitted. 
(c)  Incomplete applications. 
(1)  Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant, along with any fee included with the application, with a written explanation that describes in general terms the materials that must be submitted in order to complete the application. 
(2)  An application that does not include the applicable processing fee shall not be considered complete. 
(3)  Incomplete applications are not considered filed. 
(d)  Complete applications. Complete applications shall be processed according to the applicable procedures of this article. 
(e)  Waiver of application information requirements. The administrator may waive any of the information requirements of a particular application type if it is obvious to the administrator that they do not relate to the processing of the application for which the waiver is requested. The administrator may not waive application fees. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-507. - Sufficiency review. 
(a)  Generally. All applications shall be technically sufficient for review, meaning that: 
(1)  The application materials are internally consistent and are presented as required by this UDC and the applicable application forms. 
(2)  Materials are prepared by qualified professionals (where such qualifications are required), and signatures and certifications are present, if required. 
(3)  The application materials are technically sufficient (e.g., legal descriptions and calls and distances on surveys describe closed polygons within acceptable tolerances, calculations that are provided are performed according to the methodologies set out in this UDC, etc.) to demonstrate compliance with applicable standards of this UDC. 
(b)  Insufficient applications. 
(1)  An application is insufficient if it does not meet the standards of subsection (a), above. 
(2)  If an application is determined to be insufficient, the administrator shall notify the applicant and provide a written explanation regarding the materials that must be submitted, or revisions that must be made, in order to continue processing the application. 
(3)  The applicant shall provide the materials or revisions that are required to make the application sufficient within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice. 
(4)  If an applicant fails to submit the required materials within the time period specified in subsection (b)(3), above, or if the applicant fails to submit a sufficient application after three rounds of review, then the application fee shall be retained and the application shall be returned to the applicant as insufficient. 
(c)  Sufficient applications. Technically sufficient applications shall be processed according to the applicable standards and procedures of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-508. - Stale applications. 
(a)  Generally. This section is intended to extinguish applications that become stale due to inaction by the applicant. 
(b)  Expiration of stale applications. When an action by the applicant is required for further processing of an application (for example, if revisions are requested after agency referrals), the application shall become void: 
(1)  Six (6) months after the date that the action is requested if the applicant either fails to take action or fails to request an extension of time pursuant to subsection (c) below; or 
(2)  Upon failure to timely provide requested information to make an application technically sufficient pursuant to section 21-8-507. 
(c)  Extension of time. The time for expiration of an application may be extended by up to six (6) additional months upon written request of the applicant before the end of the period set out in subsection (b), above. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-509. - Administrative review. 
(a)  Generally. Upon determination that an application is complete and sufficient, the administrator shall cause the application to be reviewed for technical compliance with all applicable requirements of this UDC, as follows: 
(1)  Appropriate city staff or consultants shall review the application; and 
(2)  The application shall be promptly referred to applicable referral agencies and individuals for review and comment pursuant to section 21-8-510. 
(b)  Recommended revisions. 
(1)  The administrator shall provide comments from city staff or consultants (collectively, "staff comments"). The staff comments shall provide staff or consultant input and address or include comments by referral agencies and interested individuals. The applicant shall revise and resubmit the application with appropriate changes based on staff comments, and with responses to staff comments that did not result in changes to the application. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the re-submittal, the administrator may refer the application to referral agencies again if the changes substantially affect the interests of the agency in ways not anticipated by the agency's original comments (or lack thereof), or require the agency's technical expertise for appropriate review. 
(3)  The re-submittal shall not require an application fee unless both of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The revisions are inappropriate or incomplete; and 
b.  Repeated failure to address comments requires more than three (3) rounds of revisions. 
(c)  Administrative recommendation, decision, or referral. Promptly after determination that a complete application addresses the comments and recommendations provided pursuant to subsection (b), above (or, after finding that no revisions will be required): 
(1)  If the application is for an administrative approval or permit, then the administrator shall: 
a.  Approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application, as appropriate; or 
b.  Upon a determination that the development, as proposed, may have material impacts on neighboring properties or city resources that are unusual in kind or degree, or that there is material potential for disagreement regarding whether the application complies with the standards of this UDC, the administrator may refer the application to the planning commission for review and recommendation and city council for decision, according to the applicable standards of this UDC. 
(2)  If the application is for a public hearing approval or permit, then the Administrator shall make a recommendation regarding the application and forward the recommendation and the application materials and referral comments to the next body that will consider it for further recommendation or approval. 
(d)  Meeting logistics. 
(1)  If the application is for a public hearing approval or permit, then the administrator shall set the application on the agenda of the next body that will consider the application. 
(2)  Generally, the application shall be heard during the next regular meeting of the body which meets the following two (2) conditions: 
a.  There is sufficient time to meet applicable public notice requirements; and 
b.  There is available room on the agenda. 
(3)  The administrator shall coordinate with recommending and decision-making bodies to fix reasonable times for hearings. Said bodies are authorized to convene special meetings to hear applications as they determine appropriate. 
(4)  The administrator, or a designee, shall notify the applicant regarding the time and place of the public hearings. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-510. - Referrals. 
(a)  Generally. Applications may be referred for additional review by agencies or consultants according to the procedures set out in this section. 
(b)  Inter-jurisdictional referrals. 
(1)  As part of the review process, the city may seek review and comment by referral agencies that have expertise in the subject matter impacted by the application, that have jurisdiction over one or more aspects of the proposed development, or whose operations will likely be affected by the proposed development. Referral agency comments are advisory to the city. 
(2)  The administrator may refer an application to any agency, jurisdiction, ditch company, land management entity, utility, or department that the administrator determines is likely to be materially affected by the application. The administrator's determination regarding referrals is not appealable. 
(3)  The agency referral period is twenty-one (21) calendar days, which can be extended by up to thirty (30) additional days by mutual consent of the applicant and the administrator. 
(4)  Failure of an agency to respond within the prescribed time period (or extended period) is interpreted as consent by that agency to the contents of the application. However: 
a.  Such consent does not waive the authority of agencies which have concurrent jurisdiction with the city; and 
b.  Such consent is not implied if the applicant fails to pay the agency's required review fees. 
(c)  Consultant review. Upon notice to the applicant, the administrator may refer the application to consultants selected by the city, in order to obtain technical review and recommendations. The cost of such referrals shall be borne by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-511. - Public notice. 
(a)  Generally. For applications that require public notice, public notice shall be provided according to the standards of this section. 
(b)  Contents of public notice. Public notice shall include the following elements: 
(1)  The phrase "Public Notice" at the top of the notice. 
(2)  A brief description of the type of application (e.g., rezoning from zone X to zone Y). 
(3)  The date, time, and place of the hearing. 
(4)  A brief summary of what the applicant is requesting (e.g., approval of a ten thousand (10,000) square foot commercial retail development). 
(5)  The physical address of the subject property, or if an address is not available, a location map of the property or a statement that the legal description is on file with the administrator. 
(6)  A notice that interested persons may obtain more information from the administrator. 
(7)  Contact information for the administrator. 
(c)  Types of public notice. Table 21-8-511(c), Types of Public Notice, sets out standardized requirements for publication, posting, and mail notice that are used for different application types and different phases of the application process. The types of notice that are set out in the table are used to establish notice requirements for each type of application in Table 21-8-511(d), Required Public Notice by Application Type. 
Table 21-8-511(c) 
TYPES OF PUBLIC NOTICE 
Type of Notice 	When Required 	Frequency or Duration 	Other Requirements 
Publication (PUB) 
PUB.1 	At least 14 days before public hearing 	1 publication 	NA 
PUB.2 	At least 7 days before public hearing 	1 publication 	NA 
Posting (PO) 
PO.1 	At least 7 days before public hearing 	Post until public hearing commences 	NA 
Mail (ML) 
ML.1 (radius or area) 	At least 7 days before public hearing 	1 mailing 	Mail notice must be sent to all property owners within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property. 
 
(d)  Type of public notice required by application type. Table 21-8-511(d), Required Public Notice by Application Type, sets out the notices that are required at each state of processing for each type of application for which notice is required. 
Table 21-8-511(d) 
REQUIRED PUBLIC NOTICE BY APPLICATION TYPE 
	Form of Required Public Notice for 
Application Type 	Board or Commission Review 	Council Review 
Use-Oriented Permits and Approvals 
Conditional Use Permit 	PO.1; (PUB.1 if vested rights are requested) 	N/A 
Rezoning 	PUB.1; PO.1; ML.1 	PUB.2; PO.1 
Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map Amendment 	PUB.1; PO.1 	N/A 
Site Development (Layout) 
Preliminary Development Plan 	PUB.1; PO.1; ML.1 (all owners within proposed zone, and all owners within 300 ft. of proposed boundaries) 	PUB.1; PO.1; ML.1 (all owners within proposed zone, and all owners within 300 ft. of proposed boundaries) 
Final Development Plan 	PUB.1; PO.1; ML.1 (all owners within proposed zone, and all owners within 300 ft. of proposed boundaries) 	N/A 
Relief 
Variance 	PO.1; ML.1 	N/A 
Administrative Appeal 	PUB.2; PO.1 	N/A 
Administration 
Development Agreement 	By type of approval associated with development agreement; 
PUB.1 if vested rights are requested 
Vested Rights 	As provided in Division 8-6, Vested Property Rights 
 
(e)  Standards for required notices. 
(1)  Publication. Published notice shall be printed in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Alamosa. 
(2)  Posting. Posted notice shall be on a sign in a form approved by the city. 
(3)  Mail. Mailed notice shall be delivered via first class U.S. Mail. 
(f)  Optional notices. 
(1)  Electronic mail. Electronic mail notice may be delivered to an opt-in distribution list that is created for the purpose of notifying people about applications for approvals and permits in the city. Electronic mail notice shall include the subject line "PUBLIC NOTICE OF PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT," and the statement in the body of the e-mail that "Electronic mail notice is provided as a courtesy to opt-in subscribers. Failure of an e-mail communication to reach a subscriber does not constitute failure of public notice." 
(2)  Internet. Internet notice may be posted on the official web site of the city, on a page or pages that are designated for such notices. However, internet notice is also provided as a courtesy and is not official notice. Therefore, failure of internet notice shall not constitute a failure of public notice. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-512. - Public meetings and public hearings. 
(a)  Generally. Public meetings and public hearings shall be carried out in accordance with the procedural rules of the body conducting the meeting or hearing. 
(b)  City council ratification. 
(1)  Approvals that require city council ratification shall be placed on the next available consent agenda of the city council after the planning commission meeting at which the approval was granted. 
(2)  Prior to the council meeting, the administrator shall forward the materials that were considered by the planning commission and a summary of the decision by the planning commission to the city council. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any code or policy provision to the contrary, approvals may be removed from the consent agenda only by majority vote of the quorum. If an item is removed from the consent agenda, the city council may ask questions of the administrator, and may thereafter ratify the decision or to place it on the next available city council agenda for public hearing. 
(4)  The administrator shall promptly notify the applicant regarding the city council's decision. 
(5)  Council review of an approval at public hearing shall be de novo. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-513. - Continuances and withdrawal. 
(a)  Continuances. Requests for continuance by the applicant of any proceeding called for in this UDC may be granted at the discretion of the body holding the public meeting or public hearing. If granted, the Applicant shall pay all additional costs associated with the rescheduling of the proceeding. 
(b)  Withdrawal. Any application may be withdrawn, either in writing or on the record, prior to or during the meeting or hearing at which the application is considered, provided that it is withdrawn before official action is taken on the application. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-514. - Successive applications. 
(a)  Generally. It is the policy of the city not to hear successive applications for the same approval or permit after a substantially similar application is denied. The limitations of this section prevent the consideration of successive applications. 
(b)  Time required between substantially similar applications. If an application for a permit or approval is denied, a substantially similar application will not be accepted for: 
(1)  Six (6) months from the date of denial in the case of administrative permits; and 
(2)  Twelve (12) months from the date of denial for all other permits or approvals. 
(c)  Exceptions to successive application restrictions. The administrator may allow exceptions to this section if there has been a material change of circumstances that justifies consideration of a substantially similar application. By way of example and not limitation: 
(1)  If a spacing requirement was the reason for the denial, and the use from which spacing is required moved away; or 
(2)  If a subsequent amendment to this UDC now allows for approval of the application. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-515. - Recording of approvals. 
(a)  Generally. The following permits and approvals shall be recorded in the public records of Alamosa County at the applicant's expense: 
(1)  Annexation agreements, maps, and ordinances; 
(2)  Final plats; 
(3)  Preliminary development plans; 
(4)  Final development plans; 
(5)  Conditional use approvals; 
(6)  Development agreements, public improvements agreements, and reimbursement agreements. 
(b)  Timing. 
(1)  Upon approval of a final plat, preliminary development plan, or final development plan, the applicant shall provide final mylar drawings to the city clerk within ninety (90) days for execution by the city and recording. 
(2)  The final mylar drawings shall include: 
a.  All required signatures except those to be provided by the city; and 
b.  All modifications that were required as conditions of approval. 
(3)  Failure of an applicant to timely submit a conforming plan to the city clerk shall, upon the enactment of a resolution by the city council finding that the submittal was untimely, void the approval. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-516. - Effect of approvals. 
(a)  Generally. It is the intent of the city that development approved pursuant to this UDC be carried out in a timely manner pursuant to the specifications, terms, and conditions of approval; and that the steps within each approval process be carried out with diligence. 
(b)  Effect of approval or permit. 
(1)  Approval of an application means that the city consents to the particular use, plan, or other specific activity for which the approval was granted. Physical development of land may require a sequence of related (and increasingly detailed) approvals. 
(2)  Supplemental materials that are provided in support of an approval become part of the approval (e.g., elevations, lists of building materials, etc.) unless otherwise noted in the approval itself. 
(3)  Approvals and permits may be transferred to a subsequent owner of the property for which the approval or permit was issued, unless the approval or permit is specifically designated as non-transferable by condition of approval. Transferred permits shall continue to be valid for their full original terms, and the transferee may apply for an amendment to the approval or permit in the same manner as the original applicant. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-517. - Duration of approvals. 
(a)  Administrative approvals. The administrative approvals described in Table 21-8-202(b), Administrative Approvals and Permits, except a final plat or development agreement, shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of approval. 
(b)  Discretionary approvals. Discretionary approvals will lapse and be of no further force or effect if a complete application for the next stage of approval is not filed before the deadline set out in this subsection: 
(1)  The discretionary approvals described in Table 21-8-203(b), Discretionary Approvals and Permits, shall lapse as follows: 
a.  One (1) year from date of approval: 
1.  Conditional use permit. 
2.  Variance. 
b.  Two (2) years from date of approval: 
1.  Certificate of designation. 
2.  Preliminary plat. 
3.  Preliminary development plan. 
c.  Three (3) years from date of approval: 
1.  Final development plan. 
(c)  Development agreements. A development agreement is valid for the term set out in the development agreement. 
(d)  Approvals that do not lapse. Rezonings, vacations or abandonments of easements or rights-of-way, UDC text amendments, comprehensive plan amendments, recorded final plats, and administrative appeals do not lapse. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-518. - Extensions of approvals. 
(a)  Generally. The term of permits and approvals may be extended by written request according to the standards and procedures of this section. 
(b)  Timing of application for extension. Expired permits and approvals cannot be extended. Written requests for extensions shall be received not later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the permit or approval. Untimely requests for extensions will not be granted unless it is demonstrated that extraordinary circumstances (e.g., an unusual severe weather event) justify the request. 
(c)  Extensions for extraordinary circumstances. The city council may, by resolution, extend the term of all permits and approvals city-wide or in designated areas of the city in response to extraordinary circumstances, such as flood, wildfire, tornado, or other natural or man-made disaster which makes it temporarily infeasible to commence or continue with construction. The period of such extensions shall be determined by the city council. 
(d)  Administrative extensions. Unless otherwise provided in the permit or approval, the administrator may grant one extension of any permit or approval for a period not to exceed the original term or eighteen (18) months, whichever is shorter. Such extensions may be granted upon timely written request with good cause shown. 
(e)  Extensions after hearing. 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided in the permit or approval, a hearing is required for: 
a.  Extensions for terms that are longer than those which can be granted by the administrator pursuant to subsection (d), above; and 
b.  Second (and subsequent) extensions. 
(2)  Extensions of discretionary permits and approvals pursuant to this subsection shall be heard by the body that granted the original approval. Extensions of administrative permits and approvals pursuant to this subsection shall be heard by the board of adjustment. 
(3)  Extensions may be granted after hearing if it is demonstrated that: 
a.  There is good and reasonable cause for the request; and 
b.  The applicant has provided reasonable assurances that it will perform (or cause to be performed) the work authorized by the permit or approval within the extended term. 
(f)  Extensions pursuant to permit or approval terms. If a method of extension is provided within a permit, or approval, or related development agreement between the applicant and the city, then such method of extension shall supersede this section with respect to said permit or approval. 
(g)  Effect of appeals, litigation, or mediation. 
(1)  If there is an appeal, litigation, or mediation during the time period that limits the applicant's ability to use or develop land pursuant to a permit or approval granted by the city, then the term of the permit or approval shall be tolled for the duration of the appeal, litigation, or mediation, and the date shall be recalculated upon conclusion of the appeal, litigation, or mediation. 
(2)  The new expiration date shall be established by adding the number of days that the approval would have remained valid before the appeal, litigation, or mediation commenced to the date the appeal, litigation, or mediation was concluded by: 
a.  The expiration of the subsequent appeal period after final judgment or order in the initial appeal or litigation, or, if no appeal is available, after issuance of the final judgment or order; or 
b.  The termination of mediation by resolution of the conflict or impasse. 
(3)  This subsection does not apply to litigation which is related to enforcement of a violation of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-519. - Correction of approvals. 
(a)  Generally. Permits and approvals may be corrected pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Correction of recorded final plats. If it is discovered that there is a minor survey or drafting error in a recorded final plat, a request, in writing, to record a corrected plat shall be submitted to the administrator. The request shall be accompanied with an affidavit witnessed by a professional land surveyor. The surveyor witnessing this corrected plat shall be an impartial observer having no personal interest in the platted land. The administrator shall thereupon record the corrected plat at the applicant's expense. 
(c)  Correction of scrivener's errors. Development approvals other than final plats may be corrected by the administrator or upon application to the administrator as follows: 
(1)  Generally. The administrator may approve an application to reform a scrivener's error in a development approval, including an error in an application or notice, which error causes the permit or approval to inaccurately reflect the decision-maker's intent, and where it is demonstrated that: 
a.  The correction does not include a change of judgment, policy, or prior intent of the decision-maker; 
b.  The reformation of the permit or approval is essential to ensure that the documentation reflects the intent and decision of the decision-maker; 
c.  The record, including, but not limited to, the staff recommendation, minutes, and motion, evidences the clear intent of the decision-maker; 
d.  The substance of the decision was clearly evident at the time of the decision, and there was no intent to deceive the public or the decision-maker on the part of the current applicant at any time; 
e.  Failure to approve the reformation would lead to an unjust result; 
f.  The error in the development approval did not mislead anyone in a way that would cause them to be prejudiced by the reformation; and 
g.  Any errors related to public notice did not affect the legal sufficiency of the required notice. 
(2)  Correction within thirty (30) days. In the alternative, the administrator, within thirty (30) days of the decision on an application for development approval, may correct a clerical or scrivener's error in the development approval if: 
a.  The error is not related to public notice; 
b.  The error causes the approval, as written, to inaccurately reflect the clear decision of the decision-maker; and 
c.  The administrator promptly notifies the applicant and the decision-maker regarding the corrections. 
(d)  Effect on approval. A permit or approval that is modified pursuant to this section shall relate back to the date of the corrected approval, such that the effective date of the corrected language shall be deemed to be the same as the effective date of the original approval. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-520. - Vacation of easements, rights-of-way, or plats. 
(a)  Generally. Easements or rights-of-way that are granted to the city by deed, agreement, or final plat may be vacated as provided in this section. 
(b)  Administrative vacation. The administrator may vacate the city's interest in an easement or right-of-way if: 
(1)  The easement or right-of-way is not for roadway purposes; 
(2)  The city does not have a fee-simple interest in the right-of-way; 
(3)  The easement or right-of-way has not been put to use for its intended purpose; 
(4)  The easement or right-of-way is not necessary to provide services or non-vehicular access to property other than the subject property, or there are reasonable alternative ways to provide such services or public access; and 
(5)  The easement or right-of-way is intended to serve or provide non-vehicular access to development for which related approvals have lapsed or been abandoned. 
(c)  City council vacation. The city council may by ordinance vacate the city's interest in an easement or right-of-way, or vacate a plat, if it finds: 
(1)  The statutory requirements of C.R.S. § 43-2-301, et seq. are met if the easement or right-of-way is for roadway purposes, or if platted roadways are affected; 
(2)  The vacation does not conflict with adopted plans; 
(3)  The vacation does not landlock any parcel of land or restrict the access such that it is unreasonable or economically prohibitive; 
(4)  The vacation will not result in adverse impacts on the health, safety, or welfare of city residents and business owners, or reduce the quality of public facilities or public services (including emergency response services) provided to any parcel of land. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-521. - Special procedures for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  Generally. The procedures of this section apply to communications uses that are listed in Table 21-2-207(a), Utility and Communications Land Use Table. 
(b)  Shot Clock. The Federal Communications Commission has established mandatory time frames for review of different types of applications for the communications uses that are listed in Table 21-2-207(a), Utility and Communications Land Use Table. 
(1)  The "shot clock" commences at the time the application is filed, whether the application is complete or not. With respect to communications uses, subsection 21-8-507(b) and (c), are modified as follows: 
a.  The city shall respond to the applicant with regard to whether the application is complete within thirty (30) days after it is filed. The notice from the CITY shall specifically delineate all missing information, and specify the code provision, ordinance, application instruction, or other publicly-stated procedure that requirements the information. Such determination of incompleteness tolls the "shot clock." 
b.  Applications that are incomplete shall be retained by the city. 
c.  The city shall evaluate a resubmittal for completeness and respond to the applicant within ten (10) days. 
1.  If the city requests information that had previously been identified in the notice issued pursuant to subsection (c)(1)a., above, the "shot clock" shall be tolled again. 
2.  If the city requests additional information that was not identified in the notice, the shot clock shall continue to run. 
(2)  The "shot clock" concludes: 
a.  One hundred fifty (150) days after commencement for new installations that are regulated by 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7). 
b.  Ninety (90) days after commencement for substantial changes to existing installations (e.g., co-locations that are not subject to 47 U.S.C. § 1455). 
c.  Sixty (60) days after commencement for "eligible facilities" as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 1455. 
(3)  In addition to the tolling that occurs under subsection (c)(1), the "shot clock" may be tolled by agreement with the applicant. 
(c)  Approval of application. Approvals shall be in writing and shall specify all design elements that are intended to conceal the wireless telecommunications facility. 
(d)  Denial of application. Denials shall be in writing and shall specify the reasons for denial, including reference to substantial evidence in the record that supports the denial. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 8-6. - VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS 
 
Sec. 21-8-601. - Applications. 
(a)  Generally. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) below, an application for approval of a site-specific development plan, as well as the approval, conditional approval or denial of approval of the plan, shall be governed only by the land use regulations in effect at the time an application is submitted to the city. For the purposes of this Section, land use regulations include this UDC, as well as any zoning or development regulations that have previously been adopted that apply to the subject property and that remain in effect at the time of the application for approval of the plan. 
(b)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding the limitations contained in subsection (a) above, the city council may adopt a new or amended regulation when necessary for the immediate preservation of public health and safety and may enforce such regulation in relation to applications pending at the time such regulation is adopted. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-602. - Vested property rights; establishment. 
(a)  Site specific development plans. The following types of site-specific development plan approvals will establish vested property rights in accordance with Article 68, Title 24, C.R.S.: 
(1)  Final planned unit development ("PUD") plan. 
(2)  Final subdivision plat. 
(3)  Conditional use permit. 
(4)  Development agreement. 
(b)  Other approvals; additional vested development rights. A development agreement may provide for vesting of additional development rights, or for a longer vesting period than provided for in Article 68, Title 24, C.R.S. Such a development agreement may be part of a final PUD, final subdivision, or conditional use permit approval, or a development agreement may provide for vesting rights in additional types of site-specific development plans than those specified above, including but not limited to annexation agreements. 
(c)  Establishment of vested rights. A vested property right shall be deemed established with respect to any property upon the approval or conditional approval by resolution or ordinance of a site-specific development plan establishing vested right, following notice and public hearing. 
(d)  Effect of vested rights. A vested property right shall attach to and run with the subject property and shall confer upon the landowner the right to undertake and complete the development and use of said property under the terms and conditions of the site-specific development plan or development agreement, including any amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-603. - Notice of hearing and decision; form of approval. 
(a)  Generally. No site-specific development plan which establishes a vested property right shall be approved unless and until notice thereof has been given and a public hearing thereon has been conducted. 
(b)  Timing of notice of public hearing. At least fourteen (14) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Notice of said public hearing shall include language stating that the approval or conditional approval of the site-specific development plan will create a vested property right. 
(c)  Form of approval. Final approval from the city council shall be by ordinance or resolution. A site-specific development plan shall be deemed approved on the effective date of the approving ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-604. - Notice of final approval. 
(a)  Generally. Approval of vested rights shall be subject to all rights of referendum and judicial review; except that the period of time permitted by law for the exercise of such right to referendum or judicial review shall not begin to run until the date of publication, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, of the notice specified in this Section advising the general public of the site-specific development plan approval and creation of a vested property right pursuant to Title 24, Article 68, C.R.S. 
(b)  Notice of final approval. As soon as practicable following the date a site-specific development plan is approved, and not later than fourteen (14) days following such approval date, the city clerk shall cause a notice to be published advising the general public of the site-specific development plan approval and creation of a vested property right pursuant to Article 68, Title 24, C.R.S. Such notice shall be substantially in the following form: 
Notice is hereby given to the general public 
of the approval of a site-specific development plan, 
and the creation of a vested property right 
pursuant to Title 24, Article 68, C.R.S., 
pertaining to the following described property: 
[The property shall be described in the notice, 
and appended to said notice shall be the ordinance 
or resolution granting such approval.] 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-605. - Requirements of ordinance or resolution. 
Any ordinance or resolution approving a site-specific development plan shall, but not by way of limitation, include the following provisions, unless expressly exempted by the city council: 
(1)  The rights granted by the site-specific development plan shall remain vested for a period of three years (or such longer period as may be established in a development agreement) from the effective date of the approval. However, any failure to abide by any of the terms and conditions attendant to the approval shall result in the forfeiture of said vested property rights. Failure to properly record all plats and agreements required of the developers to be recorded by city ordinance shall also result in the forfeiture of said vested property rights. 
(2)  The approval granted hereby shall be subject to all rights of referendum and judicial review, except that the period of time permitted by law for the exercise of such rights shall not begin to run until the date of publication provided for in UDC § 21-8-604. 
(3)  Zoning that is not part of the site-specific development plan approved hereby shall not result in the creation of a vested property right. 
(4)  Nothing in this approval shall exempt the site-specific development plan from subsequent reviews and approvals required by this approval or the general rules, regulations and ordinances of the city, provided that such reviews and approvals are not inconsistent with this approval. 
(5)  The establishment of a vested property right shall not preclude the application of ordinances or regulations which are general in nature and are applicable to all property subject to land use regulations by the city, including but not limited to building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes. In this regard, as a condition of this site-specific development approval, the applicant shall abide by any and all such applicable building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes, unless an exemption therefrom is granted in writing. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-606. - No rights created. 
Nothing in this division is intended to create any vested property right other than those that are available to applicants pursuant to the provisions of the Vested Rights Statute (Article 68, Title 24, C.R.S.) In the event of the repeal or invalidation of the Vested Rights Statute, this division shall be deemed to be repealed and the provisions hereof no longer effective. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-607. - Exceptions. 
A vested property right, once established by this approval, shall preclude any zoning or land use action by the city or pursuant to an initiated measure which would alter, impair, prevent, diminish or otherwise delay the development or use of the property as set forth in the site-specific development plan, except: 
(1)  With the consent of the applicant; 
(2)  Upon the discovery of natural or man-made hazards on or in the immediate vicinity of the property, which hazards could not reasonably have been discovered at the time of this approval, and which hazards, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare; or 
(3)  To the extent that compensation is paid as provided in Article 68, Title 24, C.R.S. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 8-7. - ADMINISTRATIVE MODIFICATIONS, VARIANCES, AND ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS 
 
Sec. 21-8-701. - Administrative modifications. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of an administrative modification is to provide an efficient process for minor change to permits or approvals, including those related to site plans, preliminary plans, and planned unit developments, provided that the changes do not substantially alter the approved development parameters. 
(b)  Range of administrative flexibility. The items listed in this subsection qualify for an administrative amendment within the ranges specified. If an item does not qualify as an administrative amendment, it is considered a major change and must be processed in the same manner as a new application. The administrator may approve: 
(1)  Floor area. Up to a ten (10) percent increase in nonresidential floor area for any institutional, commercial or industrial development (including planned unit development). The increase is limited to hallways, stairways, restrooms, and storage, or a proven necessity for the operational safety of the project. An amended floor plan shall accompany the final application and be included as a part of the approved documents. 
(2)  Building height. An increase in building height up to twenty (20) percent, provided that adequate fire protection is available, and the height increase will not unreasonably affect single-family detached or duplex lots within one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(3)  Building spacing. A reduction up to ten (10) percent for the minimum distance between buildings within the development. However, the reduction shall not authorize a violation of applicable building or fire codes. 
(4)  Building setbacks. A reduction in building setbacks as provided in section 21-4-402, setback flexibility. 
(5)  Building footprints. 
a.  A ten (10) percent increase in the area of building footprints. However, this shall not reduce required open space or landscape surface to less than the minimum applicable requirements of this UDC (or approved planned unit development), nor reduce parking or setbacks, nor increase the maximum height or density from those approved. 
b.  A reduction in building footprints. 
c.  Relocation of building envelopes or footprints, provided that the relocation does not change any of development restrictions that are set out in the permit or approval, and an analysis of impacts to the originally approved drainage study demonstrate that there will be no material negative impact on drainage. 
(6)  Open space or landscape surface. An increase in open space or landscape surface. 
(7)  Public improvements. Changes to the specifications of public improvements, provided that the changes are consistent with current city requirements. 
(8)  Lighting, landscaping, trash disposal. Changes to lighting, landscaping, or trash disposal areas, provided that the changes are consistent with the requirements of this UDC. 
(c)  Specific exclusions. The following are not eligible for approval as an administrative modification under any circumstances: 
(1)  Addition of new land uses to the list of approved uses in a planned unit development; 
(2)  An increase in residential density; 
(3)  An application that requires additional right-of-way dedications, vacations of public improvements, or modification of an existing development agreement or improvements agreement; 
(4)  A transfer of density from one development phase to another, or from one site to another (where density by area or phase is specified on an approved development plan); 
(5)  Increases of building height of more than twenty (20) percent; and 
(6)  Subdivision related changes (such as lot lines, easements, rights-of-way, internal roadways, vacations and / or drainage systems) that require a replat or plat correction. 
(d)  Decision. 
(1)  The applicant shall submit required application materials, along with a letter of intent that details how the proposed modification meets the applicable amendment criteria set out in subsection (e), below. 
(2)  The administrator will make a determination as to the proposal's eligibility to be processed administratively. 
(3)  The administrator may refer any request for an administrative amendment to the planning commission for consideration at a regular meeting. The administrator will notify the applicant if it is determined that planning commission review will be required. 
(e)  Approval criteria. Administrative modifications shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The modification implements or does not reduce the potential for implementation of the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  The modification is consistent with the efficient development and preservation of the development approval or permit; 
(3)  The modification will not adversely affect reasonable development expectations or the use and enjoyment of adjacent land or the public interest; 
(4)  The modification is in keeping with the spirit and intent of this UDC and will not weaken the purposes of the regulations; and 
(5)  The modification will not adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(f)  Conditions. The administrator may impose conditions of approval that will secure substantially the objectives of the standard that is modified, and that will substantially mitigate potential adverse impacts on the environment or on adjacent properties, including but not limited to additional landscaping or buffering. 
(g)  Major modifications and amendments. Modifications and amendments that are not authorized by this Section shall be processed in the same manner as a new application for permit or approval. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-702. - Variances. 
(a)  Subdivision and planned unit development plan variances. The planning commission may authorize variances from provisions of this UDC that apply to a proposed subdivision or planned unit development plan in cases where, due to exceptional topographical conditions or other conditions peculiar to the subject property, an unnecessary hardship is placed on the applicant. Such variances shall not be granted if it would be detrimental to the public good or impair the intent and purposes of this UDC. The variance shall be in keeping with the intent of the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Other variances. The board of adjustment may grant or deny variances from the provisions of this UDC when: 
(1)  The strict application of this UDC would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon, the owner of such property; 
(2)  The relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this UDC; 
(3)  There are unique physical circumstances or conditions such as exceptional irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of this UDC, or by reason of exceptional topographic or other physical conditions, or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition peculiar to the affected property; 
(4)  That the unusual circumstances or conditions do not exist throughout the neighborhood or zone in which the subject property is located; 
(5)  That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, the subject property cannot reasonably be developed in conformity with the provisions of this UDC; 
(6)  That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant; 
(7)  That the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or zone in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjoining property; 
(8)  That the variance, if granted, is a minimum variance that will afford relief and is the least modification possible of the provisions which are in question. 
(c)  Referral to planning commission. The zoning board of adjustment may request a recommendation from the planning commission to assist it in determining if the above requirements have been satisfied. Further, the zoning board of adjustment may require that a special variance application form be completed by the appellant to ensure that the appellant fully understands the criteria on which the board must base its findings. 
(d)  Prohibitions. The zoning board of adjustment may not grant variances from the provisions of this UDC covering the use or density or land or buildings, or the provisions governing planned unit developments. In granting any variance, the zoning board of adjustment may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-8-703. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  Hearings, appeals and notices. 
(1)  Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved by any administrative decision based upon or made in the course of the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this UDC. 
(2)  Any such an appeal must be made, within twenty-one (21) days from the date the administrative decision was communicated to the applicant, which shall be the date of emailing or hand delivery, or, if the decision was communicated by mail only, three (3) days from the date of mailing. The form or any other procedure relating thereto, shall be as specified in any rules of procedure adopted by the board of adjustment, but shall in any event comply with the provisions concerning the notice of appeal set forth below. 
(b)  Notice of appeal. The appellant shall file with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, with a copy to the administrator. The administrator shall promptly forward all papers constituting the record of action upon which the appeal was taken to the board of adjustment. 
(c)  Notice of hearing. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal and record, the board of adjustment shall fix a time for hearing of the appeal, which shall be not less than seven nor more than thirty-five (35) days from the filing of the notice of appeal. A notice of the hearing shall be provided as set out in section 21-8-511, and written notice shall also be sent by first class mail to the party appealing and the owner of the property that is the subject of the appeal. 
(d)  Hearing procedure. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The board of adjustment may affirm, reverse (wholly or partly), or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as in their opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(e)  Decision. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official or agency. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
ARTICLE IX. - ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 9-1. - PURPOSE AND APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 
 
Sec. 21-9-101. - Purpose of article. 
(a)  Generally. The city council finds that the enforcement of this UDC is an important public service, and that code enforcement is vital to the protection of the public health, safety, welfare, and quality of life. The purpose of this article is to encourage prompt compliance with the UDC. 
(b)  Procedures and remedies are not exclusive. Nothing in this article is intended to limit the remedies that are available to the city to prevent, cure, or abate violations of this UDC. This article shall not be construed to prevent the city from using any enforcement procedures that are lawful and appropriate, nor shall it be construed as an election of remedies. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-9-102. - Application of article. 
(a)  Generally. This article provides the general process for enforcing the UDC, and the general remedies that are available to the city. However, as provided in section 29-440, the city may take any lawful action to remedy violations of this UDC, including seeking any remedy or imposing any penalty that is available under this UDC, Colorado law or administrative rules promulgated thereunder, or Federal law. 
(b)  Enforcement of LUDC, generally. 
(1)  Division 2, Enforcement Procedures, sets out: 
a.  A general procedure for code enforcement by city Staff; and 
b.  Additional actions that may be taken by the administrator. 
(2)  In addition to the enforcement provisions of this article, specific conditions of development approval or improvements agreements may provide additional or alternative enforcement procedures or remedies. 
(c)  Remedies. Division 3, Remedies, provides a non-exclusive list of defenses and potential consequences of enforcement when a person is found to have violated this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 9-2. - ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 21-9-201. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Generally. In the event of the failure of the owner, an adult tenant, or an adult person in possession of any real property in the city to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the code enforcement officer shall serve a written notice of violation ("NOV"), in a form prescribed by the department of public works, upon the property owner whose property is being kept contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Contents of notice of violation. The NOV shall include, at a minimum: 
(1)  The address of the property where the violation is alleged. 
(2)  Specific reference to the section(s) of this UDC or to conditions of a development approval that are alleged to have been violated. 
(3)  If necessary, a statement of the action that must be taken to bring the property or use into compliance with this UDC. 
(4)  A time frame, not to exceed twenty-eight (28) days, for bringing the property or use into compliance with this UDC. An extension may be granted by the administrator as long as the property owner is diligently working towards a resolution. 
(5)  A statement that if the violation is not corrected within a specified period of time, the prosecution for the violation may be initiated subsequently by the issuance of a summons and compliant. 
(6)  Contact information for a person or department who can answer questions about the warning. 
(c)  Time for correction. 
(1)  The length of time for correction shall be a reasonable period of time, depending on the facts and circumstances of the violation, in the judgment of the code enforcement officer, but shall be not less than seven (7) days nor more than twenty-eight (28) days after service of the NOV. 
(2)  In determining the time period, the code enforcement officer shall determine, taking into account the action that must be taken by the property owner to bring the property into compliance with this chapter, as well as the detriment to the neighborhood and surrounding properties, if any, from continuing non-compliance. 
(d)  Service of notice of violation. 
(1)  Service shall be made by personally delivering a copy of said notice of violation to the owner, and to any adult tenant, or an adult person in possession of the property, in which case service shall be deemed complete upon receipt; or 
(2)  If personal service cannot be achieved after reasonably diligent efforts, service may be by mailing, by certified mail, a copy of the notice to the property owner at his/her last known address, as designated in the records of the county assessor, in which case service shall be deemed complete at noon the third business day after mailing. 
(3)  Subject to the limitations of subsection (f), below, and the discretion of the code enforcement officer, warnings are the preferred method of assuring compliance with this UDC. 
(e)  Limitations. The code enforcement officer may recommend immediate prosecution by service of a summons and complaint without first issuing a notice of violation under this section if: 
(1)  During the previous twenty-four (24) months, the property owner has been warned of, cited for, or summoned to court for the same violation; or 
(2)  The code enforcement officer determines that the violation is likely to create an imminent hazard to life or property. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-9-202. - Immediate orders and immediate actions. 
(a)  Generally. As provided in this section, the code enforcement officer may issue immediate orders or take other immediate actions as necessary to halt violations of this UDC, to prevent activities from violating or exacerbating violations of this UDC, or to remedy violations of this UDC. 
(b)  Cease and desist orders. The code enforcement officer may issue a cease and desist order to close unlawful uses or to halt other violations of this UDC for which the code enforcement officer determines that other available procedures and remedies under this article are inadequate. 
(c)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  The code enforcement officer shall have the authority to stop any or all construction activities as deemed necessary to halt, correct, or prevent an imminent violation of this UDC by issuing a written stop work order to the owner, contractor, permittee, or operator. 
(2)  If the appropriate permittee or operator cannot be located, the stop work order shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the area where the activity is occurring. The notice shall not be removed until the violation has been cured or authorization to remove the notice has been issued by the city. 
(3)  Such permittee or operator shall immediately stop all activity until authorized, in writing, by the city to proceed. It is unlawful for any permittee or operator to fail to comply with a stop work order. 
(4)  Stop work orders may be issued for: 
a.  Construction work for which a required development approval or permit has not been issued; 
b.  A violation of any condition of development approval, development agreement, stormwater quality permit, stormwater management plan, or other plan required by this UDC; 
c.  Material departure from approved construction drawings or specifications; 
d.  A violation of this UDC; 
e.  A violation of any other ordinance of the city, State law, or Federal law pertaining to the development; or 
f.  The existence of any condition or the occurrence of any act which endangers health, life, or safety, or creates a high potential for damage to property. 
(d)  Permit actions. 
(1)  Permit holds. Upon recommendation of the code enforcement officer, the administrator may direct city departments that are responsible for the issuance of permits related to platting, construction, expansion, or operation of a use, building, structure, sign, or fence, to hold further permits until the code enforcement officer certifies that violations are corrected, or until the city council, municipal court, or other court of appropriate jurisdiction orders that the hold be lifted (for example, if an owner fails to plat property where a plat is required, the code enforcement officer may order that building permits be withheld until the plat is approved and recorded). 
(2)  Temporary suspension of permits, generally. 
a.  The code enforcement officer may suspend permits for a period of not more than twenty-one (21) days in order to: 
1.  Address an imminent danger to public health, public safety, or public or private property; 
2.  Prevent irreparable harm that is otherwise likely to occur if the activities that are the basis for the temporary revocation were to continue; 
3.  Achieve compliance with conditions of approval, or with limited or conditional use standards, if applicable; or 
4.  Ensure that construction proceeds according to approved plans and applicable laws. 
b.  If the code enforcement officer temporarily suspends a permit, the code enforcement officer shall immediately notify the city attorney and the administrator. The city attorney may seek a court order in municipal court or other court of appropriate jurisdiction permanently revoking the permit if compliance is not achieved within twenty-one (21) days. The city attorney may request a temporary injunction to extend the temporary suspension of the permit in order to avoid irreparable harm. 
(e)  Removal of temporary signs. The code enforcement officer may immediately remove (or cause to be removed) temporary signs that are placed in violation article VII, division 7, signs. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-9-203. - Administrative process. 
(a)  Generally. The code enforcement officer may issue a citation for violation of this UDC. The recipient of a citation shall correct the violations that are alleged and pay any applicable fines or restitution to the city within twenty-one (21) days of the date of the citation. 
(b)  Relationship to other enforcement procedures. Enforcement actions are intended to be cumulative in nature. The city may pursue any and all lawful remedies, separately or concurrently, to effect compliance with an issued citation, including issuance of immediate orders and prosecution of violations as criminal offenses. If a recipient of a citation does not take timely action required by the citation and does not timely request administrative review pursuant to this section, then the city may proceed to enforce the citation in municipal court. 
(c)  Contents of citation. Citations shall include at least the following information: 
(1)  The address or location of the property where the violation is alleged. 
(2)  Specific reference to the section(s) of this UDC or to conditions of a development approval that are alleged to have been violated. 
(3)  If necessary, a statement of the action that must be taken to bring the property or use into compliance with this UDC and a time frame, not to exceed twenty-one (21) days, for achieving compliance with this LUDC. 
(4)  The amount of any fine that is assessed as a result of the violation. 
(5)  A statement that if the requirements of the citation are not met within the stated time frame, the party cited may be compelled to appear in municipal court. 
(6)  A statement that the cited party may challenge the citation within fourteen (14) days of the date of the citation by written request for a hearing in municipal court. 
(d)  Payment of fines. If the municipal court affirms the citation or modifies the citation, any fines that are imposed shall be payable to the city not later than thirty (30) days after the date of the municipal court's decision. 
(e)  Collection of fines. A fine assessed by means of a citation may be collected by any means allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-9-204. - Administrative suspension of licenses, permits, and approvals. 
(a)  Generally. In the case of violations of, or noncompliance with, this UDC or of violations of, or failure to meet, conditions of approval, the administrator, city manager, or city attorney may schedule a hearing prior to taking civil action in court in order to investigate and consider a suspension of a license, permit, or approval as provided in this section. 
(b)  Referral of notice of violation. The administrator may refer a notice of violation of conditions of approval to the city council for initiation of proceedings to revoke an approval in cases of: 
(1)  Violations of this UDC; 
(2)  Violations of conditions of approval; or 
(3)  Failure to meet conditions of approval. 
(c)  Introduction. To consider revocation of an approval, the city council shall introduce the matter during a regular meeting. Upon affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum present, the matter shall be referred to the planning commission for a recommendation. 
(d)  Planning commission review and recommendation. Upon referral, the administrator shall place the matter on the next available agenda of the planning commission, which shall hold a quasi-judicial hearing at which it shall hear evidence from the administrator or the administrator's designee, and from the recipient of the notice of violation. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council, which shall include recommended findings of fact. 
(e)  City council decision. Upon recommendation of the planning commission, the administrator shall place the matter on the next available agenda of the city council, which shall hold a quasi-judicial hearing. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall consider the testimony adduced at the hearing and the recommendation of the planning commission, and shall decide whether to revoke the approval, attach additional conditions to ensure future compliance, or dismiss the charge of the violation. Decisions to revoke an approval or attach additional conditions shall include written findings of fact. 
(f)  Effect of suspension. An approval that is suspended is inoperative during the period of suspension, and all uses authorized by the approval shall cease operations. If the city council does not put a time limit on the suspension and the violator does not appeal to a court or competent jurisdiction, then the suspension becomes a permanent revocation of the license, permit, or approval upon the lapse of the appeal period. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-9-205. - Judicial process. 
The city may initiate action to enforce this UDC in the Alamosa Municipal Court, or in any other court of appropriate jurisdiction, according to the applicable rules of procedure. Judicial actions may include, but are not limited to, proceedings for temporary or permanent injunction, abatement, declaratory judgment, or other appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate, remove, or otherwise correct violations of this UDC or permits or approvals granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 9-3. - REMEDIES 
 
Sec. 21-9-301. - Nature of remedies; preference for civil remedies. 
(a)  Generally. The remedies provided in this Article, whether civil or criminal, shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by law. 
(b)  Each day a separate offense. Each day that a violation exists constitutes a separate offense. 
(c)  Preference for civil remedies. It is the intent of the city to apply civil remedies described in this division, and to use criminal enforcement only in egregious cases, including, but not limited to, multiple repeated offenses. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-9-302. - Revocation of licenses, permits, and approvals. 
Development approvals or permits may be permanently revoked if the city council (pursuant to section 21-9-204, administrative suspension of licenses, permits, and approvals) or a court of appropriate jurisdiction finds a failure to correct a violation that resulted in a temporary suspension of the permit; or if there was fraud or material misrepresentation in the application materials that supported the issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-9-303. - Civil remedies. 
(a)  Fines. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this UDC shall be subject to a civil penalty up to the maximum amount allowed by law, for each offense. The city council may establish a schedule of fines by resolution. 
(b)  Declaratory or injunctive relief. The city may seek declaratory or injunctive relief in order to enforce this UDC or conditions of approval. 
(c)  Responsible parties. Every person furthering the violation of, or showing failure to comply with, the UDC, whether the person directly commits the act or aids or abets the same and whether present or absent, shall be proceeded against and held as a principal. 
(d)  Specific performance. The city may seek specific performance in order to enforce improvements agreements, annexation agreements, and other agreements, however titled, that are used to implement the requirements of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-9-304. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  Generally. The owner or owners of any building or buildings or premises or part thereof where anything in violation of this chapter exists or is placed or maintained; and any architect, builder, or contractor who assists in the commission of any such violation; and all persons or corporations who violate or maintain any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or who fail to comply therewith or with any requirements thereof or who build in violation of any statement of plans submitted and approved hereunder shall, for each and every violation or noncompliance, be guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable in accordance with the general penalty provision established in the City of Alamosa Municipal Code, section 1-17. 
(b)  Responsible parties. Every person furthering the violation of, or showing failure to comply with, the UDC, whether the person directly commits the act or aids or abets the same and whether present or absent, shall be proceeded against and held as a principal. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
ARTICLE X. - FINDINGS, OBJECTIVES, AND INTENT  
DIVISION 10-1. - FINDINGS, OBJECTIVES, AND INTENT REGARDING SPECIFIC USES 
 
Sec. 21-10-101. - Findings, objectives, and legislative intent regarding sexually-oriented business. 
(a)  Findings. The regulation of sexually-oriented businesses in this UDC are based on the following findings of the city council: 
(1)  Sexually-oriented businesses cause adverse secondary effects, which are recognized by the U.S. Supreme Court (in cases such as Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990)) and the 10 th Circuit Court of Appeals (in cases such as Doctor John's v. G. Blake Wahlen, 542 F.3d 787 (10 th Cir. 2008)) as impacting substantial governmental interests in health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  In City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000), the U.S. Supreme Court held that a "city need not 'conduct new studies or produce evidence independent of that already generated by other cities' to demonstrate the problem of secondary effects, 'so long as whatever evidence the city relies upon is reasonably believed to be relevant to the problem that the city addresses.'" 
(3)  Other cases, such as City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts, 541 U.S. 774 (2004), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), Essence, Inc. v. City of Federal Heights, 285 F.3d 1272 (10th Cir. 2002), Z.J. Gifts D-2, L.L.C. v. City of Aurora, 136 F.3d 683 (10th Cir. 1998), O'Connor v. City and County of Denver, 894 F. 2d 1210 (10th Cir. 1990), City of Colorado Springs v. 2354 Inc., 896 P.2d 272 (Colo. 1995), 7250 Corp. v. Board of County Comm'rs for Adams County, 799 P. 2d 917 (Colo. 1990), and Marco Lounge, Inc. v. City of Federal Heights, 625 P.2d 982 (Colo. 1981), have upheld reasonable regulations of sexually-oriented businesses. 
(4)  The negative secondary impacts of sexually-oriented businesses have been studied in other communities. These communities include, but are not limited, to Adams County, Colorado; Dallas, Texas; Denver, Colorado; Ellicottville, New York; Garden Grove, California; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Islip, New York; Las Vegas, Nevada; Los Angeles, California; Louisville, Kentucky; New York, New York; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Phoenix, Arizona; Rome City, Georgia; St. Paul, Minnesota; Tucson, Arizona; and Whittier, California. 
(5)  The American Center for Law and Justice also completed a study on the secondary effects of such uses, dated March 1996. 
(6)  Secondary effects of sexually-oriented businesses may include any or all of the following material effects on the health, safety, and welfare of city residents: 
a.  Particularly when they are located in close proximity to each other, sexually-oriented businesses are an indicia of urban blight, or a factor that downgrades the quality of life in the adjacent area; 
b.  Sexually-oriented businesses have a deleterious effect on both neighboring businesses and surrounding residential areas, as they are regularly correlated to an increase in crime and a decrease in property values; 
c.  Sexually-oriented businesses commonly require special supervision from public safety agencies in order to protect public health, safety and welfare, including that of the patrons of such businesses; 
d.  Studies and experience show that in the absence of regulation of sexually-oriented businesses, significant criminal activity, including prostitution, narcotics and liquor law violations, have historically and regularly occurred within and within the immediate vicinity of such businesses; 
e.  Sexually-oriented businesses are frequently used for unlawful and unhealthful sexual activities, including prostitution and sexual liaisons of a casual nature, and the concern over sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV, is a legitimate health concern of the city; 
f.  Sexually-oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are often not controlled by the operators of the establishments; and 
g.  Children and minors may be harmed by exposure to the secondary effects of sexually-oriented businesses, including those encountered when children walk through or visit in the immediate neighborhood of such businesses. 
(b)  Objectives. The city wishes to minimize and control the adverse secondary effects of sexually-oriented businesses and thereby protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens; preserve the quality of life; preserve the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods; deter the spread of urban blight; and protect residents and property owners from increased crime. 
(c)  Intent. It is not the intent of this Code to suppress any speech protected by the First Amendment, but to enact reasonable, content-neutral regulations that address the secondary effects of sexually-oriented businesses. To this end, the regulations in this Code that apply specifically to sexually-oriented businesses impose restrictions which are no greater than necessary to further the city's substantial interest in preventing adverse secondary effects attributable to such businesses. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-10-102. - Findings regarding regulation of marijuana uses and marijuana cultivation. 
(a)  Generally. The findings of this section support the policy that is articulated in section 21-4, statement of policy regarding marijuana uses and marijuana cultivation. 
(b)  Findings. The city council finds that, as of the effective date of this UDC: 
(1)  Marijuana is a controlled substance under federal law, and possession of marijuana is prohibited by federal law. 
(2)  The voters of the State of Colorado have approved a constitutional amendment to the State Constitution to allow for persons with "debilitating medical conditions" to use medical marijuana. The will of the voters is reflected in Article XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution. That section of the Colorado Constitution is further implemented and further regulated by C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101, et seq. 
(3)  The voters of the State of Colorado have approved a constitutional amendment to the State Constitution to legalize, under state law, the personal use of marijuana by persons over the age of 21. However, part of the amendment, reflected in Article XVIII, Section 16(5)(f) of the Colorado Constitution, provides, "A locality may prohibit the operation of marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing facilities, or retail marijuana stores through the enactment of an ordinance …" 
(4)  The United States Constitution, in Article VI, Debts, Supremacy, Oaths, provides in part, "This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made in Pursuance thereof; and all Treaties made, or which shall be made, under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land; and the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing in the Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding. The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, and the Members of the several State Legislatures, and all executive and judicial Officers, both of the United States and of the several States, shall be bound by Oath or Affirmation, to support this Constitution …" 
(5)  Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance under 21 U.S.C. § 812. Possession and sale of marijuana is illegal under federal law. (See 21 U.S.C. § 841, et seq.) Violators of U.S. Code are subject to criminal and civil penalties under Federal law. 
(6)  The United States Department of Justice ("U.S. DOJ") issued a memorandum on October 19, 2009 regarding U.S. DOJ policy on enforcement of the Federal Controlled Substances Act in states that allow medical marijuana under state law. In that memorandum, Deputy Attorney General David Ogden writes, in pertinent part: 
a.  "Of course, no State can authorize violations of federal law … Accordingly, in prosecutions under the Controlled Substances Act, federal prosecutors are not expected to charge, prove, or otherwise establish any state law violations." 
b.  "This guidance regarding resource allocation does not 'legalize' marijuana or provide a legal defense to a violation of federal law, nor is it intended to create any privileges, benefits, or rights, substantive or procedural, enforceable by any individual, party, or witness in any administrative, civil, or criminal matter." 
c.  "Nor does clear and unambiguous compliance with state law … create a legal defense to a violation of the Controlled Substances Act." 
(7)  In response to the reallocation of investigative and prosecutorial resources of the U.S. DOJ, medical and recreational marijuana uses have proliferated in Colorado. 
(8)  On February 23, 2017 a White House official signaled that there will be "greater enforcement" of federal laws against marijuana use, particularly in the area of recreational marijuana; however, as of the effective date, neither the White House nor the U.S. DOJ has articulated a substantive change in policy. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 10-2. - FINDINGS REGARDING REGULATION OF CERTAIN STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 21-10-201. - Interests, findings, and legislative intent regarding sign regulation. 
(a)  Statement of interests. The city has the following legitimate, important, substantial, or compelling interests in regulating signs: 
(1)  Preventing the proliferation of signs of generally increasing size, dimensions, and intrusiveness (also known as "sign clutter") that tends to result from competition for the attention of passing motorists and pedestrians, because sign clutter: 
a.  Creates visual distraction and obstructs views, potentially creating safety hazards for motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians; 
b.  May involve physical obstruction of streets, sidewalks, or trails, creating public safety hazards; 
c.  Degrades the aesthetic quality of the city, making the city a less attractive place for residents, business owners, visitors, and private investment; 
d.  Increases the cost of doing business in the city by placing undue pressure on business owners to invest in ever-increasing amounts of signage; and 
e.  Dilutes or obscures messages on individual signs due to the increasing intensity of competition for attention. 
(2)  Maintaining and enhancing the historic character of downtown Alamosa. 
(3)  Protecting the health of the tree canopy in the city. 
(4)  Maintaining a high quality aesthetic environment to protect and enhance property values, leverage public investments in streets, sidewalks, trails, plazas, parks, and landscaping, and enhance community pride. 
(5)  Protecting minors from speech that is harmful to them as provided by state or federal law, by preventing such speech in places that are accessible to and used by minors. 
(b)  Findings. The city finds that: 
(1)  Content-neutrality, viewpoint neutrality, and fundamental fairness in regulation and review are essential to ensuring an appropriate balance between the important, substantial, and compelling interests set out above and the constitutionally-protected right to free expression. 
(2)  The sign regulations set out in this Code are unrelated to the suppression of constitutionally-protected free expression, do not relate to the content of protected messages that may be displayed on signs, and do not relate to the viewpoint of individual speakers. 
(3)  The incidental restriction on the freedom of speech that may result from the regulation of signs pursuant to this Code is no greater than is essential to the furtherance of the important, substantial, and compelling interests that are advanced herein. 
(4)  Regulation of the location, number, materials, height, sign area, form, and duration of display of temporary signs is essential to preventing sign clutter. 
(5)  Temporary signs may be degraded, damaged, moved, or destroyed by wind, rain, snow, ice, and sun, and after such degradation, damage, movement, or destruction, such signs harm the safety and aesthetics of the city's streets if they are not removed. 
(6)  Certain classifications of speech are not constitutionally protected due to the harm that they cause to individuals or the community. 
(c)  Intent. The sign regulations in this Code represent the city's best effort to advance its legitimate, important, substantial, and compelling interests while ensuring consistency with an evolving legal framework. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-10-202. - Interests, findings, and legislative intent regarding wireless telecommunications facilities regulations. 
(a)  Interests. The unique and diverse landscapes of the city are among its most valuable assets. Protecting these assets will require that location and design of wireless telecommunication services and/or equipment be sensitive to and in scale and harmony with, the character of the community. 
(b)  Findings. The city finds that providing predictable, consistent, and balanced standards for the siting and screening of wireless telecommunication services facilities and equipment is important in order to: 
(1)  Preserve the character and aesthetics of areas which are in close proximity to wireless telecommunication services facilities and equipment; 
(2)  Protect the health, safety, and welfare of persons living or working in the area surrounding wireless telecommunication services facilities and equipment related to the placement, construction or modification of such facilities; and 
(3)  Allow development that is compatible in appearance with allowed uses of the underlying zoning district. 
(c)  Intent. It is the intent of the city to further its interests in protecting its community character while also promoting access to wireless telecommunications services within the city. To that end, the city intends to: 
(1)  Enforce standards that mitigate the visual, aesthetic, and safety impacts of wireless telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting and screening, and placement for their construction or modification; 
(2)  Allow for fair and meaningful competition and, to the greatest extent possible, extend to all people in all areas of the city high quality wireless telecommunication services at reasonable costs; and 
(3)  Encourage co-location and clustering of antenna sites and structures, when practical, to help reduce the number of such facilities that may be required in the future to service the needs of customers, and thus avert unnecessary proliferation of facilities on private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
ARTICLE XI. - MEASUREMENTS, CALCULATIONS, RULES OF CONSTRUCTION, ACRONYMS, AND DEFINITIONS  
DIVISION 11-1. - MEASUREMENTS AND CALCULATIONS 
 
Sec. 21-11-101. - Measurements. 
(a)  Height. 
(1)  Buildings. 
a.  Building height is measured from a horizontal reference plane at the elevation of the average existing grade across the front building line, measured at major building corners, to the highest point among the following: 
1.  The midpoint of a sloped (gable, hip or gambrel) roof; 
2.  The top of the parapet of a flat roof system; or 
3.  The deck line of a mansard roof. 
b.  The following building elements and appurtenances are excepted from the building height measurement, but only to the minimum degree necessary to achieve compliance with applicable building codes (or if not regulated by building codes, to provide for appropriate function): 
1.  Chimneys, 
2.  Vents (e.g., attic fans, cupola vents, radon mitigation, plumbing vents, etc.), and 
3.  Light collection domes for daylighting systems. 
c.  In addition to the elements and appurtenances described in subsection (a)(1)b., above, with regard to multifamily and nonresidential buildings, the following are also excepted from the building height measurement: 
1.  Non-habitable towers, spires, belfries, and domes; 
2.  Screened mechanical equipment; 
3.  "Green roof" vegetation; 
4.  Roof access, elevator, and stair towers; and 
5.  Clock towers. 
(2)  Fences, walls, and retaining walls. 
a.  The height of fences, walls, or retaining walls is measured as the vertical distance from a point of measurement at the average finished grade for each interval on the outside of the enclosed area (or the side closest to the property line if the fence or wall does not enclose anything) to the highest point at the top of the fence or wall for that interval, excluding posts and pilasters. 
b.  In general, fence or wall height is measured in forty (40) foot horizontal intervals, or the distance between posts or pilasters, whichever is shorter. 
(3)  Monopoles and towers. The height of a monopole or tower is measured from the lowest point of the anchored base of the tower, at its grade, to the highest point of the structure. For antenna towers, height shall be measured inclusive of any antennas placed on the tower. For wind turbines, height shall be measured to the top of the rotor at its highest point during rotation. 
(4)  Roofed structures other than buildings. The height of roofed structures other than buildings (e.g., gazebos) is measured as the distance from the grade plane at the base of the structure to the top of the highest point on the structure, including attachments thereto. 
(b)  Building coverage. Building coverage is measured as the area of a lot or parcel that is occupied by principal and accessory buildings at ground level. For the purpose of this UDC, building coverage is measured as the footprint of the principal and any accessory buildings at grade, including any carport (whether enclosed or not). Eaves, overhangs, and decks that project less than two feet from the building walls are not included in the measurement of building coverage. Overhangs, covered porches, cantilevers, and decks that project more than two feet from building walls are included in the measurement of building coverage. 
(c)  Floor area. Floor area is measured as the horizontal floor area included within the outside walls of a building or portion thereof, including habitable tenant houses and attic space, but not including vent shafts, courts, or uninhabitable areas below ground level or in attics. 
(d)  Lot area. Lot area is the total planar area within a lot that is enclosed by its lot lines. 
(e)  Lot depth. Lot depth is the average horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines. 
(f)  Lot width. Lot width is the horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at right angles to the line establishing the lot depth at the established building setback line. 
(g)  Setbacks. Setbacks are measured horizontally at right angles to the affected lot line to the nearest point of the building or structure for which the setback is being measured. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-11-102. - Calculations. 
(a)  Building coverage ratio. Building coverage ratio is calculated as building coverage divided by lot area. 
(b)  Density. Density is calculated as the number of dwelling units per acre of land of a lot or subject property, as applicable to the circumstances of the calculation. 
(c)  Open space ratio. Open space ratio is calculated as the total area of open space on a subject property divided by the total area of the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
DIVISION 11-2. - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION, ACRONYMS, AND DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 21-11-201. - Rules of construction. 
The words and terms used, defined, interpreted, or further described in this chapter may be construed as follows: 
(1)  The particular controls the general. 
(2)  The word "shall" is mandatory. 
(3)  The word "may" is permissive. 
(4)  Words used in the present tense include the future unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(5)  Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-11-202. - Table of acronyms. 
Table 21-11-202 sets out the abbreviations and acronyms that are used in this UDC. 
Table 21-11-202 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
Acronym 	Meaning 
ac. 	Acre 
ADA 	Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq., as amended from time to time 
ADA 502 	2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design § 502, as amended from time to time, and however subsequently titled or numbered 
ADT 	Average Daily Traffic 
Art. 	Article 
BMP 	Best Management Practice 
BRU 	Preceded by a number, "Bedroom Unit" (e.g., 2 Bedroom Unit) 
CAFO 	Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation 
CCR 	Colorado Code of Regulations 
CDPHE 	Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment 
CMRS 	Commercial Mobile Radio Service 
C.O. 	Certificate of Occupancy 
C.R.S. 	Colorado Revised Statutes 
dBA 	A-weighted Decibels 
DBH 	Diameter at Breast Height 
Div. 	Division 
DNL 	Day-Night Average Sound Level 
e.g. 	exempli gratia (translation: "for example"), which is followed by illustrative, non-exclusive examples 
EIFS 	Exterior Insulation Finishing Systems 
EOPC 	Engineer's Opinion of Probable Cost 
EPA 	United States Environmental Protection Agency 
ESMR 	Enhanced Specialized Mobile Radio 
FDP 	Final Development Plan 
ft. 	Feet 
i.e. 	id est (translation: "that is"), which is followed by an elaboration of the topic 
IGA 	Intergovernmental Agreement 
lf. 	Linear Feet 
LAN 	Local Area Network 
LOS 	Level of Service 
LSR 	Landscape Surface Ratio 
Max. 	Maximum 
Min. 	Minimum 
MUTCD 	Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices 
N/A 	Not Applicable 
NOV 	Notice of Violation 
NPDES 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, created by the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq. 
OSHA 	Occupational Safety and Health Act, 29 U.S.C. § 651, et seq. 
OSR 	Open Space Ratio 
PC 	City of Alamosa Planning Commission 
PCS 	Personal Communications Services 
PDP 	Preliminary Development Plan 
PUD 	Planned Unit Development 
RV 	Recreational Vehicle 
Sec. 	Section 
sf. 	Square Feet 
sp. 	Parking Space (or Parking Spaces) 
SWMP 	Stormwater Management Plan 
U 	Dwelling Unit 
U/A 	Dwelling Units per Acre 
UDC 	City of Alamosa Unified Development Code 
UDFCD 	Urban Drainage and Flood Control District 
U.S. 	When preceded and followed by numbers, United States Reports (a Supreme Court Reporter); otherwise United States 
U.S.C. 	United States Code 
U.S. DOJ 	United States Department of Justice 
USDCM 	Urban Storm Drainage Criteria Manual (all volumes), published by UDFCD, as amended or revised from time to time 
ZBOA 	City of Alamosa Zoning Board of Adjustment 
 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17)  
Sec. 21-11-203. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure that is accessory to a principal building or structure, such as a shed or detached garage. 
Accessory use means a use of property that is incidental or subordinate to the principal use, such as a home occupation. 
Administrator means the Public Works Director or his or her designee. 
Adult day care means a facility that is certified by the State of Colorado to provide health and social services on a less than 24-hour basis to elderly, blind, or disabled adults. 
Airport means an area of land that is used for the landing and takeoff of aircraft (fixed-wing or helicopter). An airport may be private or public, and may include related buildings and facilities, such as fixed-base operators, hangars, terminals, fueling and de-icing facilities, maintenance facilities, and car rental agencies, gift shops, and restaurants. 
Alcoholic beverage sales means the retail sale of beer, wine, spirits, or other alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption. The phrase "alcoholic beverage sales" applies to those uses which must obtain a Colorado retail liquor store license. 
Alley means a minor right-of-way or easement for motor vehicles that gives a secondary means of access to the back or side of lots or parcels that otherwise abut a street. Alleys are often used for service access and utility installations. 
Alternative tower structure means artificial trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures that are visually compatible with their context (e.g., a natural setting or surrounding buildings or structures), which camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. The phrase "alternative tower structure" also includes any antenna or antenna array attached to the alternative tower structure. 
Amateur radio antenna means an antenna used by an amateur radio (a.k.a. "HAM Radio") operator pursuant to 47 C.F.R. 97, Subpart A. 
Animal equivalent unit means a unit of measurement to compare various animal types based upon equivalent forage needs or waste generation. Animal equivalent units are set out in the table below. 
ANIMAL EQUIVALENT UNITS 
Animal 	Animal Equivalent Units 
Adult Cow with Unweaned Calf 	1.00 
Mature Dairy Cattle 	1.40 
Slaughter or Feeder Cow 	1.00 
Sheep 	0.20 
Goat 	0.20 
Llama 	0.60 
Horse 	1.25 
Mule 	1.25 
Donkey 	1.25 
Burro 	1.25 
Swine (>55 pounds) 	0.40 
Swine (>55 pounds) 	0.07 
Laying Hens 	0.03 
Broiler Chickens 	0.01 
Turkeys 	0.02 
Other Animals 	Average Animal Weight (in pounds) / 1,000 pounds 
 
Antenna means any structure, including but not limited to a monopole antenna, tower, parabolic, or disk-shaped device in single or multiple combinations of either solid or mesh construction, intended for the purpose of receiving or transmitting communication to or from another antenna, orbiting satellite, cell phone, television, radio, or other telecommunications device, as well as supporting equipment necessary to install or mount the antenna on an antenna tower or building. 
Antenna tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennae. This includes guyed mast, lattice towers, monopoles, alternative tower structures, and towers that are taller than ten feet that are installed or mounted on top of a building, along with any separate building or structure on the same lot used to house any supporting electronic equipment. 
Arcade frontage means that the street-facing elevation of the principal building includes an integrated colonnade that is covered by upper stories of the building, and that shelters the sidewalk or walkway in front of the building elevation. 
Assisted living or congregate care means a residential facility that provides meals or assistance with daily activities, such as dressing, grooming, and bathing, for the elderly or adults who are unable to manage these activities themselves. 
Bar, tavern, or nightclub means a use engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, where such sales account for more than fifty (50) percent of gross revenues. The use does not include temporary sales of alcohol for on-premise consumption. 
Bed and breakfast inn means an adaptive re-use of a single-family detached building as a place of overnight accommodation, in which: (i) eight or fewer guest rooms are rented for daily or weekly terms; (ii) breakfast is provided to guests; and (iii) the operator resides on the premises. 
Berm means a mound of earth typically used to shield, screen, and buffer undesirable views and to separate potentially incompatible land uses. 
Board of adjustment means the City of Alamosa Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
Boarding or rooming house means a residential building in which three or more bedrooms are available to be rented to guests on a short-term or long-term basis. Some services (e.g., meals or laundry) may be provided, and common areas, such as kitchens, living areas, or bathrooms, may be shared. 
Bufferyard means open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or any combination thereof, used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block buildings, structures, storage areas, noise, lights, or other nuisances. Bufferyards are classified into five classifications, with specific uses, locations, or purposes calling for specific bufferyard classifications. See Table 21-5-306(c) for classifications. 
Building means an enclosed structure built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, property or substances of any kind, excluding fences. 
Business services means commercial services, such as printing and copy centers, 3D print shops, direct mail services, repair services and shops (except automobile, truck, and heavy equipment repair), parcel service drop-off locations and mailbox services, and data recovery shops. 
Caliper means the diameter of a tree trunk, measured six inches above the soil. Caliper measurements are used to measure single-trunk trees that are grown in nurseries. Trees that are already established on a subject property are measured using a diameter at breast height ("DBH") technique. See Diameter at breast height ("DBH"). 
Campground or RV park means an area of land developed and intended for use to provide the traveling public with short-term accommodations for recreational vehicles, motor homes, travel trailers, truck campers, park models, and tents. 
Campus means a master-planned collection of buildings and grounds that typically include a variety of uses and activities for an academic institution (e.g., a college campus), non-academic institution (e.g., a hospital campus), or a business or group of related businesses (e.g., a research park campus), which are normally designed to provide common areas and amenities that provide focal points within the master plan. 
Cemetery/mausoleum means any place in which there is provided space either below or above the surface of the ground for the interment of the remains of human bodies. 
Central Business District means the area bounded by Fourth Street on the north, Denver Avenue on the east, Sixth Street on the south and Edison Avenue on the west. 
Changeable copy panel means a portion a sign with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be manually (not electronically) changed or rearranged without structurally altering the surface of the sign. 
Child care center means a facility, by whatever name known, which is maintained for the whole or part of a day for the care of five or more children under the age of 16 years and not related to the owner, operator, or manager thereof, whether such facility is operated with or without compensation for such care and with or without stated educational purposes. The term includes: (i) facilities commonly known as "day care centers," "day nurseries," "nursery schools," "kindergartens," "preschools," "play groups," "day camps," "summer camps," "centers for mentally retarded children," and (ii) facilities that provide 24-hour care for dependent and neglected children, and (iii) facilities for children under the age of six years with stated educational purposes operated in conjunction with a public, private, or parochial college or a private or parochial school, except that the term does not apply to any kindergarten maintained in connection with a public, private, or parochial elementary school system of at least six grades. Child care centers are classified as either "small" (five to 12 children) or "large" (13 or more children). 
City facilities means a building, structure, storage yard, or major utility installation that is owned, operated, and used by the City, that the City determines is necessary for its operations or the advancement of the health, safety and welfare of City residents. 
Code enforcement officer means an employee or contractor of the City who is designated by the City Manager to make inspections and issue notices and orders to correct violations of this UDC. 
Co-housing community means a community of cottage dwellings, including tiny homes or small duplex dwellings that are clustered around commonly-owned open space, and that share a common house. 
Co-location means locating one or more antennae for more than one provider on a single antenna tower. 
Commercial agriculture means the science and art of production of plants and animals useful to man, including, to a variable extent, the preparation of these products for man's use and their disposal by marketing or otherwise, and includes horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, forestry, dairy, livestock, poultry, bee, and any and all forms of farm products and farm production for commercial purposes. Commercial agriculture does not include: (i) commercial equestrian facilities; or (ii) concentrated animal feeding operations. 
Commercial equestrian facilities means an establishment that boards horses or teaches, tests, or advances the skills of horses or horse riders. 
Commercial Mobile Radio Service ("CMRS") means a Federal Communications Commission designation for any carrier or licensee whose wireless network is connected to the public switched telephone network and/or is operated for profit. CMRS is more specifically defined in 47 CFR § 20.9, as amended from time to time, which shall control this definition in the event of a conflict. 
Commercial vehicle means: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer that: 
a.  Is designed or used to carry freight, other vehicles, equipment, passengers for a fee, or merchandise in the furtherance of any business enterprise; and 
b.  Has a gross weight of more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds; 
(2)  Any step van or truck that is designed for commercial moving or parcel delivery services; 
(3)  Any truck that is used for mobile retail sales (e.g., ice cream, lunches); 
(4)  Any vehicle with more than four (4) wheels that is used for business purposes; 
(5)  Any trailer that is used to haul machinery, supplies, or equipment for business purposes (horse trailers, boat trailers, motorcycle trailers, RV trailers, and car trailers put to personal use are not included in the definition); 
(6)  Any trailer that is used for commercial hauling (e.g., waste, junk, or lawn clippings), or commercial moving services; 
(7)  Any vehicle which has permanently mounted outside brackets or holders for ladders, tools, pipes, or other similar equipment, unless such vehicle is used for on-call emergency services contracted by the city or other governmental entity. 
ILLUSTRATIVE COMMERCIAL VEHICLES 
  
 
Common house is a building that is commonly owned by residents of a co-housing community, which may include a kitchen and dining area, laundry, recreational space, shared amenities, and up to three guest rooms. 
Common open space means a parcel of land or an area of water or a combination of both land and water within a subdivision or a planned unit development. Common open space does not include streets, alleys, parks, off-street parking and loading areas, public open space, or other facilities dedicated by the developer for public use or for motor vehicle use. Common open space is substantially free of structures, but may contain such improvements that are approved as part of the planned unit development and are appropriate for recreation purposes. 
Common property means a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, the use and enjoyment of which are shared by the owners and occupants of the individual building sites in a planned unit development or subdivision. 
Community garden means land where plants are grown and maintained by a group of individuals in the community. Community gardens may produce food for individual consumption or food for sale, may be designed for beautification of the community, or may be used for educational purposes. 
Compatible or compatibility means that the characteristics of different uses or activities, or their design (including site layout, architecture, landscaping, lighting, and noise mitigation), allow them to be located near or adjacent to each other in harmony. Some elements affecting compatibility include height, scale, massing and bulk of structures, noise, lights, odors, traffic patterns, and environmental and safety risks. Compatibility does not mean "the same as." Rather, compatibility refers to whether proposed development maintains the character of existing development, or establishes a desired pattern or type of development as envisioned in the comprehensive plan or applicable design standards. 
Comprehensive plan means the comprehensive plan for the city which has been officially approved to provide long-range development policies for the city and which includes, among other things, the plan for future land use, multimodal circulation, and public facilities. 
Concentrated animal feeding operation ("CAFO") means a facility where large numbers of animals are raised in confinement, as more specifically defined by 40 CFR § 122.23, as may be amended from time to time. 
Corner lot means a lot that abuts two streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street, and where, in either case, the interior angle formed by the intersection of street centerlines does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
Cottage dwelling. See Dwelling, cottage. 
Cottage industry means a business that is operated out of a dwelling unit or accessory building on a residential or agricultural lot, which involves: (i) employment of up to four unrelated people who do not live in the dwelling unit; (ii) commercial deliveries from semi-trailer trucks; (iii) a light industrial use that does not involve pick-ups or deliveries by semi-trailer trucks; or (iv) on-site parking of commercial vehicles. 
Day-night average sound level ("DNL") means the average noise level over a 24-hour period. The noise between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. is artificially increased by 10 dB. This noise is weighted to take into account the decrease in community background noise of 10dB during this period. 
Diameter at breast height ("DBH") means the diameter of a single-trunk tree, measured at four and one-half (4½) feet above the ground. Diameter at breast height is used to measure existing, established trees on a subject property. Nursery stock is measured using the caliper technique. See "Caliper." 
District means an area or areas within the limits of the City, within which the regulations and requirements governing use, lot, and bulk of building and premises are uniform. 
DNL zone means an area within corresponding noise contours on the noise exposure map of an airport, identified in accordance with the requirements of 14 CFR Part 150. 
Double-loaded block means a block that includes two columns of lots, whether or not separated by an alley. 
Drive-in facility means a facility that is designed to provide, wholly or in part, service to customers while they remain in their automobiles parked upon the premises. Drive-in facilities are commonly (but not necessarily) associated with restaurants, banks, dry-cleaners, convenience stores, and coffee shops. 
Duplex or twin house dwelling. See "Dwelling, duplex or twin house." 
Dwelling unit (or dwelling) means any building or part thereof, constituting a separate independent housekeeping establishment (with areas for cooking, bathing, and sleeping) that is designed to be occupied, in whole or in part, for residential purposes. The word "dwelling" includes the residential component of a live-work unit, but does not include hotels, motels, resorts, boarding or rooming houses, assisted living units, congregate care units, nursing home rooms, convalescent care rooms, memory care rooms, tents, recreational vehicles, or other structures designed or used primarily for temporary or transient occupancy. 
Dwelling, cottage means a single-family dwelling unit that contains less than 1,000 square feet of floor area. 
Dwelling, duplex or twin house means a dwelling unit that is located in a building that contains two dwelling units that are separated by either a common wall or a floor. 
Dwelling, multifamily means a dwelling unit that is located in a building that includes three or more dwelling units, or that is located within a mixed-use building that is not classified as "live-work" (i.e., dwelling units above a downtown storefront are classified as multifamily dwelling units, regardless of how many dwelling units are in the building). The phrase "multifamily dwelling" does not include townhouse or rowhouse. 
Dwelling, single-family detached means a dwelling unit that is located within a building that is free-standing and surrounded on all sides by open areas or yards, that is designed for use and occupancy by one family. 
Dwelling, townhouse or rowhouse means a dwelling unit that is located in a building that includes three or more dwelling units that are accessed from the outside and separated by common walls. 
Easement means authorization by a property owner for the use of any designated part of the owner's property by the public or another person or entity (e.g., neighboring property owner, ditch company, or utility company) for specific purposes. 
Employees, for the purposes of evaluating compliance with parking standards that are related to the number of employees, means all persons, including proprietors, working on a premises during the largest shift at peak season. 
Essential governmental or public utilities services means gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission distribution systems, collection, communication, and supplier-disposal systems. Such services may include poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, cabinets, pedestals, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions or for the public health, safety or general welfare. 
Family means a single individual, cooking and living upon a premises as a separate, independent housekeeping unit; or a group of persons doing their own cooking and living together upon the premises, sharing household responsibilities as a separate housekeeping unit in a domestic relationship based upon birth, marriage, or adoption; or a group of not more than four (4) unrelated persons doing their own cooking and living together upon a premises as a single housekeeping unit. 
Family child care home means a private residence used for the daytime care of up to six children who are not related to the operator of the family child care home. 
Fence or garden wall means a free-standing structure of metal, masonry, composition, wood, or any combination thereof resting on, or partially buried in the ground and rising above ground level, which is used for confinement, screening or decorative purposes. The phrase "fence or garden wall" does not include retaining walls. 
Floodplain is defined in section 8-5, Alamosa Municipal Code. 
Forecourt frontage means that the street-facing elevation of the building includes a functional courtyard between the sidewalk and the building. 
Fraternity, sorority, dormitory or group student house means a building occupied by and maintained exclusively for students affiliated with an academic or vocational institution. 
Frontage means that portion of a lot, parcel, tract or block that abuts a street. 
Funeral home means a building that is used principally for: (i) human funeral services; (ii) embalming and the performance of other services used in the preparation of the dead for burial; or (iii) the performance of autopsies and other tests or surgical procedures on human remains. In addition to these functions, funeral homes may also store caskets, urns, hearses, and other vehicles used in funeral processions. 
Gallery frontage means that the street-facing elevation of the principal building includes an intergrated colonnade that shelters the sidewalk or walkway in front of the building. 
Garage, private means an accessory building or an enclosed portion of a principal building that is designed for the shelter or storage of motor vehicles owned or operated by occupants of the main building only. 
Gasoline service station or light motor vehicle repairs and services means a building or premise on, or in which, the principal use is one or more of the following: (i) retail sale of gasoline, oil, or other fuel for motor vehicles; (ii) routine service to passenger vehicles which generally takes less than ninety (90) minutes to complete (e.g., tire rotation and balance, brake service, oil changes, glass repair and replacement, fluid changes, etc.); or (iii) repairs and service to motorcycles, scooters, snowmobiles, ATVs, riding lawnmowers, and other vehicles with engines of less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) cc displacement. The phrase "gasoline service station or light motor vehicle repairs and services" does not include liquefied petroleum gas distribution facilities, heavy automotive repairs and services, or automotive sales and rental. 
Grade means the elevation of ground level. 
Grade plane means the average elevation of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building or at the center of a structure. 
Group home means a dwelling unit, in which care or assistance with daily tasks is provided for not more than eight unrelated individuals. There are four types of group homes: 
Group home for developmentally disabled persons means a state-licensed group home exclusively for the care of persons with developmental disabilities, as defined and regulated by the Colorado Department of Human Services, Division for Developmental Services, and the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
Group home for elderly persons means a group home of persons sixty (60) years of age or older who do not require medical attention associated with a residential health care facility. Group homes for elderly persons are licensed by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment as either an assisted living residence or an alternative care facility. 
Group home for mentally ill persons means a state-licensed group home exclusively for the care of persons with mental illness, as defined and regulated by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
Group home for children awaiting disposition means a state-licensed group home for children up to eighteen (18) years of age who are not related to the head of the household, and who are awaiting disposition to foster homes or other accommodations. 
Guest house means an accessory building that is physically detached from a single-family dwelling unit, does not contain cooking facilities, is serviced through the same utility meters or connections as the single-family dwelling unit, and is intended for occupancy only by guests of the family that resides in the single-family dwelling unit. 
Guest room means a room in a hotel, motel, bed and breakfast inn, or rooming or boarding house that is offered to the public for compensation, in which room no provision is made for in-room cooking, and which room is used only for transient occupancy. 
Guyed mast tower means a tall, thin, vertical structure that receives support from guy lines. 
Heavy industry means industrial uses (that are not specifically defined elsewhere in this Code) that can be described in one of the following four ways: 
(1)  Primary processing or manufacturing or repair operations not specifically defined elsewhere in this Code or this definition, which involve: (i) a material risk of significant environmental contamination, explosion, or fire; (ii) perceptible ground vibration at the property line; (iii) excessive noise or dust emissions at the property line and downwind; (iv) large-scale outdoor storage of inputs or products; (v) significant outdoor installations of processing equipment; (vi) outside emission of objectionable odors; (vii) more than five trips by semi trailer trucks per day; or 
(2)  Processing of minerals (except precious and semi-precious stone cutting for jewelry or precision instruments such as lasers or watches), ores, logs, pulpwood, or fossil fuels; or 
(3)  Activities that are required to undergo New Source Review under the Federal Clean Air Act, or are subject to construction or operation permits pursuant to the Colorado Stationary Sources Program or Title V of the Federal Clean Air Act; or 
(4)  Activities that are required to obtain a Certificate of Designation under C.R.S. § 25-15-201 (hazardous waste disposal sites), Title 30, Article 20, Colorado Revised Statutes (various other types of disposal sites). 
For illustrative purposes, uses classified as heavy industry may include (if they meet the thresholds of this definition), but are not limited to: (i) coal cleaning plants with thermal dryers; coke oven batteries; carbon black plants (furnace process); petroleum refineries; petroleum storage and transfer units (except retail gasoline stations); and bulk fuel dealers; (ii) facilities used in the primary or secondary production of metals (e.g., primary zinc, copper, or lead smelters; primary aluminum ore reduction plants; iron and steel mills; sintering plants; secondary metal production plants; and blacksmith shops); (iii) portland cement plants; (iv) sawmills and pulp mills; (v) incinerators with the capacity to charge more than 250 tons of refuse per day; (vi) lime plants; phosphate rock processing plants; sulfur recovery plants; and hydrofluoric, sulferic, or nitric acid plants; (vii) fossil fuel combustion (except for electricity generation) totaling more than 250 million BTUs per hour of heat input; (viii) fabrication of motor vehicles, manufacturing equipment, durable goods, or pre-fabricated homes or home components; (ix) drycleaner processing plants that use large quantities of PERC or comparable petrochemical solvents; (x) manufacture of plastic products (except assembly of parts that are manufactured elsewhere); (xi) hot mix asphalt plants; (xii) composting facilities; and (xiii) meat processing involving butchering of large animal carcasses. 
Heavy logistics center means a wholesaling, warehousing, and/or distribution use that provides a central location for receiving, storing and distributing raw materials, semi-finished goods, or finished goods. Heavy logistics centers may be warehouses in which goods are stored (a.k.a. "product warehouses"), or truck terminals in which goods are transferred between trucks or between trucks and trains or other transportation modes (a.k.a. "truck terminals" or "logistics centers"), or moving warehouses (including indoor storage of portable on-demand storage containers), or wholesaling operations (but not wholesale membership clubs in which memberships are available to the general public). Heavy logistics centers are expected to generate at least 10 heavy truck trips per day. Warehousing and distribution uses that involve fewer than 10 heavy truck trips per day are classified as light industry. 
Heavy motor vehicle repairs and services means repairs to passenger vehicles that are not included in the definition of the gasoline service station or light automotive repairs and services use, such as body repair, paint, upholstery, engine replacement or reconditioning, air conditioning replacement, tire recapping, and custom body work (but not including installation of audio, video, and navigation systems); and any type of repairs to commercial vehicles or construction vehicles. 
Heavy retail means retail or service activities in which more than 25 percent of the area put to the use is located outside or in partially enclosed structures. Illustrative heavy retail uses include manufactured home sales, boat sales, heavy equipment sales or rental, retail greenhouses and garden supply stores, and outdoor lumberyards. Heavy retail does not include uses that are specifically defined elsewhere in this Code, such as motor vehicle sales and rental. 
Hedge means a dense row of shrubs or low trees planted in a regular pattern such that they function as a garden wall. 
Helistop means an area of land or portion of a building or structure that is used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters, for private use or public safety purposes. 
Historic sign means a sign that has been recognized as part of an historic designation that is on the National, State, or Local Register of Historic Places; or a sign that is attached to a building or structure that is part of such historic designation, if the sign was installed during the period of significance of the designation. 
Home business means a business that is operated out of a dwelling unit, which involves employment of up to two unrelated individuals who do not live in the dwelling unit. These uses are limited to office or service businesses. The phrase "home business" does not include: (i) wholesale or retail sales, except for sales distributors who fill orders for catalog type products and then make deliveries to the customer's house (as opposed to customers coming to the place of business), or who fill orders by "drop shipping" from the manufacturer or a distribution center; (ii) activities that require commercial deliveries from semi-trailer trucks (as opposed to parcel services); (iii) on-site parking of commercial vehicles, or on-street parking of commercial vehicles next to the dwelling unit. 
Home occupation means an occupation carried on in a dwelling unit (or accessory building on a residential lot) by members of the family occupying the dwelling unit, with no servant, employee, or other person being so engaged, such that the residential character of the building and lot is maintained and the occupation is conducted in such a manner as not to give an outward appearance nor manifest any characteristic of a business in the ordinary meaning of the term nor infringe upon the right of neighboring residents to enjoy the peaceful use and occupancy of their homes. 
Homeowners association means an incorporated organization operating under recorded land agreements through which: (i) each lot or homeowner in a subdivision, planned unit development, or other described land area is automatically a member; (ii) each lot is automatically subject to charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintaining a common property, and (iii) the charge, if unpaid, becomes a lien against the property. 
Hospital or emergency room means an institution that is licensed, certified, or approved as a "hospital" by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment ("CDPHE"), where sick or injured persons are given medical care and, in the course of same, may be housed overnight, fed, and provided nursing and related services. The phrase also includes a free-standing emergency department. 
Hotel or motel means an establishment that principally provides temporary lodging in guest rooms, and in which meals, conference rooms, exercise rooms, swimming pools, retail sales, entertainment, and personal services may also be available to guests or the general public. 
Indoor amusement, recreation, and entertainment means uses that provide commercial amusement or recreation activities indoors (except sexually-oriented businesses or indoor firing / gun ranges), including, but not limited to bowling alleys; indoor playgrounds (may include conventional playground equipment, inflatables, trampolines, rock climbing walls, zip lines, and comparable equipment); indoor skating rinks (ice or roller); laser tag; local area network ("LAN") gaming centers; pool or billiard rooms; game arcades (e.g., video games, skee ball, and comparable amusement machines); dance halls; martial arts facilities; yoga studios; indoor athletic courts or fields; fitness centers; indoor pools; and recreation centers. 
Indoor firing/gun range means an indoor facility for shooting firearms at targets. 
Intensive agriculture means (1) concentrated animal feeding operations ("CAFOs") of any size, as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 122.23, Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations; (2) concentrated aquatic animal production facilities, as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 122.24, Concentrated Aquatic Animal Production Facilities; (3) any use where animals are tightly confined in buildings or outdoor pens or pastures with more than one animal equivalent unit per acre, including feedlots, hog farms, and poultry operations; or (4) any other agricultural use that is required to obtain a discharge permit under the Federal Clean Water Act due to animal wastes. 
Junk (salvage) means scrap iron, scrap tin, scrap brass, scrap copper, scrap lead, scrap zinc, and all other scrap metals and their alloys, bones, rags, used cloth, used rubber, used rope, used foil, used bottles, old cotton; used utensils, used boxes or crates, used pipe or pipe fittings, used automobiles or airplane parts, and other manufactured goods that are so worn, deteriorated or obsolete as to make them unusable in their existing condition; and all other products subject to being dismantled or recycled. 
Kennel means a lot or building in which four or more dogs or cats at least four months of age are kept commercially for board, propagation, or sale. 
Lattice antenna tower means a self-supporting tower with multiple legs and cross bracing of structural steel or other material. 
Level of service ("LOS") means, with respect to streets and intersections, a measure of the mobility characteristics of a street segment or intersection, as determined by the volume-capacity ratio or vehicle delay, as set out in the HIGHWAY CAPACITY MANUAL, as may be revised from time to time, published by the Transportation Research Board ("TRB"). 
Light industry means land uses that involve research and development, assembly, remanufacturing, compounding, packaging, testing, or treatment of products, generally from previously prepared materials or components or from organic materials, with limited outside storage and limited external impacts or risks (such that the use is not defined as Heavy Industry or Heavy Logistics). Light industry also includes wholesaling, warehousing, and distribution uses that involve fewer than ten (10) truck trips per day. Light industry does not include marijuana uses. 
For illustrative purposes, light industry uses include: (i) assembly, testing, repair, or refurbishing of products, instruments, electronics, office and computing machines, and fixtures using pre-manufactured components; (ii) offices of general contractors; specialty subcontractors; tradesmen; or telecommunications providers which include overhead door access to indoor storage of tools, parts, and materials, parking of commercial vehicles or a fleet of cars, vans, or light trucks that are used in the business; or limited outdoor storage areas; (iii) food production (e.g., commercial kitchen or bakery) and packaging, but not meat processing involving butchering of large animal carcasses, marijuana uses, or restaurants of any type; (iv) beverage production (alcoholic and non-alcoholic) and bottling; (v) furniture making or refinishing; (vi) manufacture, printing, or dyeing of textiles or apparel (except low volume production at a retail store); (vii) printing and publishing, except copy centers, and except printing presses that require a Stationary Source permit or Title V permit for air emissions; (viii) research, development, and testing laboratories (e.g., for development of products, equipment, or materials), if not classified as "office" or "heavy industry"; (ix) disassembly of consumer electronics and/or appliances into component parts, where all operations and storage are within an enclosed building; (x) manufacture of glass products (e.g., window panes, bottles and jars), including hand-blown products; (xi) fabrication of building materials such as countertops, drywall, and cut stone (if not classified as heavy industry); (x) manufacture or compounding of pharmaceutical products, dietary supplements, health and beauty products, and herbal products (except compounding pharmacies, which are retail sales and service uses, and except marijuana uses); (xi) packaging of products; (xii) storing, selling, and/or distributing merchandise for or to retailers; industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users; or (xiii) wholesalers, except that wholesale membership clubs that offer memberships to the general public are not Light Industrial uses. 
Live-work unit means a building or portion of a building that combines a dwelling unit with an integrated workspace that is principally used by one or more of the residents of the dwelling unit. The floor area of the workspace is subordinate or equal to the residential use. 
Lot means a parcel of land that is described with reference to a recorded plat, which is intended for private ownership, development, and use. 
Lot, double frontage means a lot that runs through a block from street to street. 
Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot line, front means the property line that divides a lot from the abutting street right-of-way. With respect to residential corner lots, the front lot line is typically the shortest street right-of-way line. With respect to nonresidential corner lots, the front lot line is typically the lot line that abuts the street with the larger capacity. 
Lot line, rear means, except on a double frontage lot, the property line opposite the front lot line. 
Lot line, side means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
Lot of record (or, where context suggests, "lot") means a parcel of land with boundaries that have been established by a legal instrument such as a recorded plat, recorded deed, or court order, which is used as a single development or building site, and which is recognized as a distinct property for purposes of transfer of title. A single lot of record may include multiple or fractional platted lots if said lots have been combined for the purposes of transfer of title or for the purposes of creating a building site. 
Major subdivision means a division of land into six or more new lots, or a division of land into any number of lots if it also includes dedications of public easements, rights-of-way, or other areas of land for public use. For the purpose of this definition, "public easements" do not include easements for utilities or drainage that serve only the lots in the subdivision. 
Major utility facilities means: (i) non-nuclear electrical generation facilities of any type; (ii) substations used for switching, regulating, transforming, or otherwise modifying the characteristics of electricity; (iii) transmission lines operated at one hundred ten (110) kilovolts or more; (iv) structures and equipment associated with such substations or transmission lines; (v) centralized water treatment plants; or (vi) centralized wastewater treatment plants. Major utility facilities do not include facilities related to telecommunications. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and which has certification required by the United States Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and was constructed is in compliance with the requirements of 42 U.S.C. § 5401, et seq., Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, and the regulations of the Department of Housing and Urban Development that are promulgated thereunder. The phrase "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle, nor does it include a mobile home. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel of land that is divided (or, in the case of the subdivision, platted) into two or more lots for long-term lease or sale, with infrastructure designed for the installation of manufactured homes. 
Marijuana use means: (i) a medical marijuana center; (ii) a medical marijuana-infused product manufacturer; (iii) an optional premises cultivation operation; (iv) a medical marijuana testing facility; (v) a retail marijuana store; (vi) a retail marijuana cultivation facility; (vii) a retail marijuana products manufacturing facility; or (viii) a retail marijuana testing facility, as the same are defined by the Colorado Statutes or rules of the Colorado Department of Revenue, Marijuana Enforcement Division, from time to time. 
Marquee means any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather and to provide a large vertical plane for the display of signage, often including changeable copy panels. 
Maximum extent feasible shall mean that no feasible and prudent alternative exists, and all possible efforts to comply with a regulation or minimize potential harm or adverse impacts have been undertaken. 
Medical office or clinic means a facility that provides medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons, or provides preventative care or monitoring, exclusively on an outpatient basis. Services may include diagnostic services, treatment, training, administration, and related services to outpatients, employees, or visitors, with or without appointment. The phrase also includes immediate care facilities, where urgent (non-emergency) care treatment is the dominant form of care provided at the facility, medical laboratories to the extent necessary to carry out diagnostic services for the medical clinic's patients, and physical therapy, licensed massage, chiropractic, acupuncture, hypnotherapy, nutrition counseling, homeopathy, Ayurveda, and other comparable services. 
Minor subdivision means a subdivision of land into two to five new lots, or that consolidate two or more lots, or that move existing lot lines between or among lots. Minor subdivisions do not include subdivisions that involve any new or changed dedications of public easements, rights-of-way, or public land. For the purpose of this definition, "public easements" do not include easements for utilities or drainage that serve only the lots in the subdivision. 
Mobile home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and which does not have certification required by the United States Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and was not constructed is in compliance with the requirements of 42 U.S.C. § 5401, et seq., Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, the regulations of the Department of Housing and Urban Development that are promulgated thereunder, or the residential building codes of the City of Alamosa, Colorado. 
Monopole tower means a slender un-guyed self-supporting tower (that does not include any lattice cross bracing structure) on which antennas can be placed. 
Motor vehicle parking, as a principal land use, means a surface parking lot or parking structure that provides parking spaces for one or more uses that are located on a separate lot or parcel. 
Motor vehicle sales and rental means a business engaged in the sale or rental of motor vehicles, in which some or all of the motor vehicle inventory is stored on-site. 
Multifamily dwelling. See "Dwelling, multifamily." 
Multiplex means a multifamily building that is architecturally designed to resemble a large single-family detached building (i.e., the boundaries of the individual dwelling units are not easily discernible from outside the building, garage doors are screened from view, and entry doors are arranged so that there appears to be only one principal entrance to the building). 
Nonconforming sign means a sign that was lawfully erected and in use prior to the effective date of this UDC, or any amendment thereto which does not conform to the regulations of this UDC. 
Nonconforming structure or use means a structure or use that was allowed before the effective date of this UDC, which does not meet the requirements of this UDC. 
Nursing home, convalescent center, or memory care means a facility that provides continuous day and night room and board, personal services, and medical care for compensation, for two or more elderly or infirm persons who are not related to the owner or operator facility. 
Obsolete sign means a sign (except an historic sign) that identifies or advertises an activity, business, product, or service which is no longer conducted, produced, performed, or sold on the premises, or a sign that does not contain a message for a period of more than six months. 
Off-street loading space means a space located outside of a public street or alley, intended for the discharge of passengers, or a space directly accessible to the building it serves for bulk pickups and deliveries by delivery vehicles. 
Off-street parking area means any parking area located wholly within the limits of one or more lots or parcels. 
Open space means land that is at least 95 percent open from surface to sky, which may be vegetated but which may not be paved for motor vehicle use. Open space may include buildings or structures that are directly related to the function of the open space, such as park shelters, grandstands, boathouses, or clubhouses. 
Outdoor commercial amusement means an outdoor entertainment venue that includes such facilities as amusement rides (e.g., roller coasters, zip lines, carnival rides), batting cages, mini-golf, bumper cars, bumper boats, go-cart racing, and / or water slides. Outdoor commercial amusement may also include indoor or outdoor areas with games, expositions, tent shows, rodeos, incidental food service, and incidental retail uses (e.g., souvenir shops) that are subordinate to the principal outdoor entertainment uses. 
Outdoor storage yard means an area of land that is used for the storage of materials, merchandise, stock, supplies, machines, operable vehicles, equipment, manufacturing materials, or chattels of any nature that are not kept in a structure having at least four walls and a roof, regardless of how long such materials are kept on the premises. The phrase does not include: (i) storage or display of items that are offered for sale to the general public, such as new and used cars, recreational vehicles, boats, manufactured homes, landscape and building materials, where such items are permitted for sale in the zoning district in which they are located; (ii) the storage of wrecked or inoperable vehicles (see "salvage or junk yard"); or (iii) outdoor parking of motor vehicles that are regularly used in connection with the operation of a business or institution, or parked for less than forty-eight (48) hours for maintenance service. 
Park means an outdoor place for passive or active recreation, which may include facilities such as playgrounds, racquetball courts, fitness courses, picnic areas, botanical gardens, jogging trails, cycling facilities, tot-lots, playing fields, outdoor swimming pools, tennis courts, golf courses, and wildlife sanctuaries. 
Parking module means an access aisle with a row of parking on each side, or an access aisle with a row of parking on one side if parking is not provided on both sides. 
Parking space means an improved area of land that is designated for parking a single vehicle. 
Permitted use means a use that is specifically allowed within a district. 
Personal communications services ("PCS") means wireless services that are similar to cellular telephone services (e.g., Time Division Multiple Access, Code Division Multiple Access, and Global System for Mobile communications technologies), but that operate within the 1,850 to 1,990 MHz frequency bands. 
Personal services means an establishment engaged in the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvement, personal care, and similar services, such as portrait shops, photography studios, art and music schools, driving schools, handicraft or hobby instruction, laundry and dry-cleaning retail outlets, beauty and barber shops, shoe repair, and tailor/alterations shops. 
Place of assembly means a building in which people assemble for scheduled civic, educational, religious, or cultural purposes, such as civic clubs, lecture halls, places of worship, conference centers, and meeting halls. 
Planned unit development means a project of a single owner or a group of owners acting jointly, involving a related group of residences, or businesses, or industries and associated uses, planned as a single entity and therefore subject to development and regulation as one land use unit rather than as an aggregation of individual buildings located on separate lots. The planned unit development includes usable, functional, open space for the benefit of the entire development, and is designed to provide variety and diversity through creative design that may include the modification of zoning and subdivision standards, so that maximum long-range benefits can be gained and the unique features of the development or site are preserved or enhanced, while still being in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood. 
Planning commission means the City of Alamosa Planning Commission. 
Porch frontage means that the street-facing elevation of the principal building includes a porch that shelters the principal building entrance, and does not include overhead doors. 
Porte-cochère means a porch-like or portico-like structure at a main or secondary entrance to a building, through which a motor vehicle can pass, in order for the occupants to access the building from the motor vehicle (or vice-versa) under cover, protected from the weather. 
Premises means a general term that encompasses part or all of any lot parcel or tract or part or all of any building or structure or group of buildings or structures located thereon. 
Private utility means any utility other than a municipally owned and operated utility, including telephone, electric, gas, and other privately owned and operated utilities. 
Professional or business offices means offices from which professional, business, or financial services are provided. The phrase includes such services as accounting, auditing and bookkeeping; advertising and graphic design; architectural, engineering, and surveying services; attorneys and court reporters; "back-office" operations of banks, mortgage companies, insurance companies, and financial services ("front office" services are classified as "retail sales and services"); call centers; computer programming; corporate headquarters or administrative offices; counseling services (except medical counseling services); consulting services; data processing, data mining, and word processing services; detective agencies; interior design; retail catalog, internet, and telephone order processing (but not warehousing); and virtual office services. 
Property line means the boundary of any lot, parcel or tract as the same is described in the conveyance to the owner, and shall not include the streets or alleys upon which the lot, parcel or tract may abut. 
Protective care means a facility that provides custodial care and treatment in a protective living environment for persons residing voluntarily or by court placement including, without limitation, correctional and post-correctional facilities, juvenile detention facilities, "halfway houses" (but not sober houses), and temporary custody facilities. Protective care also includes uses that would be classified as sheltered care facility or rehabilitation center, or a group home, if the use involves treatment of sexual offenders or people with a known tendency to commit acts of violence. 
Public hearing means a meeting of the Planning Commission, Board of Adjustment, or City Council, at which a recommendation or decision under this UDC is considered, and for which public notice is generally given and the opportunity for the applicant and the general public to be heard is provided. 
Recording or television studio means a facility for the recording and production of audio or video material, such as the recording of music, voice, video, for live broadcast or post-production. 
Recreational vehicle ("RV") means a motor vehicle or a trailer that may be pulled by a passenger vehicle or light truck (e.g., a camper, motor home, or fifth-wheel trailer), that provides less than four hundred (400) sf. of living and sleeping area. 
Residential zone means the following zones, individually and collectively: Established Neighborhoods (EN), Residential Estate (RE), Residential Light (RL), Residential Medium (RM), or Residential High (RH). 
Resource extraction, mineral means the extraction of coal or mineral resources (including sand and gravel, but not oil and gas) from the land (surface or subsurface). 
Resource extraction, oil and gas means the exploration for or extraction of oil and gas resources. 
Restaurant, drive-in or drive-through means an establishment engaged in the sale of pre-prepared or rapidly prepared food or beverages to customers in a ready-to-consume state, for consumption either within the restaurant building, outside but on the premises, or off the premises, and which includes a drive-in or drive-through facility. The design or principal method of operation involves two or more of the following characteristics: (i) the elimination, in whole or in part, of table service, thus requiring customers to place orders at the counter where the orders are filled; (ii) service of food in edible containers or in paper, plastic, foil or other disposable containers; or (iii) insufficient facilities for on premises consumption of the total volume of food sold by the establishment. 
Restaurant, indoor means an establishment engaged in the sale of food and beverages in a ready-to-consume state, where all activities are conducted indoors. The use may also include the production and sale of fermented malt beverages, malt, special malt and vinous and spirituous liquors for consumption on the premises. 
Restaurant, outdoor means an establishment engaged in the sale of food and beverages in a ready-to-consume state, where some or all of the dining areas are outdoors. The use may also include the production and sale of fermented malt beverages, malt, special malt and vinous and spirituous liquors for consumption on the premises. 
Retail means any sale of goods to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption or use (and not for resale). 
Retail sales and services, type 1 means a use involving the sale, lease, or rental of consumer, home, and business goods to consumers. Such uses include but are not limited to department stores, furniture stores, clothing stores, and establishments providing the following products or services: antiques, appliances, art, art supplies, beauty supplies, bicycles, books, magazines and newspapers, craft supplies, copies, costumes, dry goods, electronics, fabric, framing, garden supplies, gifts, groceries, hardware, home improvement goods, household products, jewelry, music, musical instruments, office supplies, party supplies, pet supplies, pharmaceuticals, phones, photography equipment, produce, signs, sporting goods, stationary, toys, and videos; and new automotive parts and accessories. The phrase also includes services such as banking, picture framing, installation of electronics (e.g., audio systems and navigation systems) into motor vehicles, real estate offices that are open for walk-in traffic; repairs of products sold by the establishment (e.g., a computer store may also repair computers), repairs of consumer electronics, and comparable services. The phrase "Retail Sales and Services, Type 1" does not include uses that are classified or defined more specifically in this Code, including but not limited to Retail Sales and Services, Type 2; Restaurants (all types); Sexually-Oriented Businesses; retail Marijuana Uses (whether medical or recreational); and Motor Vehicle Sales and Rentals. 
Retail sales and services, type 1 uses are generally conducted indoors. However, the phrase also includes uses in which not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area used for storage and display of products is located outside or in partially enclosed structures. 
Retail sales and services, type 2 means the following types of establishments: attended charitable donation collection centers; coin laundries; off-track betting centers; second-hand stores; thrift shops; consignment stores; head shops or drug paraphernalia stores; tattoo parlors; check cashing stores; payday loan providers; pawn shops. Retail sales and services, type 2 uses are conducted indoors. 
Right-of-way, public means all streets, roadways, sidewalks, alleys and all other areas reserved for present or future use by the public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular or pedestrian travel. 
Rowhouse dwelling. See "Dwelling, townhouse or rowhouse." 
Salvage or junk yard means any establishment that is maintained, used, or operated for storing, buying, or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. This use is also referred to by the Colorado statutes as "automobile graveyard." See C.R.S. § 43-1-502. 
School means a public or private licensed preschool; a public, private, or charter K-8, elementary (which may also include kindergarten), middle, junior high, or high school; or a vocational or language school. 
Screening means decorative fencing, evergreen hedges or earth berms maintained for the purpose of concealing from view the area behind such screening. 
Self-storage means the provision of individual storage compartments for household or commercial goods within a building. Storage spaces may be accessed from interior hallways or individual outside doors. This use may also include quarters for one or more persons employed by and residing at the self-storage facility for the purpose of on-site management and security. 
Setback line means a line or lines designating the area outside of which buildings and certain other structures may not be erected. 
Sexually-oriented business means a "sexually-oriented theater/dancing establishment" or a "sexually-oriented retail establishment." 
Sexually-oriented theater/dancing establishment means any of the following uses: 
Adult arcade, which means any commercial establishment or private club where, for any form of consideration, one or more video displays, still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image producing machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, are used to regularly show digital images or video, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions or digitally, mechanically, electronically, or chemically reproduced visual materials characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction, display or exhibition of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult cabaret, which means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, concert hall, auditorium, or other commercial establishment or private club that regularly features or presents live adult entertainment with an emphasis upon the display or exhibition of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Nude model studio, which means any place where a person who appears nude, semi-nude, or who otherwise displays specified anatomical areas, is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. The phrase "nude model studio" does not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of Colorado or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or a business in a structure: (i) that has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and (ii) where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and (iii) where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
Adult motel, which means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: (i) offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, digital images or video, slides, or other photographic reproductions or digitally, mechanically, electronically, or chemically reproduced visual materials which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction, display or exhibition of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproduction; or offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10 hours; or allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours. 
Adult motion picture theater, which means a commercial establishment or private club, where for any form of consideration, digital images or video, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions or digitally, mechanically, electronically, or chemically reproduced visual materials characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction, display or exhibition of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown. An establishment meeting the definition of an adult arcade is not an adult motion picture theater. 
Adult theater, which means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons who appear nude or live performances which are characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
Sexual encounter center, which means a business or commercial establishment or private club that offers, for the purpose of sexual arousal, pleasure, gratification, or abuse, for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort and observe, view, participate, or engage in specified sexual activities or expose specified anatomical areas. 
Sexually-oriented retail establishment means a commercial establishment that: 
(1)  Devotes a significant or substantial portion of its business to the rental or sale of any one or more of the following ("adult items"): (a) books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, digital video, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions or digitally, mechanically, electronically, or chemically reproduced visual materials that are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction, display or exhibition of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or (b) instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for engaging in specified sexual activities; or 
(2)  Is characterized by one or more of the following: (a) a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade consists of Adult Items; or (b) a significant or substantial portion of its revenues is derived from the rental or sale of Adult Items; or (c) a significant or substantial portion of its floor space, shelf space or storage space is devoted to Adult Items; or (d) a significant or substantial portion of its advertising is devoted to Adult Items. 
Sheltered care facility means: (i) facilities, other than group homes, in which residents live in an institutional environment and are, generally, under the care or control of staff; (ii) in-patient drug and alcoholism hospitals and rehabilitation centers, in which residents have institutional care, or are given medical treatments by staff in an institutional setting. The phrase sheltered care facility does not include assisted living, congregate care, convalescent center, Alzheimer's care, memory care, or nursing home uses. The phrase sheltered care facility does not include "sober houses," which are classified according to the type of residential use in which the use is located (e.g., a rooming or boarding house or multifamily use). 
Shopfront frontage means that the street-facing elevation of the principal building abuts the sidewalk (except for a recessed entry, if provided), the principal entrance is at the same grade as the sidewalk, and display windows provide transparency into the building from street-level views. 
Shopping center means a composite arrangement of shops and stores which provide a variety of goods and services to the general public, when developed as an integral unit. 
Sight triangle (also referred to as "vision clearance area") means a triangular area located at the intersection of two streets, a street and a driveway, or a street and a railroad, within which visual obstructions are restricted. Two sides of the sight triangle are line segments measured from the corner intersection of the extension of the right-of-way lines to a distance specified in this Code, and the third side is a line segment joining the ends of the other two sides. 
Sign means any object, device or part thereof situated outdoors, or indoors within three feet of a window, if oriented for viewing outside of the window, that is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, idea, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, motion, illumination or projected images. Signs do not include merchandise or products that are displayed behind windows. 
Sign, animated means any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position by any movement or rotation, or which uses moving images or flashing lights of any sort. 
Sign, awning means a sign that is a part of or attached to an awning that shelters a door, building entrance, or window. Marquees and canopies are not awnings. 
Sign, canopy means any sign that is a part of or attached to a canopy or other plastic or structural shelter over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. Awnings and marquees are not canopies. 
Sign, flashing means any directly or indirectly illuminated sign either stationary or animated, which exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever. 
Sign, ground (a.k.a. freestanding sign) means a sign supported by poles, uprights or braces extending from the ground, or an object on the ground but not attached to any part of any building. 
Sign, historic means any sign or marker recognized as part of a building's historic designation by the National, State, or Local Register of Historic Places. 
Sign, illuminated means a sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting either by lights on the sign or directed toward the sign. 
Sign, integral roof means any sign that is erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof, and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six (6)inches. 
Sign, marquee means any sign attached to integrated into a marquee. 
Sign, projecting means a sign that is affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six (6) inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. 
Sign, roof means any sign that is erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, that is supported by the roof structure, and that extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof. 
Sign, suspended means a sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface, and is supported by such surface. 
Sign, temporary means any sign that is designed for temporary use, which is not permanently mounted. 
Sign, V-sign means a sign consisting of two essentially equal faces, positioned at an angle subtending less than one hundred seventy-nine (179) degrees and more than ninety (90) degrees. A sign positioned at an angle extending ninety (90) degrees or less is considered a projecting sign. 
Sign, wall means a sign attached to, painted on, or erected against or within six inches of a wall of a building, with a single display surface that is parallel to the face of the building to which the sign is attached, and wholly confined to an area within the boundaries of the surface of the wall. 
Sign, window means a sign which is applied or attached to or located within three feet of the interior of a window, which sign can be seen through the window from the exterior of the structure. 
Single-family detached dwelling. See "Dwelling, single-family detached." 
Small wireless facility means a wireless telecommunications facility on which each wireless provider's antenna(s) could fit within an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume, and for which all wireless equipment associated with the wireless telecommunications facility, whether ground-mounted or pole-mounted, is cumulatively no more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume, not including any electric meter, concealment element, telecommunications demarcation box, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, vertical cable run for the connection of power or other service, wireless provider antenna, or cable that is immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular collocation, unless the cable is a wireline backhaul facility (in which case the cable should be included in calculating the total volume of the associated equipment). 
Smoking lounge means a retail tobacco businesses in which on-premises smoking is allowed, or a private club in which tobacco is smoked on the premises. 
Sober house means a residential use that is occupied by people who are recovering from substance abuse, which provides a structured environment that supports sobriety, and which serves as an interim environment between rehabilitation and mainstream society. Sober houses may provide on-site counseling, but do not provide on-site medical treatment. Comparable facilities that provide institutional care or on-site medical treatment are classified as "sheltered care." 
Solid waste disposal means facilities for the disposal of non-nuclear waste or fill. The phrase "solid waste disposal" includes solid waste disposal sites and facilities, as defined by C.R.S. § 30-20-101; and hazardous waste disposal sites, as defined by C.R.S. § 25-15-200.3. 
Special flood hazard area is defined in Section 8-5, Definitions, City of Alamosa Municipal Code. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes any of the following: (i) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or (ii) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: (i) the fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; (ii) sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; (iii) flagellation, mutilation or torture for purposes of sexual arousal, gratification, pleasure, or abuse; (iv) human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or (v) excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities specified above. 
Stoop frontage means that the street-facing elevation of the principal building includes stairs that lead to an elevated "stoop" at the principal building entrance. The stoop may be covered or open. 
Street means the entire width between the boundary line of every way that provides for public use for the purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and placement of utilities and including the term "road," "highway," "land," "placing," "avenue" or other similar designations, but not including the term "alley." 
Street, collector means any street designed primarily to gather traffic from local or residential streets and carry it to the arterial system. 
Street frontage means that portion of a property boundary that is shared with the boundary of a public street. 
Street, marginal access (frontage) means a local street lying parallel to and adjoining an arterial street or freeway right-of-way, that provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Street, minor arterial means any street serving major traffic movements that is designed primarily as a traffic carrier between various sections of the City, that forms part of a network of through streets, and that provides service and access to abutting properties only as a secondary function and serves a collector function for access to principal arterial streets. 
Street, principal arterial means a highway that is designed primarily as a traffic carrier between cities. 
Structural alteration means any change to the supporting members of a building, including foundations, bearing walls, or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any structural change in the roof. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location from the ground above grade, but not including ground-level paving, poles, lines, cables, or other transmission or other distribution facilities of public utilities. 
Structure, nonconforming. See "Nonconforming structure or use." 
Subject property means any legally described lot or parcel of land that is designated by the owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a single unit, or that has been developed as a unit as determined by the City. A subject property may be subdivided to create individual lots and tracts. 
Telecommunication tower means a support structure for wireless telecommunications facilities the primary purpose of which is for such wireless telecommunications use rather than for another purpose (such as buildings, flagpoles, church steeples, cupolas, ball field lights, water towers, etc.). In the context of wireless telecommunications facilities, support structures whose primary use is a purpose other than wireless telecommunications are referred to as multiple-use facilities. 
Temporary sign means a sign that is designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of time. 
Townhouse dwelling. See "Dwelling, townhouse or rowhouse." 
Transfer station means the use of land or a facility, regardless of name or title, to unload waste of any kind or type from vehicles, and, with or without intermediate processing such as compaction, sorting, or shredding, subsequently re-load the waste onto other vehicles for delivery to another transfer site, storage site, or disposal site. The phrase includes a facility for drop-off of recyclable materials (e.g., waste paper, motor oil, scrap metal, polystyrene foam, porcelain, batteries, electronic components, textiles, plastics, discarded shoes, cardboard, and other discarded household materials), where the materials are sorted, temporarily stored, and then shipped in bulk to other locations for processing. The phrase does not include a wastewater treatment facility. 
Unattended collection box means a drop-off box, container, receptacle, or similar facility that accepts textiles, shoes, books, household goods, or other salvageable personal property items to be used by the operator for distribution, resale, or recycling. The phrase "unattended collection box" does not include dumpsters and recycling containers that are intended for solid waste processing. 
University or college means an educational institution that is authorized by the State of Colorado or other nationally recognized accrediting entity to award associates' or higher degrees. 
Use means the purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. 
Use, accessory. See "Accessory use." 
Use, nonconforming. See "Nonconforming structure or use." 
Use, principal means the main use of land or structures as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. 
Vehicle wash means any area or business using self-service, in-bay automatic, or conveyor equipment for cleaning and washing motor vehicles on a commercial basis. 
Veterinary and animal hospital facilities means veterinary clinics and animal hospitals that provide care for small domestic animals, large animals, or livestock, which may include facilities that provide daytime or overnight boarding of small domestic animals. 
Whip antenna means an antenna in the form of a long flexible wire or rod. 
Wholesale nursery or greenhouse means land that is used to raise trees, shrubs, flowers, and other plants that are sold at wholesale to retailers or landscape professionals. 
Wholesale trade business means the wholesale of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, which may include accessory offices and showrooms. Products may be picked up on-site or delivered to the customer. The use may also include related product repair, minor fabrication services, or repackaging of goods. 
Wireless telecommunications facilities (a.k.a. wireless telecommunication services facilities or equipment) means a facility used to provide personal wireless services as defined at 47 U.S.C. § 332 (c)(7)(C); or wireless information services provided to the public or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public via licensed or unlicensed frequencies; or wireless utility monitoring and control services. The phrase does not include a facility entirely enclosed within a permitted building where the installation does not require a modification of the exterior of the building; nor does it include a device attached to a building, used for serving that building only and that is otherwise permitted under other provisions of this Code. The phrase "wireless telecommunications services facility or equipment" includes an antenna or antennas, including without limitation, directional, omni-directional and parabolic antennas, base stations, support equipment, alternative tower structures, and towers. It does not include the support structure to which the facility, equipment, or components thereof are attached if the use of such structures for such facility, equipment, or components is not the primary use. The phrase does not include mobile transmitting devices used by wireless service subscribers, such as vehicle or hand held radios/telephones and their associated transmitting antennas, nor does it include antennae that are incidental to residential uses, including residential satellite dish antenna under two feet in diameter, radio or television receivers, or amateur radio (HAM radio) antennae, or other facilities specifically excluded from this Code. 
Yard means an open space on a lot that is unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
Yard, front means the yard extending between the side lot lines, from the front lot line to the principal structure. 
Yard, rear means the yard extending between the side lot lines, from the rear lot line to the principal structure. 
Yard, side means the yard extending between the principal structure and the side lot line, not including areas that are part of the front yard or the rear yard. 
Zoo means a place where live animals are kept and exhibited to the public. The animals may also be studied, given medical treatment, and bred. The term "zoo" does not include agricultural uses or uses that sell live animals. 
(Ord. No. 33-2017 , § 1, 12-6-17; Ord. No. 20-2018 , § 2, 7-18-18) 
