THE CODE OF THE CITY OF CORTEZ, COLORADO 
____________ 
A Codification of the Charter 
and the General Ordinances of 
Cortez, Colorado 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 7, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
 
PREFACE 
The Code of the City of Cortez, Colorado, originally published by Michie City Publications Company in 1974, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement 7, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Michie City Publications Company under the supervision of Christopher C. Hudson. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been appropriately catchlined to facilitate usage. Attention is also directed to the analysis preceding each chapter which, in many instances, will serve as an index within itself. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. Beginning with Supplement No. 7, this legislative history will be complemented by a "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List," following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 7, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 1231 , passed October 10, 2017. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 2 is numbered 2-1 and the ninth section of Chapter 4 is 4-9. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 9-5 and 9-6 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 9-5.1, 9-5.2 and 9-5.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 6 and 7, it will be designated as Chapter 6.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 7, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 7, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 7, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Prefatory Statement. 
The charter convention, elected on the25th day of June, 1957, respectfully presents to the voters of the City of Cortez a Charter for their approval. 
Uppermost in the minds of the members of the charter convention have bee two main purposes: 
First—That the Charter must reserve to the people of the city absolute right and power of self government under the home rule provision of the Constitution of the State of Colorado; that it must provide for the well being of all inhabitants and look forward to the future growth and development of the community. 
Second—That the Charter must ensure the orderly and economical management of the city government by a single responsible administrative officer chosen guided and controlled by the people through their elected representatives. 
To accomplish these objectives the Charter provides for the council-manager form of city government. 
The policy making, legislative and budget making powers are vested in a council composed of seven tax paying electors, elected by popular vote from the city at large. Provisions are made for there call of elected officers, for control of legislation by the people through initiative and referendum and for amendment of the Charter by popular vote. The strict financial controls required by the Charter will prevent wasteful and extravagant use of public funds and ensure the continued conduct of city business on a cash basis. Indebtedness in the form of general obligation bonds cannot be incurred except upon the favorable vote of a majority of voters who are taxpayers. 
Control of city owned utilities and the regulation of rates to be charged consumers is vested in the council, the intent being that such utilities shall be self supporting and operated for the benefit of the city. The rights of the people with respect to franchises are carefully safe-guarded. 
Provision is made for the necessary departments of the city government. Recreation, the public library, parks and a cemetery are given due consideration. The Charter provides for a citizens planning commission whose duties shall be to recommend to the council plans for the orderly improvement, growth and beautification of the city. 
The administrative officer of the city will be a city manager, appointed by the council on the base of his executive and administrative abilities, and subject to removal by a majority vote of the council. The manager will attend the meetings of the council but will not have the right to vote; he will prepare the budget, but final approval and adoption of such budget and of all appropriations and expenditures of city funds will remain in the hands of the council. His acts as city manager will be subject at all times to review, criticism and supervision of the city council. It is the belief of the charter convention that this Charter will provide the basic law upon which the citizens of Cortez may build a sound and progressive city government.  
Preamble. 
We, the people of Cortez, under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, do ordain and establish, for our municipal government this Charter. 
  Editor's note: The provision of the State Constitution herein referred to is section 6 of Article XX. For the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1971, see CRS § 31-2-201 et seq.  
Article I. - Name, Boundaries, Powers, Rights, Liabilities and Form of Government. 
 
Sec. 1. - Name; boundaries. 
The municipal corporation heretofore and now existing and known as the City of Cortez, shall remain and continue a body politic and corporate under this Charter, with the same name and boundaries, until changed in the manner authorized by law.  
Sec. 2. - Rights; liabilities; powers. 
By the name of Cortez, the city shall have perpetual succession; shall own, possess and hold all property, real and personal, heretofore owned, possessed and held by said city, and shall assume and manage and dispose of all trusts in any way connected therewith; shall succeed to all the rights and liabilities and shall acquire all benefits, and shall assume and pay all bonds, obligations and indebtedness of said City of Cortez; by that name may sue and defend, plead and be impleaded, in all courts and places, and in all matters and proceedings; may have and use a common seal and alter the same at pleasure.  
Sec. 3. - Form of government. 
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "council-manager government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the State Constitution and by this Charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereafter referred to as the "council." All powers of the council shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or, if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance.  
Article II. - Municipal Officials. 
 
Sec. 1. - Designation of officials. 
The legally qualified incumbents of the following positions in the municipal service are hereby declared to be officials: 
Mayor. 
Members of the city council. 
Members of boards and commissions. 
Appointed officials who shall be: the city manager, the city attorney, and the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 873, Part 9 (part).)  
Sec. 2. - Municipal employees. 
The incumbents of all other positions in the municipal service are hereby declared to be employees.  
Sec. 3. - Qualifications for city council members.* 
No person shall be eligible to office as a council member unless at the time of election he or she be a citizen of the United States, at least twenty-one years of age and shall have been for one year immediately preceding such election a resident of the city. The city clerk shall promulgate rules to have candidates establish proof of residency, if challenged, with candidates having the burden of proof. 
No member of the council shall hold any other public office or employment for which compensation is paid from municipal funds. No person shall be elected or appointed to any city office position or employment for which the compensation was increased or fixed by the council while he or she was a member thereof until after the expiration of one year from the date when he or she ceased to be a member of the council. 
(As amended November 4, 1975; Ord. No. 783, Part 6 (part).) 
*  Editor's Note: Ordinance 873, Part 6, contained a scrivener's error, indicating Art. II, Section 4 was amended, when in fact Art. II, Section 3 was amended, as set out above.  
Sec. 4. - Appointment to boards and commissions. 
The city council shall by resolution establish qualifications for appointment to city boards and commissions, except where such qualifications are elsewhere established by the city charter or the code of ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 873, Part 7 (part).)  
Sec. 5. - Oath of office. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, each council member, the mayor, the city manager, the city attorney, the city clerk, the judge of the municipal court and each director of a department shall take, subscribe and file with the city clerk an oath or affirmation that he will faithfully perform the duties of the office or position. The city clerk shall take and subscribe his oath before some person qualified to administer oath. 
(Ord. No. 906 § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 6. - Bonding of employees. 
The council shall require a bond of the city manager and the finance director, and may require a bond of any other employee in its discretion. These bonds shall be placed with each surety and in such amounts as the council may determine. Premiums on these bonds shall be paid by the city. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1.)  
Article III. - The Council. 
 
Sec. 1. - Composition. 
The electors of the city shall elect a city council of seven members, one of whom shall be chosen by the council to serve as mayor. The council shall constitute the legislative and governing body of the city and shall have power and authority, except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by statute, to exercise all powers conferred upon or possessed by the city, and shall have the power and authority to adopt such laws, ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise thereof. 
The mayor shall preside over the meetings of the council. He shall be recognized as the head of the city government for ceremonial purposes, and by the governor of the State of Colorado for purposes of military law, and for service of civil processes. He shall execute and authenticate legal instruments requiring his signature as such official. 
The council shall choose one of its members as mayor pro tempore who shall preside over the council in the absence or disability of the mayor and serve as acting mayor with the same duties as the mayor.  
Sec. 2. - Compensation of mayor and council members. 
The mayor shall receive as compensation five hundred dollars per month. Each of the council members shall receive as compensation four hundred dollars per month. 
Such compensation shall be paid every two weeks. No council person shall receive a payment for a meeting which he or she did not attend. The mayor and council members may, upon order of the council, be paid necessary bona fide expenses incurred in service on behalf of the city as authorized and itemized. 
(As amended November 4, 1975; Ord. No. 906 § 3 (part): Ord. No. 1068 § 3.)  
Sec. 3. - Powers of council. 
All powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the council except as otherwise provided by this Charter. Without limitation of the foregoing, the council shall have power to: 
(a)  Appoint and remove the city manager. 
(b)  By ordinance create, change, and abolish offices, departments, or agencies, and assign additional functions to offices, departments or agencies established by this Charter, but not to discontinue any office, department, or agency established by this Charter. 
(c)  Adopt the budget of the city. 
(d)  Authorize the issuance of bonds by ordinance as provided by this Charter. 
(e)  Inquire into and investigate any office, department, or agency of the city and the official acts of any officer or employee thereof, and to compel by subpoena attendance and testimony of witnesses and production of books and documents. 
(f)  Adopt plats. 
(g)  Adopt and modify the official map of the city. 
(h)  Provide for independent audits of all funds and accounts of the city.  
Sec. 4. - Meetings; quorum. 
Council shall meet regularly twice each month on such days as the council by written resolution shall prescribe, at city hall at an hour to be fixed from time to time by the rules and procedures of each council; and the council shall have power by ordinance to prescribe the manner of calling meetings thereof. Special meetings may be held at any time the council may direct. A majority of the membership of the entire council shall constitute a quorum to do business. Council shall sit with open door at all legislative sessions, and shall keep a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
(As amended November 3, 1987.)  
Sec. 5. - Ordinances, resolutions and motions generally. 
In all legislative matters coming before it, the council shall act only by ordinance, resolution or motion. The ayes and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances, resolutions and motions and entered upon the journal of the council proceedings. Should any council members being present refuse to vote on any measure, his vote shall be recorded in the affirmative. A council member shall be excused from voting on matters involving the consideration of his own official conduct, or where his financial interests are involved. 
(Ord. No. 906 § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 6. - Ordinances—When required. 
In addition to such acts of the council as are required by this Charter to be by ordinance, every act fixing compensation, making an appropriation, authorizing the borrowing of money, levying a tax, establishing any rule or regulation for the violation of which a penalty is imposed, or placing any burden upon or limiting the use of private property, shall be by ordinance.  
Sec. 7. - Same—Form. 
All ordinances shall be introduced in written form and no ordinance or section thereof shall be amended or repealed except by an ordinance regularly adopted. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Cortez."  
Sec. 8. - Same—Procedure for passage. 
An ordinance may be introduced at any regular or special meeting and be read a first time, and a day and an hour set at which time the council or a committee shall hold a public hearing thereon. Such hearing may be at a regular meeting of the council, or at such time and place as the council may order and may be adjourned from time to time. An ordinance may be read and finally passed at any regular or special meeting of the council following the meeting at which it is introduced. Such final reading and passage of an ordinance may be made at the same meeting at which such public hearing thereon is held. The reading upon introduction or upon final passage or both shall be in full unless the proposed ordinance shall be in writing or printed and a copy furnished to each council member at least five days prior to such reading. 
(Ord. No. 906 § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 9. - Same—Emergencies. 
No ordinance shall be passed finally on the date it is introduced, except in cases of emergency for the preservation of the public peace, health or property, and then only by two-thirds vote of the council members present. The facts showing such urgency and need shall be specifically stated in the measure itself. No ordinance making a grant of any franchise or special privilege shall ever be passed as an emergency measure. 
(Ord. No. 906 § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 10. - Same—Publication and effective date. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, every proposed ordinance shall be published once in full in a newspaper of the city, before its final passage. After such final passage, it shall be again published once in a newspaper, and shall not take effect until after publication following final passage, unless another date is specified therein; except that an emergency ordinance and any ordinance not subject to the referendum shall take effect upon publication following passage. 
(As amended November 2, 1993.)  
Sec. 11. - Same—Publication by reference. 
When the council deems it appropriate, publication of the title of the ordinance, or the title of an amendment thereto, together with a brief summary of such ordinance or amendment as determined to be sufficient by the council, together with a statement that the text thereof is available for public inspection and acquisition in the office of the city clerk, shall be sufficient publication.  
Sec. 12. - Same—Codification. 
The city council shall within five years after the date of the adoption of this Charter and within each ten year period thereafter complete a codification of all existing ordinances.  
Sec. 13. - Same—Disposition. 
A true copy of every ordinance, when adopted, shall be numbered and recorded in a book marked "Ordinance Record," and adoption and publication shall be authenticated by the signatures of the mayor and the city clerk, and by the certificate of the publisher, respectively. The ordinances as adopted by the vote of the qualified electors of the city shall be separately numbered and recorded.  
Article IV. - Elections. 
 
Sec. 1. - When held and terms of office. 
A general municipal election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in April in the year 1996 and on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in April in each even numbered year thereafter. Elections held at other times shall be special elections. The three candidates receiving the highest number of votes in the November 1993 election shall serve until the fourth Tuesday in April of the year 1998. The candidate receiving the fourth highest number of votes shall serve until the fourth Tuesday in April of the year 1996. The three candidates who received the highest number of votes in the November 1991 election shall have their terms extended to the fourth Tuesday in April of the year 1996. 
At all subsequent general municipal elections there shall be elected four council members. The three candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared to be elected for a term of four years and the candidate receiving the next highest number of votes shall be declared to be elected for a term of two years. 
(Ord. No. 782 § 2 (B).)  
Sec. 2. - Primary election. 
There shall be no primary election for any municipal office.  
Sec. 3. - Precincts. 
The city shall constitute one voting precinct, provided that the council may for the convenience of voters, establish two or more precincts 30 days or more, prior to any election, by ordinance. The precincts so established by ordinance shall remain for all subsequent elections until otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(As amended May 6, 1980.)  
Sec. 4. - Commencement and continuation of terms. 
The term of each council member shall commence on the fourth Tuesday in April of even numbered years immediately following the general municipal elections held under the provisions of this article and shall continue until he/she has served the term of years for which he/she was elected unless he/she sooner die, resign, be removed from office or become otherwise disqualified to act as council member. 
(Ord. No. 782, § 2 (C).)  
Sec. 5. - Mayor and mayor pro tempore. 
The members of the city council chosen to serve as mayor and mayor pro tempore shall be elected on the fourth Tuesday in April, as provided in Section 4, Article IV. The mayor and mayor pro tempore shall serve for a term which shall commence on the fourth Tuesday of April in even numbered years following the general municipal election and shall continue for two (2) years thereafter or until their successors have been chosen and qualified for office as hereinabove provided, unless they sooner die, resign or be removed from office. In the event of a vacancy occurring in either or both offices, the council shall have the power to fill such vacancy in the manner provided in Article IV, Section 21, until the first meeting in April after the next general municipal election thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 782, § 2 (D).)  
Sec. 6. - Repealed May 6, 1980.  
Sec. 7. - Repealed May 6, 1980.  
Sec. 8. - Repealed May 6, 1980.  
Sec. 9. - Repealed May 6, 1980.  
Sec. 10. - Calling of special elections. 
Special election shall be called by the city council whenever a measure is required to be submitted to the voters pursuant to the Constitution and laws of the State of Colorado, this Charter, or the ordinances of the city. 
The city council may by ordinance also call a special election for a vote of the electorate upon any measure upon petition of the electorate or by referendum, or upon its own initiative, consistent with this Charter; but no special election shall be called to fill a vacancy in an elective office. 
No special election shall be called or held within 3 months prior to a general municipal election, except where otherwise required by the Constitution of the state. 
Where a petition for a special election if filed pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance, making the calling of a special election mandatory, the repeal of such ordinance or any part thereof, shall not affect the mandate of the petition.  
Sec. 11. - Measures submitted to electorate. 
Every petition to have a vote of the electorate on a measure and every ordinance requiring a vote of the electorate on any measure, shall contain a short and concise ballot title for the measure to be voted upon, and the ballot title shall appear on the ballot, as follows: 
_____
	YES 	FOR 
_____
BALLOT TITLE 	or 
_____
	NO AGAINST 
_____
 
Every petition to have a vote of the electorate upon a measure shall name a conference committee of three, who are signers of the petition, and shall contain authority in such committee to make any necessary changes in such ballot title. The council may refuse to submit the measure when any ballot title is unreasonably long, misleading, or ambiguous, unless such committee shall revise the same to conform to such requirements. 
If there be more than one measure on a ballot by petition, they shall be numbered in the order of filing, and they shall follow the measures placed on the ballot by initiation of the council. 
The list of candidates shall precede the ballot titles on the ballot.  
Sec. 12. - Repealed May 6, 1980.  
Sec. 13. - Repealed May 6, 1980.  
Sec. 14. - What constitutes election. 
The candidates for council members equal in number to the positions on the council to be filled by any election, receiving the highest number of votes cast, shall be declared elected council members; and any measure submitted to a vote of the electorate shall be declared adopted or approved, as the case may be, when a majority of those voting upon any such measure shall vote "yes" or "for" on any such measure. In case of a tie, the election shall be decided by casting lots. 
(Ord. No. 906 § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15. - Repealed May 6, 1980.  
Sec. 16. - Repealed November 3, 1987.  
Sec. 17. - Repealed May 6, 1980.  
Sec. 18. - State law applicable. 
All provisions of law of the State of Colorado insofar as the same shall be applicable to municipal elections, both general and special, in cities of the second [first] class in the State of Colorado, shall apply to all elections in the city except as otherwise provided in this article. When there shall be a conflict between the provisions of law and the provisions of this Charter with respect to any matter pertaining to elections, the provisions of this Charter shall be deemed to supersede any and all statutory provisions. 
  Editor's note: For state law as to municipal elections, see "Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965," as contained in CRS § 31-10-101 et seq.  
Sec. 19. - Repealed May 6, 1980.  
Sec. 20. - Definition of "party." 
The term "party" as used herein, shall mean and include any group of citizens of the city who shall associate themselves together for the purpose of nominating candidates for office at municipal elections, but shall not be any political party which nominates candidates for election of county, state and national offices.  
Sec. 21. - Vacancies. 
All elected officers shall hold office until their successors are elected and qualified. Any vacancy in an elective office shall be filled within sixty days by appointment of the council until the next regular election, when the vacancy shall be filled by the electors for the remainder of the term, if any. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy for an unexpired term in an elective office shall have the qualifications required of persons to be regularly elected. A vacancy shall exist when a member of the council fails to qualify within thirty days after the commencement of his/her term, or if he/she dies, resigns, removes from the city, or absents him/herself from meetings of the council for sixty days unless excused by resolution thereof, or if he/she is convicted of a felony or is judicially declared a mental incompetent. 
The council at its discretion may decline to appoint a new member to fill a vacancy if the vacancy occurs within 120 days of a duly scheduled municipal election. 
(Ord. No. 906 § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 22. - Repealed November 2, 1993.  
Sec. 23. - Repealed November 2, 1993.  
Sec. 24. - Repealed November 2, 1993.  
Article V. - Appointed Officials. 
 
Sec. 1. - Appointed officials. 
The appointed officials of the city shall be as follows: city manager; city attorney, and judge of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 873, Part 9 (part).)  
Sec. 2. - Terms of office. 
All such appointed officials shall be appointed by the council and each shall hold office at the pleasure of the council or until the next general municipal election succeeding the appointment. 
(Ord. No. 873, Part 9 (part).)  
Sec. 3. - City manager. 
Appointment and qualifications. The council shall appoint and fix the salary of the city manager, who shall be the chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the municipal government. He or she shall be chosen on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his or her actual experience in and his or her knowledge of accepted practice with respect to the duties of the position. 
At the time of his or her appointment the city manager need not be a resident of the city but he or she shall reside in the city during his or her tenure of office. 
All city department heads shall report directly to the city manager as the chief administrative officer. The city manager shall be directly responsible to the council for the administrative operation of the city. 
No council member shall be appointed city manager during the term for which he or she shall have been elected nor within one year after the expiration of his or her term. 
(Ord. No. 873, Part 9 (part); Ord. No. 906 § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4. - Acting city manager. 
The council may appoint or designate an acting city manager to serve during the period of a vacancy in the office or during the absence of the city manager from the city.  
Sec. 5. - Removal of city manager.* 
The city manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term but shall be removable at the pleasure of the council. Before the manager may be removed, he shall, if he so demands, be given a written statement of the reasons alleged for his removal and the right to be heard publicly thereon at a meeting of the council prior to the final vote on the question of his removal, but pending and during such hearing the council may suspend him from office. The action of the council in suspending or removing the manager shall be final, it being the intention of this section to vest all authority fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the council. The city council shall be fully responsible for the review and approval by contract of all terms and conditions, including termination provisions, regarding the employment of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 873, Part 9 (part).) 
*  Editor's Note: Ordinance 873, Part 9, contained a scrivener's error, indicating Art. V, Section 5, catchline be removed; the catchline has been retained.  
Sec. 6. - Departmental divisions. 
The work of each department of the administrative branch may be distributed among such divisions within the department as may be established by the Charter, or by ordinance, after recommendation of the city manager, or by regulations issued by the city manager pending passage of such an ordinance. 
There is hereby created a Department of Planning and Building for the City of Cortez. The Department of Planning and Building shall be responsible for implementation of planning, planning review and zoning functions as well as building inspection and assurance of compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances. 
Appointment of Director: The City Manager shall appoint a director to carry out the responsibilities and direct the activities of the Department of Planning and Building. The Director may within the framework of an annual budget approved by the City Council and with the authorization and approval of the City Manager hire such employees as are necessary to perform the prescribed functions of the Department and such other duties as may be assigned by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 1136)  
Article VI. - Municipal Court and City Attorney. 
 
Sec. 1. - Municipal court—Created; powers generally. 
There shall be a municipal court which shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases arising under this Charter or the ordinances of the city, subject to appeal to the district court in the manner provided by law for appeals from municipal court to district court. The court may punish contempt of court by fine or by imprisonment, or both, in like manner as a court of record may do; may enforce its orders and judgments in like manner as a court of record may do, and as provided by general law; and may render final judgment on any forfeited bond or recognizance returnable to such court subject to appeal as in other cases. Cash bonds may be provided for or taken in lieu of property, individual or corporate surety bonds. 
(Ord. No. 747, § 1.)  
Sec. 2. - Same—Judge; council to provide place, supplies, etc.; forms for complaints, etc. 
The municipal court shall be presided over, and its functions exercised by a judge, who shall be a licensed member of the bar of this state in good standing, appointed by the city council, for a term to be at the pleasure of the council. If no qualified member of the bar satisfactory to the council is available and willing to serve, any other person may be appointed until a qualified member of the bar is willing to accept. He shall receive a fixed salary or compensation not dependent upon the outcome of the matters to be decided by him, and to be fixed by ordinance from time to time. If absent, disqualified, or unable to act in any matter or case, the municipal judge may call any eligible person to act and serve temporarily; and, if he fails to or cannot call in a substitute, the council shall appoint a substitute. The council by ordinance shall provide for trial by jury, but there shall be no change of venue from said court. 
The council shall provide a suitable place and all supplies and things necessary for the proper functioning of the court. 
The forms of complaints and all other rules, procedure, proceedings, costs and fees in the municipal court, shall be prescribed by ordinance, upon the recommendation of the municipal judge. 
(As amended April 4, 1961.)  
Sec. 3. - Same—Penalties. 
The council shall provide for the enforcement of its ordinances by fine or imprisonment or both, as established by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 748, § 1.)  
Sec. 4. - City attorney.* 
Appointment and qualifications. The council shall appoint a city attorney who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. He/she shall have been a duly licensed attorney in the State of Colorado for at least three years immediately prior to his/her appointment. The council shall fix the compensation of the city attorney. 
Functions. The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of the council and all employees of the city in matters relating to their official powers and duties. He shall represent the city in all legal proceedings, draw all ordinances, and prepare all other legal documents. He shall attend all council meetings and perform all services incident to his position as may be required by this Charter, ordinances, or the council. In all legal proceedings concerning the city, he nor any member of his firm shall represent the opposition. 
(Ord. No. 906 § 3 (part).) 
*  Annotator's Note: For further clarification, please refer to Ordinance No. 864, Series 1998.  
Sec. 5. - Special counsel. 
The council may, in special cases, employ special counsel to assist the city attorney if deemed necessary and advisable under the circumstances.  
Article VII. - Finance Administration. 
 
Sec. 1. - Department created; qualifications of director. 
A department of finance is hereby created, the executive officer of which shall be the director of finance who shall have special knowledge of municipal accounting, taxation, budget making, and finance. The city clerk shall be director of finance unless otherwise provided by ordinance.  
Sec. 2. - Powers and duties of director. 
The director of finance shall have charge of the financial records and general and special funds of the city and shall collect, receive, and disburse all money belonging to the city, and shall have all other duties required to administer properly the financial affairs of the city; to that end he shall have authority and shall be required to: 
(a)  Maintain a general accounting system for the city government of each of its offices, departments, and agencies, exercise budgetary control over the same in accordance with the budget and annual appropriation ordinance; prescribe the form of receipts, requisitions, warrants, and other evidence of income and disbursements; audit before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls, and other claims and charges against the city government; determine the regularity, legality, and correctness of such claims, demands or charges. 
(b)  Advise the city manager of the budget requirements of the department of finance and furnish estimates and information concerning other departments, agencies and boards as requested by the city manager. 
(c)  Advise departments of remaining allotments. 
(d)  Disburse funds in a manner which will assure that budget appropriations are not exceeded and that payments are not illegally made. 
(e)  Collect and hold all city funds; invest funds as directed by the council by resolution; be responsible for all trust funds. 
(f)  Serve as custodian of all bonds, documents, and other evidence of indebtedness owned by the city or under its control. 
(g)  Issue all licenses and collect the fees therefor, except as otherwise provided ordinance; collect or receive funds of every description belonging to, due to or accruing to the city, including fines, forfeitures, penalties, taxes, water rentals and sewer fees. 
(h)  Submit to the council through the city manager a monthly statement of all accounts and funds, including trust and custodial funds, such report to show receipts and disbursements and remaining budget allotments sufficiently itemized in detail to show the exact financial condition of the city. 
(i)  Examine and approve all purchase contracts, orders, and other documents by which the city incurs financial obligations, having previously ascertained that moneys have been appropriated and allotted and will be available when the obligations become due and payable. 
(j)  Advise the city manager of any financial irregularity in any department. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 1.)  
Sec. 3. - Separate utilities accounts. 
The accounts of each utility owned and operated by the city shall be kept separate and distinct from all other accounts of the city. Such accounts shall show also reasonable allowance for depreciation and obsolescence and estimate of the amount of taxes that would be chargeable, against such utility property if owned privately.  
Sec. 4. - Responsibility for funds. 
All money belonging to the city and in the custody of city employees shall be paid daily to the department of finance.  
Sec. 5. - General fund expenditures. 
A general fund is hereby created which shall consist of all revenues of the city not specifically belonging to any special fund. The governmental functions of the city shall be paid for out of appropriations from the general fund.  
Sec. 6. - Special fund expenditures. 
Special funds may be created for any purpose by ordinance, any ordinance creating a special fund shall also specify the source of revenue and the purpose and manner of expenditure.  
Sec. 7. - Fiscal, budget and accounting year. 
The budget, fiscal and accounting year shall be the same as the calendar year. The term "budget year" means the fiscal year for which any budget is adopted and in which it is to be administered.  
Sec. 8. - Annual budget estimates. 
On or before the first Monday in November of each year, the city manager shall submit to the council a proposed budget for the next ensuing budget year with an explanatory message. The proposed budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the city and shall include the following: 
(a)  Proposed expenditures for each office, department and agency for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(b)  Debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(c)  An estimate of the amount of anticipated income from all sources other than taxes on property during the ensuing fiscal year, including estimated cash surplus at the end of the current year. 
(d)  The probable amount required to be levied and raised by property taxes during the ensuing fiscal year. 
(e)  A general budget summary. 
The budget shall be in sufficient detail to show for each fund estimated revenues by source and estimated expenditures. The budget shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for receipts and expenditures for the last completed fiscal year, for the current year, and the city manager's recommendations for the ensuing year. 
(As amended November 2, 1993.)  
Sec. 9. - Capital budget. 
As a part of the budget message or as separate report attached thereto, the city manager shall also present a program of proposed capital projects for the ensuing year and the five fiscal years thereafter. Estimates of the cost of such projects shall be submitted together with suggested methods of financing the same. 
In such proposed program, the city manager shall include those projects previously considered by the planning commission, but he may recommend the omission or deferment of projects proposed by the planning commission, giving his reasons therefor. 
The council shall consider the program of projects submitted by the city manager and adopt a capital budget plan for such period of years, including estimated costs and methods of financing; provided, however, that projects shall be budgeted and appropriations made therefor only by including them in the budget for the ensuing year as provided in this article. 
In order to facilitate the carrying out of the capital budget plan the council may create a capital budget fund. Moneys may be appropriated to this fund directly or by transfer from the general fund, and may be accumulated and invested; and may be expended only for capital projects, including the purchase of land, buildings, or equipment and the construction or improvement of public works.  
Sec. 10. - Public record; hearing. 
The budget estimates aforesaid shall thereupon be a public record and open to the public for inspection and copy. The council shall, within ten days after the filing of said budget estimates, set a time certain for public hearing thereon and cause notice of such public hearing to be given by publication. At the hearing all persons may appear and object to any or all items and estimates in the proposed budget. Upon completion of the public hearing the council may revise the budget estimates.  
Sec. 11. - Adoption of budget. 
After said public hearing and before the last day of December in each year, the council shall pass the "Annual Appropriation Ordinance" in which shall be appropriated such sums of money as the council deems necessary to defray all expenses and liabilities of the city during the ensuing budget year. The annual appropriation ordinance shall be based upon the budget as adopted but need not be itemized further than by departments and the major divisions thereof, and by each independent office and agency. 
(As amended November 2, 1993.)  
Sec. 12. - Tax levy generally. 
The "Annual Appropriation Ordinance" shall include the proper levy in mills upon each dollar of the assessed valuation of all taxable property within the city, such levy representing the amount of taxes for city purposes necessary to provide for payment during the ensuing budget year of all properly authorized demands against the city; including interest and principal of general obligation bonds. The council shall thereupon cause the total levy to be certified by the director of finance to the county assessor, who shall extend the same upon the tax list of the current year in a separate column entitled "City of Cortez Taxes," and shall include said city taxes in his general warrant to the county treasurer for collection. If the council fails in any year to make said tax levy as above provided, then the rate last fixed shall be the levy fixed for the ensuing budget year and the director of finance shall so certify.  
Sec. 13. - Tax levy limitation. 
All tax levies of the city when applied to the total assessed valuation of the city shall be so fixed as to prohibit the levying of a greater mill levy than was levied in the preceding year plus 5 percent on the previous years mill levy except to provide for the payment of bonds and interest thereon; provided, however, that if all members of the council shall be of the unanimous opinion that the amount of tax so limited will be insufficient for the city's needs for such year, they may by resolution unanimously adopted, authorize an increased levy above such limit, provided that such increased levy shall not exceed an additional 5 percent unless authorized by a special election.  
Sec. 14. - No unbudgeted liability. 
The city expenditures in any one year shall not be increased above the amount provided in the annual budget. No contract involving expenditures, and no expenditures, for any improvement to be paid out of the general or special funds of the city or for defraying the expenses and liabilities of the city shall exceed, in any one year, the amount provided in the annual budget to be paid out of the said general and special funds so budgeted, but the said several funds shall be maintained and used for the particular purposes specified in the budget. It shall be unlawful for any department, officer, or agent of the city to incur or contract any expense or liability for or on behalf of the city unless an appropriation therefor shall have been made in the budget. Such contracts shall be null and void ab initio as to the city for any liabilities; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prevent the council from providing by ordinances for payment of any expense, the actual necessity of which is caused by any casualty, accident, or unforeseen contingency arising after the passage of the annual appropriation ordinance; and that the provisions of this section shall not apply to or limit the authority conferred in relation to bonded indebtedness, nor to monies to be collected by special assessments for local improvements. The provisions herein shall be subject to section 22 of this article.  
Sec. 15. - Effect of appropriation and levy. 
After the commencement of the budget and fiscal year the annual appropriation ordinance and levy shall be irrepealable and the several amounts stated in the adopted budget and annual appropriation ordinance as proposed expenditures shall be deemed appropriated for the items, objects and purposes therein specified.  
Sec. 16. - Lapsed appropriations. 
All appropriations unexpended or unencumbered at the end of the budget year shall lapse to the applicable general or special funds.  
Sec. 17. - Deposit of public funds. 
The cash balances of the city shall be deposited in such banks in the city as the council by resolution shall determine and with such security as the council shall by resolution require; but nothing herein contained shall make the council, or any member thereof, or the director of finance, personally liable to the city for loss of any funds so deposited.  
Sec. 18. - Investments. 
Monies remaining in any fund may in the discretion of the council be invested in one or more of the securities permitted by the statutes of Colorado governing investments of public funds, or in bonds payable out of the revenues of any service or facility furnished by the city; or in general obligation bonds of the city. Interest on such investments shall be credited to the fund to which the invested money belongs, if such can be determined, otherwise to the general fund of the city. The council, or any member thereof, or the director of finance shall not be personally liable to the city for any loss incurred through the investment of any funds as herein provided. 
(As amended May 6, 1980.)  
Sec. 19. - Collection of taxes. 
Until the council shall otherwise provide by ordinance, the county treasurer shall collect taxes in the same manner and at the same time as state taxes are collected. In like manner the council may provide for collection of special improvement assessments by said treasurer. All laws of this state for the assessment of property and the levy and collection of general taxes, sale of property for taxes, and the redemption of the same, shall apply and have as full effect in respect to taxes, except as modified by this Charter. On or before the tenth day of each month, the county treasurer shall report and pay to the director of finance the amount of tax collections of the city for the preceding month. The estimated costs of tax collections and losses shall be included in the budget.  
Sec. 20. - Audit and payments. 
No demand for money against the city shall be approved, allowed, audited, or paid unless it is in writing, dated and sufficiently itemized to identify the expenditure, and payment thereof approved in writing by the director of finance and the person or department creating the obligation.  
Sec. 21. - Apportionment of expenses. 
The salaries of the city manager, directors, and others rendering services to two or more departments, and expenses of departments rendering services to other departments or to improvement districts, shall be equitably apportioned and charged against the proper department or other agency.  
Sec. 22. - Repealed April 4, 2000.  
Sec. 23. - City not to pledge credit. 
The city shall not lend or pledge its credit or faith, directly or indirectly, in any manner to or in aid of any person, corporation, or any other organization, public or private, for any amount or any purpose whatever, or become responsible for any debt, contract, or liability thereof except for municipal purposes. 
(As amended November 4, 1975.)  
Sec. 24. - Reports and publication. 
The council shall provide for an independent audit at least annually by an independent certified public accountant or a registered accountant of all books and accounts of the city and shall publish a summary thereof once in the manner provided for publication of legal notices within three months after the end of each fiscal year. Copies of such audit shall be available at the office of the city clerk for public inspection.  
Sec. 25. - Availability of receipts and disbursements. 
The finance officer shall make available at the office of the finance director for public inspection a list of the warrants or checks issued for the previous month, stating the name of the person, firm or corporation to whom issued, amount thereof, and showing separately the warrants or checks payable out of each fund. 
(As amended May 6, 1980.)  
Sec. 26. - Capital improvement fund created: how funded. 
Any amounts of revenue deriving from legally authorized sources in excess of the amounts otherwise allowed under Article X, Section 20 of the Constitution shall be retained and expended annually by the City of Cortez, for the purpose of creating a capital improvement fund to develop sidewalks, recreational facilities, public parking, and other capital improvements. 
(Ord. No. 782, § 3; Ord. No. 859, § 3, as approved by voters on April 7, 1998.)  
Article VIII. - Municipal Borrowing. 
 
Sec. 1. - Forms of borrowing. 
The city may borrow money and issue the following securities to evidence such borrowing: 
Short term notes; 
General obligation bonds and other like securities; 
Revenue bonds and other like securities; and 
Local improvement bonds and other like securities.  
Sec. 2. - Short term notes. 
The municipal government, with the written approval of the director of finance and the mayor and upon the affirmative vote of four members of the city council, is hereby authorized to borrow money without an election in anticipation of the collection of taxes or other revenues and to issue short term notes to evidence the amount so borrowed. Such short term notes shall be payable from the fund for which the money was borrowed; shall mature before the close of the fiscal year in which the money is so borrowed; and shall not be extended or funded except in compliance with section 3, "General obligation bonds," of this article.  
Sec. 3. - General obligation bonds. 
No bonds or other evidences of indebtedness payable in whole or in part from the proceeds of general (ad valorem) property taxes or to which the full faith and credit of the city are pledged, shall be issued, except in pursuance of an ordinance, nor until the question of their issuance shall at a special or general election be submitted to a vote of the qualified electors and provided that such securities issued for acquiring, improving or extending a municipal water system or any combination of such purposes, may be so issued without an election. 
(As amended May 6, 1980.)  
Sec. 4. - Limitation on indebtedness. 
The aggregate amount of bonds or other evidences of indebtedness will not exceed ten percent of the assessed valuation of the taxable property within the city as shown by the last preceding assessment for city purposes; provided, however, that in determining the amount of indebtedness, there shall not be included within the computation, bonds or other evidences of indebtedness outstanding or authorized to be issued for the acquisition, extension or improvement of the municipal waterworks system or the municipal storm sewer, sanitary sewer, combined storm and sanitary sewer, or sewage disposal systems, short term notes, local improvement securities, or securities payable solely from the net revenues of an income producing system, utility or other project, of from excise taxes, or from any part or combination of such revenue sources. 
(As amended May 6, 1980.)  
Sec. 5. - Revenue bonds. 
The city may, by ordinance of the city council, without an election and without adherence to the limitation of article VIII, section 3, borrow money, extend its credit, or issue bonds for any lawful purpose, and made payable solely from revenues other than the proceeds of ad valorem taxes, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the issuance of securities payable from revenues derived from the operation of water, electric, gas, sewer or other revenue producing public utilities or income producing projects or improvements, from the available proceeds of any sales tax, use tax or other excise tax, or from any part or combination of such sources. Short term notes, anticipation warrants, and other interim securities, are among the securities which may be issued and made so payable or made payable from the proceeds of bonds. No revenue bonds or other like securities shall be issued for the acquisition of such a system, utility or income producing project unless the acquisition thereof has been authorized as provided in article X of this Charter. 
(As amended May 6, 1980.)  
Sec. 6. - Refunding bonds. 
The city pursuant to ordinance, may issue its bonds or other securities without an election for the purpose of refunding outstanding general obligation or revenue bonds, or other securities, and it shall be the duty of the council to refund such securities whenever it determines it is advantageous and favorable to the city so to do. Any such refunding revenue bonds or other revenue securities shall be payable solely from the net revenues of the system, utility or other income producing project acquired, extended, or improved, with proceeds from issuance of the securities so refunded. Refunding bonds shall not extend beyond the period of usefulness estimated at the time of financing, and in no case for a longer term than thirty years from the date thereof.  
Sec. 7. - Bonds limited to life of the project. 
The ordinance authorizing the issuance of general obligation or revenue bonds or other such securities shall state the estimated period of usefulness of the property or improvement for which issued and the term of any such bonds shall not exceed such estimated period. No bonds shall be issued for a term longer than thirty years from the date thereof.  
Sec. 8. - Bonds; interest, sale. 
The terms and interest rate of general obligation or revenue bonds or other like securities shall be fixed by the authorizing ordinance and such securities shall be sold at public or private sale for cash and in all cases to the best advantage of the city, but any funding bond or other funding security or any refunding bond may be exchanged respectively dollar for dollar for a short term note, anticipation warrant, or other interim funded security for a bond refunded. All bonds or other securities may contain provisions for calling the same for prior redemption at a designated time or times prior to the fixed maturity date or dates. 
(As amended May 6, 1980.)  
Sec. 9. - Local improvements. 
The power to create local improvement districts, to assess the cost of the construction of public improvements of a local and municipal character or any part thereof against benefited property therein, and to issue local improvement bonds, is vested in the city council, in accordance with Article XIII of this Charter. 
(As amended May 13, 1958.)  
Article IX. - Department of General Services. 
 
Sec. 1. - Division created. 
A division of purchases may be created by the council and the head thereof shall be the purchasing agent for all departments and other agencies of the city. The powers and duties of the purchasing agent shall be as provided by the council.  
Sec. 2. - Competitive bidding. 
All purchases of or contracts for supplies, material or equipment shall be made by the purchasing agent under such rules and regulations with respect to competitive bidding as the council may prescribe.  
Sec. 3. - Emergency purchases. 
In case of emergency affecting the public peace, health, or safety, the council may waive all provisions for competitive bidding and direct the purchasing agent to purchase necessary supplies in the open market at not more than commercial prices.  
Sec. 4. - Participation of officers and employees interested in contracts. 
No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city shall be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale of any land, material, supplies, or services to the city in excess of $500.00 except it be by competitive bidding. In cases of emergency necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare, competitive bidding may be waived.  
Sec. 5. - Contracts to be approved by council. 
Any city improvement in excess of such amount as determined by council resolution from time to time shall be executed by contract, except such improvements as the council authorizes a department to make, and shall be submitted for competitive bidding and awarded on the basis of what in the judgment of the council is the lowest and best bid. The successful bidder may be required to provide a performance bond. If all bids are rejected, then the council may authorize the appropriate department to proceed with the construction as in other cases in accordance with the plans and specifications, and the services of the department shall be charged as a part of the costs of the improvements. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 1; Ord. No. 782, § 6.)  
Sec. 6. - Contracts for service. 
No contract for service shall be made by the city for a longer period than two years, unless authorized by ordinance which ordinance shall not be passed as an emergency ordinance.  
Sec. 7. - Contracts effective only when bond funds available. 
No contract for the acquisition of property or the construction of improvements or other expenditures which is to be financed by bonds or other obligations shall be effective until the proceeds of the bonds or obligations are actually in the hands of the director of finance. 
Improvements to be paid for by special assessments shall be excepted from the provisions of this section.  
Article X. - Franchises and Public Utilities. 
 
Sec. 1. - Franchise elections. 
No franchise election shall be held unless by referendum as set out in Article 20, Paragraph 4, of the Colorado State Constitution. 
No election shall be held until the grantee of the franchise has deposited the cost thereof, with the franchise, in an amount determined by said director. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. 
If no referendum is called, each franchise shall be enacted by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 997, § 2, as approved by voters on November 4, 2003)  
Sec. 2. - Franchise to specify streets. 
All franchises or privileges hereafter granted shall plainly specify the particular streets, alleys, avenues, and other public property, or parts there of, to which they shall apply. All other franchises maybe in general terms and may apply to the city generally.  
Sec. 3. - Regulation of public utilities. 
The right to regulate the rates, fares, and rentals of public utilities and carriers serving the residents of the city shall always be reserved to the city to be exercised by ordinance. Every person or corporation operating under a franchise or grant from the city shall annually submit to the council a report verified by the oath of the president, the treasurer, or the general manager thereof. Such reports shall be in the form, contain such detailed information, and cover the period prescribed by the council. The council shall have the power, either through its members or by authorized experts or employees, to examine the books and affairs of any such person, persons, or corporations, and to compel the production of books and other records pertaining to such reports or other matters.  
Sec. 4. - Books of record. 
The council shall provide and cause to be kept in the office of the city clerk an indexed franchise record in which shall be transcribed copies of all franchises granted by the city. Said record shall be a complete history of all franchises granted by the city and shall include a comprehensive and convenient reference to actions, contests, or proceedings at law affecting the same, and copies of all annual and inspection reports and such other information as the council may require.  
Sec. 5. - Terms; compensation. 
No franchise, lease, or right to use the streets or the public places or property of the city shall be granted for longer than twenty years. Every grant of a franchise shall fix the amount and manner of payment of the compensation to be paid by the grantee for the use of the same, and no other compensation of any kind shall be exacted for such use during the life of the franchise. This provision shall not exempt the grantee from any lawful taxation upon his or its property, nor from any license charges, or other impositions levied by the council, not levied on account of the use granted by the franchise.  
Sec. 6. - City may acquire utilities. 
The council upon vote of the taxpaying electors shall have the power within or without the territorial limits of the city to construct, condemn, and purchase, acquire, and lease waterworks, gas works, light plants, power plants, transportation systems, telephone systems, heating plants. and other public utilities local in use and extent, in whole or in part, and everything required therefor, for the use of the city and its inhabitants, and any such systems, plants, works, or ways, or any contracts in relation or in connection therewith which may exist and which the city may, desire to acquire or purchase, In whole or in part, the same or any part thereof may be purchased by the city. Such public utilities acquired by the city, except waterworks, and transportation systems, shall not be paid for out of general taxes or general obligation bonds, but shall be paid for from revenue derived from the public utility. Equipment necessary for transportation system may be acquired from the funds of the equipment fund of the city.  
Sec. 7. - Right of regulation. 
The grant of every franchise or privilege shall be subject to the right of the city, whether in terms reserved or not, to make any regulations for the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public, including among other things the right to require proper and adequate extensions of the service of such grant, the right to require any or all wires, cables, conduits, and other like appliances to be placed underground, and the right to protect the public from danger or inconvenience in the operation of any work or business authorized by the franchise.  
Sec. 8. - Revocable permits. 
The council may grant a permit at anytime for the temporary use or occupation of any street, alley, or public place provided such permit shall be revocable by the council at its pleasure, whether such right to revoke be expressly reserved in such permit or not.  
Sec. 9. - Franchise renewal. 
No franchise shall be renewed before one year prior to its expiration which renewal shall be subject to all provisions relating to the original grant of a franchise.  
Sec. 10. - Leasing of franchises. 
No franchise granted by the city shall ever be leased, assigned, or otherwise alienated without the express consent of the city and no dealing with the lessee or assignee on the part of the city to require the performance of any act or the payment of any compensation by the lessee or assignee shall be deemed to operate as such consent. Any assignment or sale of such franchise without the consent of the city shall, at the option of the council operate as a forfeiture to the city of such franchise.  
Sec. 11. - Issuance of stock. 
Every ordinance granting any franchise shall prohibit the issuing of any stock on account thereof by any corporation holding or doing business thereunder.  
Sec. 12. - Amendment, renewal, extension, or enlargement of franchise. 
No amendment, renewal, extension ,or enlargement of any franchise, or grant of rights or powers heretofore granted to any corporation, person or association of persons shall be made except in manner and subject to all the conditions provided in this article for the making of original grants and franchises.  
Sec. 13. - Common use of facilities. 
The city may by ordinance require any person or corporation holding a franchise from the city for any public utility to allow the use of any of its poles, tracks, wires, conduits and other related facilities by any other person or corporation to which the city shall grant a franchise upon the payment of a reasonable rental to the owner therefor. If the person or corporation desiring to use the same cannot agree with the owner regarding said rental and the terms and conditions for such use, within sixty days from offering writing to do so, the council, after a fair hearing, shall by resolution fix the terms and conditions of such use and compensation to be paid therefor, which award of the council shall be final and binding on the parties concerned.  
Sec. 14. - Franchise public utility commission to regulate until city acts. 
Unless and until the council shall make provision, by ordinance for regulating the rates, fares, rentals and charges charged by any public utility, or by a carrier serving the residents of the city, the public utility commission of Colorado shall continue to exercise supervision thereof under applicable statutes of the State of Colorado but the right to so regulate public utilities and carriers serving the residents of the city shall always be reserved to the city.  
Article XI. - Department of Municipal Public Utilities. 
 
Sec. 1. - Department created. 
A department of municipal public utilities is hereby created, which shall include a division of water, including the sanitary sewer system, and other divisions for any public utility acquired by the city.  
Sec. 2. - Functions of department. 
The functions, powers and duties of the department of municipal utilities shall be as provided by ordinance or resolution of the council.  
Sec. 3. - Restriction on sale of water and other utility property. 
The city shall not sell, lease, or in any manner dispose of the water or other utility plants or systems, nor any part thereof, unless and except the proposition for such purpose shall first have been approved by a majority vote of the qualified electors of the city who shall have paid a property tax therein during the preceding calendar year. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale or exchange of any equipment which may be worn out or use less, or which could with advantage to the service be replaced by new or improved machinery or equipment.  
Sec. 4. - Control of water. 
If at any time the water supply is greater than the immediate needs of the city and its inhabitants, the council may authorize the city manager to permit the use of such surplus water by consumers outside the city at such rates as the council may prescribe; provided that no vested right shall accrue under such permits.  
Sec. 5. - Municipal utility rates and finances. 
The council shall by ordinance from time to time fix, establish, maintain, and provide for the collection of rates, fees or charges for water, sewer, and other utility services furnished by the city for the operation of such utilities. The council may provide and maintain an adequate fund for replacement of depreciated or obsolescent property, and a fund for the extensions, improvement, enlargement and betterment of said utilities. The provisions hereof shall be subject at all times to the performance by the city of all covenants and agreements made by it in connection with the issuance, sale or delivery of any bonds of the city payable out of the revenues derived from the operation of its water, and other utilities, whether such revenue bonds be heretofore or hereafter issued. 
Payments from the revenues derived from such utilities shall be made into a depreciation and obsolescence fund and a fund for making extensions, improvements, enlargements and betterments of such works in such manner as the council may provide. Such funds shall be expended only for purposes for which they were created and shall be invested as directed by the council. Any surplus revenue produced from the operation of any utilities after meeting all of the requirements set forth above shall be paid into the general fund of the city.  
Article XII. - Initiative, Referendum and Recall. 
 
Sec. 1. - Initiative and referendum procedure generally. 
Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the council by petition therefor of qualified electors equal in number to at least ten percent of the total number of legal ballots cast within the City of Cortez at the last general municipal election by filing the same with the city clerk or other election officer, and such proposed ordinance shall be' adopted, without alteration by the council, within twenty days after such petition is filed; or the council shall refer such proposed ordinance in the form petitioned for, to the qualified electors at the next municipal election held not less than sixty days after such petition is filed. If such petition contains a request for a special election and is signed by qualified electors equal in number to at least twenty-five percent of the total number of legal ballots cast at the last preceding general municipal election, the ordinance thereby proposed shall be passed by the council, without amendment or change, within twenty days after such petition shall be filed or the council shall refer each proposed ordinance in the form petitioned for, to the qualified electors at a special election, which shall be called within said thirty days and held not less than sixty nor more than ninety days after petition is filed, unless a special election for some other purpose or a general election is held within said period of time, in which case such proposed ordinance may be submitted at the same election, and if two or more conflicting measures be approved by the people, then that one which received the greatest number of affirmative votes shall be adopted in all particulars as to which there is a conflict. 
The law known as "Initiative and Referendum," Chapter 70, Title 31, Article 2, Revised Statutes of Colorado 1973, and all laws amendatory thereto, as far as applicable shall govern the procedure and form of direct legislation by the people of the City of Cortez, with power in the city council to make and publish such ordinances as may be needful to carry out the object and intent of this article, but not inconsistent herewith. 
The City Council of the City of Cortez shall have the power to submit to the qualified electors of the City of Cortez any ordinance or other measure as maybe needful to carry out the object and intent of this charter. Electorate approval shall be by a majority of those voting in such election. 
(As amended November 3,1987.)  
Sec. 2. - Recall from office. 
Every elective city officer of the City of Cortez may be recalled from office at any time after he has held office for six months, by the electors of the City of Cortez, by recall petition filed with the city clerk, with signatures of qualified electors equal in number to twenty-five (25) percentum of the entire vote cast at the last preceding general municipal election for all candidates for the position which the incumbent sought to be recalled occupies. The procedure here under to effect the recall of an elective officer, shall be as far as applicable by the method pointed out in Article XXI of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, known as "Recall from Office," with power in the city council to provide by ordinance such other and further procedure as it may deem expedient, not inconsistent herewith.  
Article XIII. - Public Works and Public Improvements. 
 
Sec. 1. - Department created. 
A department of public works is hereby created, the head of which shall be the director of public works.  
Sec. 2. - Functions. 
The department shall provide all engineering, architectural, maintenance, construction, and work equipment services required by the city except those performed by private persons, firms or corporations under contract, or those assigned to other departments by this Charter.  
Sec. 3. - Improvement districts. 
A public work or improvement, the cost of which in whole or in part are to be assessed by the city; may be initiated by the council on recommendation of the director of public works; or on petition of property owners in such number and in such form as may be prescribed by ordinance. The council shall by ordinance prescribe the method of making such improvements and the assessments for their cost.  
Sec. 4. - Surplus and deficiency fund. 
Where all outstanding bonds have been paid in a public improvement district, and any money remains to the credit of said district, it shall be transferred to a special surplus and deficiency fund and whenever there is a deficiency in any improvement district to meet payment of outstanding bonds, it shall be paid out of said fund. Whenever a public improvement district has paid and canceled four-fifths of its bonds outstanding, and for any reason the remaining assessments are not paid in time to take up the final bonds of the district, and there is not sufficient money in said special surplus and deficiency fund, then the city shall pay said bonds when due and reimburse itself by collecting the unpaid assessments due said district.  
Sec. 5. - Authority to acquire property. 
In addition to all other power which it has to acquire property, the City of Cortez is hereby authorized to purchase or otherwise acquire property on which there are delinquent taxes and/or special assessments. The city may also dispose of any property acquired under this authority.  
Sec. 6. - Additionally securing payment of bonds. 
In addition to the provisions of Section 4 of this article and not in limitation thereof, the city prior to the issuance hereafter of any bonds of any public improvement district therein may contract by ordinance with the holder or holders thereof that the payment of the bonds of such district, both as to principal and interest, is additionally secured by a pledge of monies in a special fund created therefor into which the city covenants to deposit the proceeds of general (ad valorem) property taxes to be levied not earlier than the date of the bonds of any such series nor later than one year after the maturity date thereof, not exceeding three mills in any one year. After the issuance of any such bonds, the city shall levy such general taxes pursuant to such contract; provided, however, that any such levy may be diminished to the extent other funds of the city available therefor are deposited in such fund. Prior to the redemption of all such bonds, both principal and interest, the proceeds of such taxes or equivalent transfer or both, shall be disbursed from such fund only for the payment of the principal of and interest on such bonds. After such bonds have been redeemed in full, any monies remaining in such fund shall be deposited in said special surplus and deficiency fund. Whenever there are no outstanding bonds of any public improvement district of the city, all or any part of any monies in the special surplus and deficiency fund may be transferred to the city's general fund or any designated special fund pursuant to ordinance of the city council. Bonds of any public improvement district payable from special assessments, which payment may be additionally secured as provided in this article, shall not exhaust the city's debt incurring power, nor shall such bonds be required to be authorized at an election. 
(Adopted May 13, 1958.)  
Article XIV. - Department of Parks and Recreation. 
 
Sec. 1. - Department created. 
A department of parks and recreation may be created by ordinance. The department of parks and recreation shall exercise administrative functions as to: 
(a)  Operation of municipal parks, park areas, museums, playgrounds, playfields, lake facilities, swimming pools, fountains, recreation and community buildings, sports arenas, stadiums, golf courses, city cemeteries, and related facilities, both within and without the corporate limits; 
(b)  Planning, conducting, and supervising organized physical and cultural recreation programs for the public; 
(c)  Cooperation with public and private agencies in public recreational programs, concerts, and other entertainment, and specifically with any privately sponsored recreation commissions, or other private bodies; 
(d)  Maintenance and preservation of public monuments and collections; 
(e)  Maintenance of restrooms, facilities for entertainment, and other related facilities on properties under the supervision of the department.  
Sec. 2. - Construction of facilities. 
The construction and reconstruction of all parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities shall be vested in the department of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 1.)  
Sec. 3. - Rules and regulations. 
The council shall have power by ordinance to adopt all needful rules and regulations relating to properties and related facilities under supervision of the department of parks and recreation, whether within or without the city, and for the preservation of order, safety, and decency therein. For the purpose of enforcing such rules and regulations, all such properties shall be under the police jurisdiction of the city. Any member of the police force of the city, or park employee appointed as a special policeman, shall have power to arrest without warrant on all such properties any person who has violated any such rule or regulation or committed an offense therein.  
Article XV. - Police Department. 
 
Sec. 1. - Department created; qualification of chief. 
A police department is hereby created, the head of which shall be the chief of police, who shall have special knowledge and experience in law enforcement. Under the direction and supervision of the city manager, the chief of police shall appoint such subordinate officers and other employees of such rank and grade as the city manager shall deem necessary. 
(As amended April 4, 1961.)  
Sec. 2. - Functions. 
The department shall be responsible for the preservation of public peace, prevention of crime, apprehension of criminals, protection of the rights of persons and property, and the enforcement of this Charter and the ordinances of the city, and such other duties as the city manager may prescribe for the public peace and safety and the protection of property, including the property of the city within and without the corporate limits.  
Sec. 3. - Duties of chief. 
The chief of police shall command the department and shall assign its members to their respective posts, shifts, details and duties. He shall make rules and regulations with the approval of the city manager in conformity with the ordinances and resolutions of the council concerning the operation of the department and the conduct of its employees. The chief of police shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline, and good conduct of the employees and for the care and custody of all property used by the department and its employees.  
Sec. 4. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 454, Article 1.  
Article XVI. - Department of Fire. Repealed November 3, 1987.  
Article XVII. - Department of Health. 
 
Sec. 1. - Department created. 
A department of health is hereby created.  
Sec. 2. - Council to constitute board. 
The council shall constitute the board of health for the city, unless it shall otherwise provide by ordinance, and such board shall have all such powers and duties as may be provided by statute or ordinance.  
Sec. 3. - Powers and duties generally to be provided. 
The ordinances or resolutions adopted by the council under this article may provide, among other things for sanitary inspections, quarantines and condemnations of land, buildings and personal property for health purposes and other matters as may be deemed necessary to promote the public health and safety of persons and property.  
Article XVIII. - Aviation. 
 
Sec. 1. - Adoption of general law provisions; authority to create department of aviation. 
The city shall have and may exercise all powers relating to airports and aviation granted by this Charter and general law, including all powers to act jointly with other governmental authorities in relation thereto. The council may by ordinance provide for a department of aviation with such duties, functions and powers as may be provided thereby.  
Article XIX. - General Provisions. 
 
Sec. 1. - Amending the Charter. 
This Charter may be amended at anytime in the manner provided by Article XX of the Constitution of the State of Colorado.  
Sec. 2. - Continuance of duties. 
All persons holding administrative office by appointment and members of administrative boards at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue in office and in the performance of their duties until provision shall have been made in accordance with this Charter for the performance of such duties or the discontinuance of such office.  
Sec. 3. - Outgoing officers. 
All officers of the city whose terms of office terminate shall deliver to their successors all papers, records, property and equipment whatsoever in their possession or custody by virtue of their office, and shall account to them or to any authority designated by the council for all funds, credits or property of any kind with which they are properly chargeable as such officials.  
Sec. 4. - Eminent domain. 
All proceedings for the condemnation of property or in the exercise of the right of eminent domain shall be in accordance with the laws of the State of Colorado now or hereafter applicable.  
Sec. 5. - Construction of Charter. 
If any provision, section, article or clause of this Charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or applications of the Charter provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end this Charter is declared to be severable.  
Sec. 6. - Construction of words. 
Whenever such construction is applicable, words used in this Charter importing singular or plural number maybe construed so that one number includes both; words importing masculine gender may be construed to apply to the feminine gender as well; and the word person may extend to and include firm and corporation; provided, that these rules of construction shall not apply to any part of this Charter containing express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context is repugnant thereto.  
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Cortez, Colorado," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as "Cortez City Code." 
 For charter provision requiring codification, see Char., art. III, § 12. 
 For state law as to authority of city to adopt Code by reference, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-12-401 et seq.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and regulations of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section, ordinance or regulation, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Cortez, Colorado. 
City council. The words "city council" or "the council" shall mean the city council of Cortez, Colorado. 
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded. 
County. The words "the county" shall mean the County of Montezuma, Colorado. 
Day. A day is the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following . 
Daytime, nighttime. "Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. "Nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise. 
Gender. Any word importing the masculine gender only shall also include and mean the feminine and neuter. 
In the city. The words "in the city" shall mean and include all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, the jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons. 
May, shall. The word "may" is permissive. The word "shall" is mandatory. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number only shall also include and mean the plural. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, departments, etc. Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees referred to in this Code shall mean officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the City of Cortez, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall mean and include firm, association, club or other organized group, partnership, corporation and governmental agency, as well as a natural person. 
Preceding; following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real, tangible and intangible personal property. 
Real property. The terms "real property," "premises," "real estate" or "lands" shall be deemed to be coextensive with lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean the portion of the street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature. Where the written signature of any person is required, the proper handwriting of such person or his mark shall be intended. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Colorado. 
Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley or other public thoroughfare, and each of such words shall include all of them. 
Tenant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Writing. The words "writing" and "written" shall include printing, lithographing or any other mode of representing words and letters. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, unless otherwise expressed, and the word "year" shall be equivalent to the words "year of our Lord." 
(Ord. No. 311, § 3.) 
 For state law definitions and rules of construction, see C.R.S. 1973, § 2-4-102.  
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters, so far as they are in substance the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of "The Code of the City of Cortez, Colorado," shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines, headings, etc. 
Catchlines, headings and titles of sections, divisions, subdivisions, articles and chapters of this Code or in changes made in the Code are inserted for the convenience of users of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Ord. No. 411, § 8.)  
Sec. 1-5. - Severability. 
The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each sentence, section, part or chapter of this Code independently of each and every other sentence, section, part or chapter, and the fact that any section, sentence, part or chapter, or any part thereof may be found to be invalid shall not affect the validity of any other portion of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 411, § 6.)  
Sec. 1-6. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this code or any other ordinance of the city or any section or an order, rule or regulation promulgated under the provisions of this code or other ordinance of the city any act is prohibited, made or declared to be unlawful, an offense, nuisance or misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefore, any person who shall be convicted of the violation of any such provision of this code or other ordinance of the city or of such orders, rules and regulations shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 411, § 5.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 2, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 1-7. - Issuance of summons or complaint to violators; continuing violations. 
Any person who is alleged to have violated any provision of this Code or other ordinances of the city enacted, or orders, rules or regulations promulgated under authority of this Code or other ordinances of the city, shall be issued a summons and complaint charging the nature of the violation and shall be ordered to appear before the police magistrate. 
Each day a violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the city or any order, rule or regulation promulgated under the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 411, § 4.)  
Sec. 1-8. - Description and adoption of city seal. 
(a)  The design of the seal shall be a circle within a circle; the inner circle being one and one-quarter inches in diameter with the word "Seal" in the center and the word "Centennial" within the upper arc of the circle and the dates "1886—1986" within the lower arc of the circle; the outer circle being two inches in diameter with the words "The City of Cortez" within the upper arc of the circle and the word "Colorado" within the lower arc of the circle. 
(b)  The forms of the seal shall be two, an embossing seal and a rubber stamp seal. The embossing seal shall be used on all documents as feasible. At the discretion of the city clerk, or authorized representative, the rubber stamp may be used on mylars or other documents on which it is not feasible to affix the embossing seal. 
(c)  The design of the seal as described in subsection (a) of this section, and the forms of the seal as described in subsection (b) of this section shall be and hereby are adopted as the official seal of the city. 
(d)  Use of the official seal shall be reserved to the city clerk or authorized representatives. Unauthorized use of the seal shall be deemed to be a violation of this Code and shall carry penalties as set forth in section 1-6 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 657, § 2.) 
 For state law as to city seal, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-5-107.  
Sec. 1-9. - Code to supersede state law in case of conflict. 
All laws of the state in conflict with the provisions of this Code are hereby superseded where state law does not prohibit such result. 
(Ord. No. 411, § 7.)  
Sec. 1-10. - Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted that certain Code entitled "The Code of the City of Cortez, Colorado, 1974, as revised, supplemented and updated through January 23, 1979," containing ordinances of a general and permanent nature as implied, consolidated, codified and indexed in chapters 1 through 29 as prepared by The Michie Company, City Publications Division, Charlottesville, Virginia, dated 1974 as revised and supplemented through January 23, 1979. Not included in said Code are certain ordinances of a special nature, such as those creating special assessment districts, ordering specific improvements, authorizing contracts, platting, naming or vacating streets or alleys, establishing mill levies, making appropriations or appropriation transfers, annexation ordinances, ordinances ordering elections, bond elections and authorizing bond issues, creating franchises to public utilities and other ordinances not of a general or permanent nature. 
(Ord. No. 529, § 1.)  
Sec. 1-11. - Adoption by reference. 
Not less than three copies of this Code are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city. This Code is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into the ordinance codified in this section as if set out in full herein, all as provided by section 11 of article III of the city Charter. 
(Ord. No. 529, § 2.)  
Sec. 1-12. - Repeal. 
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature not included within the codification except ordinances adopted after January 23, 1979, beginning with Ordinance No. 521 are hereby specifically repealed and also except for those ordinances of a special nature as hereinabove described in section 1-11, and there is also repealed the 1968 Code of the City of Cortez, Colorado, heretofore prepared by the Carl S. Becker Co., of Denver, Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 529, § 3.)  
Sec. 1-13. - Definitions and interpretations. 
When the word "person" is used in this Code of Ordinances or in other ordinances of the city, it shall mean and include also, firm, association, club or other organized group, partnership, corporation and governmental agencies, as well as the natural person, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. In this Code and in other ordinances of the city, a word importing the masculine gender only shall also include and mean the feminine and neuter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
In this Code and in other ordinances of the city, a word importing the singular number only shall also include and mean the plural, unless the context indicates otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 529, § 4.)  
Sec. 1-14. - Violation. 
A person who is alleged to have violated any provision of this Code, or other ordinances hereafter enacted, or orders, rules or regulations promulgated under authority of this Code, or ordinances enacted hereafter, shall be issued a summons and complaint charging the nature of the violation and shall be ordered to appear before the municipal judge. Every day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the city hereafter enacted or any order, rule or regulation promulgated under the provisions of this Code or ordinances shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 529, § 5.)  
Sec. 1-15. - Penalties. 
Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the city hereafter enacted or any section or an order, rule or regulation promulgated under the provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the city hereafter enacted, any act is prohibited, made or declared to be unlawful, an offense, nuisance or misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, any person who shall be convicted of the violation of any such provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city hereafter enacted or of such orders, rules or regulations shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 529, § 6; amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 3, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 1-16. - Separability. 
The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each sentence, section, part or chapter of this ordinance and of the Code independently of each and every other sentence, section, part or chapter, and the fact that any section, sentence, part or chapter, or any part thereof, may be found to be invalid shall not affect the validity of any other portion of the ordinance codified in this section or of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 529, § 7.)  
Sec. 1-17. - Catchlines, headings and titles. 
Catchlines, headings and titles of sections and other subdivisions in this Code adopted by the ordinance codified in this section or in annual changes made in the Code, are inserted for the convenience of users of the Code; the same shall have no legal effect. 
(Ord. No. 529, § 8.)  
Sec. 1-18. - Annual changes and supplements. 
By contract, or by city personnel, a change to the Code of Ordinances adopted by this ordinance shall be prepared and printed at least two times each year hereafter or as soon thereafter as practicable. The annual updates and supplements to this Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the year preceding and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all Charter amendments which have been made during the year. Supplement pages shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be up to date. 
(Ord. No. 529, § 9.)  
CHAPTER 2. - ADMINISTRATION. 
 For charter provisions as to the form of government, see Char., art. I, § 3. As to municipal officers generally, see Char., art. II. As to the city council, see Char., art. III. As to municipal elections, see Char., art. IV. As to appointive officers and employees, see Char., art. V. As to municipal court and city attorney, see Char., art. VI. As to financial administration, see Char., art. VII. As to municipal borrowing, see Char., art VIII. As to division of purchase, see Char., art. IX. As to department of municipal utilities, see Char., art. XI. As to recall of elective officers, see Char., art. XII, § 2. As to department of public works, see Char., art. XIII, §§ 1, 2. As to police department, see Char., art. XV. As to health department, see Char., art. XVII. 
 For state law as to the organization of cities generally, see CRSA Art. 31-1 et seq. As to the manager form for cities, see CRSA § 31-4-210 et seq. As to officers in cities generally, see CRSA Art. 31-4. As to the powers of cities generally, see CRSA Arts. 31-15 et seq. 
 As to the airport commission, see §§ 3-6 to 3-12 of this Code. As to the humane officer, see § 5-17. As to civil defense and emergencies generally, see Ch. 7. As to finance and taxation generally, see Ch. 9. As to fire marshal, see § 10-3. As to the gas inspector, see §§ 13-2, 13-3. As to powers of county health department in city, see § 14-5. As to municipal courts generally, see Ch. 17. As to impersonating, resisting, etc., officers, see § 18-30. As to parks and recreation generally, see ch. 19. As to establishment and duties of park and recreation department, see § 19-1. As to the park commission, see §§ 19-2 to 19-8. As to personnel generally, see Ch. 20. As to the enforcement of Plumbing Code, see § 21-2. As to administration of the water system by city council, see § 27-2. As to duties of city manager as to the water system, see § 27-3.  
Article I. - In General. 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Voting precincts—Created; designated. 
There are hereby created in the city two voting precincts to be designated as follows: 
(a)  Precinct No. 1. All that part of the city lying north of the center of Main Street, or any extension thereof, in the city. 
(b)  Precinct No. 2. All that part of the city lying south of the center of Main Street, or any extension thereof, in the city. 
(Code 1968, § 3-1-1.) 
 For charter provision authorizing city to create two voting precincts, see Char., art. IV, § 3. As to elections generally, see Char., art. IV.  
Sec. 2-2. - Same—Designation of polling places. 
The city council is hereby authorized and empowered to designate polling places within the voting precincts by public announcement thereof in any call for election as provided by law. 
(Code 1968, § 3-1-2.)  
Sec. 2-3. - Council rules of procedure generally. 
The following shall be the rules of procedure of the city council: 
(a)  Suspension of rules. The rules of procedure and order of business shall be strictly adhered to by the council, unless temporarily suspended by a two-thirds vote of the members present. 
(b)  Dates of regular meetings. The council shall meet regularly on the second and fourth Tuesday of every month at the city hall. 
(c)  Calling of special meetings—Generally. The mayor or any four members of the council may call special meetings of the council, but no such call shall be made unless at least twenty-four hours notice of the time of such meeting have been given to each and every member of the council as provided by this section, that special meetings may be called and held upon shorter notice if five members of the council personally accept such call. 
(d)  Same—Notice. Notice of special meetings shall be in writing, shall be served by the chief of police, other policemen or by any other person of lawful age and shall be served on each councilman personally or by leaving a copy of such notice at his usual place of business or residence. 
(e)  Presiding officer. The mayor, or in his absence the mayor pro tempore, shall call the meetings of the council to order and preside at all meetings. In case of the absence of the mayor and the mayor pro tempore, the city clerk shall call the meeting to order, and if a quorum is present one of the councilmen may be elected to preside at the meeting. 
(f)  Quorum. At all meetings of the council, four councilmen shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a minority may adjourn from day to day until a quorum is in attendance. 
(g)  Call to order; roll call; order of business. At the hour appointed for the meeting, the members of the council shall be called to order by the presiding officer. The city clerk shall then call the roll and note those present and those absent, after which the presiding officer shall announce whether a quorum is present. If a quorum is present the council shall proceed to do business. The council by motion or resolution may adopt an order of business from time to time. 
(h)  Questions of priority of business. All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided without debate. 
(i)  Conduct of members. Previous to speaking, every member shall address the presiding officer and shall not proceed with his remarks until recognized by him. No member shall leave the council chamber while the council is in session, except by the permission of the presiding officer. Any member called to order shall immediately suspend his remarks and resume his seat, unless permitted to continue. Any member failing or refusing to vote on any question shall be deemed to have voted in the affirmative, unless excused from voting by the council on matters involving the consideration of his own official conduct or where his financial interests are involved. 
(j)  Reduction of motions or resolutions to writing; consideration of motions. All motions and resolutions shall be reduced to writing if required by any member of the council, and when seconded and stated by the presiding officer, or read by the clerk, shall be open for consideration. 
(k)  Taking and recording of vote. The vote on all ordinances, resolutions and motions shall be taken by ayes and nays and shall be entered in the journal. 
(l)  Motions to adjourn. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, shall have precedence over all other motions and shall be decided without debate. 
(m)  Appointment of committees. All committees shall be appointed by the presiding officer, unless otherwise ordered by the council. 
(n)  Preservation of order. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide all questions of order, subject to the right of appeal to the council. 
(o)  Appeal of decisions of presiding officer. Appeals shall be allowed from all decisions of the presiding officer to the council and a majority vote of all the members present shall be required to sustain such an appeal. 
(p)  Standing committees generally. The standing committees, if any, shall be appointed annually at the first regular meeting after the election of officers and the person first named to the committee shall be the chairman thereof. In the absence of such chairman, or other inability to act, the second person named to the committee shall act as chairman thereof. Standing and special committees may be created by motion or resolution of the council. 
(q)  Conduct of executive sessions. When the council is in executive session, the room shall be cleared of all persons except the councilmen, the city manager, the city attorney and the city clerk; provided, that the council may authorize other designated persons to remain. All matters discussed in executive session shall be kept secret unless the council provides otherwise. 
(r)  Records of proceedings. The council shall cause a record of the proceedings to be kept, which shall be open at all reasonable hours for the inspection of the electors of the city. 
(s)  Applicability of Robert's Rules. Except as provided by the Charter or these rules, Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall govern the proceedings of the council insofar as it is applicable. 
(t)  Enforcement; penalty. The council shall make and enforce the rules of procedure and may compel their observance by a fine not exceeding five dollars. 
(u)  Amendment. These rules may be amended at any time by ordinance. 
(v)  Cancellation of a municipal election. It is ordained by the city council of the city of Cortez, Colorado, that: 
(1)  No write-in vote for any municipal office shall be counted unless an affidavit of intent has been filed with the city clerk by the person whose name is written in prior to twenty days before the day of the election. Such affidavit shall contain: 
(A)  That the person desires the office; and 
(B)  Is qualified to assume the duties of the office if elected. 
(2)  Election may be cancelled when: 
(A)  A municipal election may be cancelled if the only matter before the voters is election of persons to office and if at the close of business on the nineteenth day before the election there are not more candidates than offices to be filled at such election, including candidates filing affidavits of intent. 
(3)  The clerk, if instructed by resolution of the governing body either before or after such date shall cancel the election and by resolution declare the candidates elected. Upon such declaration by resolution, the candidates shall be deemed elected. 
(4)  Notice of such cancellation shall be published, if possible, in order to inform electors of the municipality and notice of such cancellation shall be posted at each polling place and not less than one other public place. 
(5)  If one of the terms for which the candidates are declared elected is a two-year term as opposed to a four-year term, then the one two-year term shall be decided amongst the candidates. If the candidates cannot decide who shall have the two-year term, it shall be decided by lot. 
(Code 1968, § 1-2-1; Ord. No. 1007.) 
 For charter provision as to council generally, see Char., art. III. 
 For state law as to council generally, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 31-5-105, 31-5-106, 31-5-108.  
Sec. 2-3A. - Qualifications for appointment for members of boards and commissioners. 
(a)  In addition to the qualifications stated in any Cortez charter provision Cortez ordinance, code provision or resolution, regarding appointment of the members of any City of Cortez Board or Commission, all prospective board members shall undergo a criminal background check. 
(b)  Prospective members shall be disqualified for appointment if the criminal background check indicates convictions within seven years of appointment for crimes of violence, crimes of moral turpitude, crimes against persons, felony theft or embezzlement, crimes against government. Crimes against children are not subject to the seven year look back limitation. 
Applicants who fail a background check shall not be recommended to city council unless an appeal in subsection (c)(3) is successful. 
(c)  (1)  All background checks shall be conducted by the city department of human resources. The director of human resources shall not disclose the background checks to anyone except the city manager and/or city attorney. 
(2)  A negative background check shall be disclosed to the applicant. 
(3)  An applicant may appeal the director of human resource's decision not to recommend an applicant based on an unfavorable criminal background check to the city manager, whose decision shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 1214 , 7-26-16)  
Article II. - Planning and Zoning Commission. 
 For state law as to planning commissions, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 31-23-101 to 31-23-125. As to zoning commission, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-23-206. As to zoning generally, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 31-23-201 to 31-23-213. 
 
Sec. 2-4. - Created; appointment, qualifications and terms of members. 
There is hereby created a planning and zoning commission for the city consisting of nine members, five members of whom shall be registered electors of the city and shall be appointed by the city council in the following manner and for the following terms: 
The original five members shall be appointed by the council to serve terms as follows: One member for one year; one member for two years; one member for three years; one member for four years; and one member for five years. As the term of each member expires, the vacancy thus created shall be filled by a majority vote of the council for a term of three years. If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of term, the council by a majority vote shall appoint a new member to fill the unexpired term. 
The four remaining members shall be ex officio members without vote and shall consist of the city manager, the zoning administrator, the city engineer and the mayor of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 668; Ord. No. 963 (part).) 
(Ord. No. 1163, 2-28-12) 
 For state law as to membership of commission, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-23-103. See also C.R.S. 1973, § 31-23-206.  
Sec. 2-5. - Clerk; frequency of meetings. 
The city clerk shall be ex officio clerk of the planning and zoning commission and keep its records and notify it of the filing of applications for permits and such other matters that come before such commission. Such commission shall, when there is business to transact, hold a meeting at least once each month or more often, as the business of the commission requires. 
(Ord. No. 440, § 3.)  
Sec. 2-6. - Absence from meetings. 
Should a member of the planning and zoning commission be absent for three consecutive regular meetings of such commission without cause, the office of such member shall be deemed to be vacant and the term of such member terminated and the secretary of the commission shall immediately inform the city council of such termination. An absence due to illness or an unavoidable absence from the city and written notice thereof to the secretary of the commission on or before the day of any regular meeting by such commission shall be deemed absence for cause. A regular meeting as provided for by law or by rule of the commission or any regularly advertised public hearing shall be deemed a regular meeting. 
(Ord. No. 440, § 4.)  
Sec. 2-7. - Election and term of chairman; creation and filling of other offices. 
The planning and zoning commission shall elect its chairman from among the appointed members and shall create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the chairman shall be one year with the eligibility for reelection. The position of chairman shall be filled at the first regular meeting of January of each year. 
(Ord. No. 440, § 5.) 
For similar state law, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-23-104.  
Sec. 2-8. - Regular meetings; calling of special meetings. 
The planning and zoning commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month and such special meetings as are necessary in the opinion of the chairman; provided, that a special meeting may be called by any three appointed members of the commission or the city manager upon due notice to the chairman and the other members of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 440, § 6.) 
For similar state law, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-23-104.  
Sec. 2-9. - Adoption of procedural rules; records. 
The planning and zoning commission shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its meetings, resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations which record shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 440, § 7.) 
 For similar state law, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-23-104.  
Sec. 2-10. - Three-fifths vote required for adoption, extension or amendment of plans. 
In voting upon the adoption of any plan or any part thereof or any amendment, extension or addition by resolution of the planning and zoning commission, the same must be carried by the affirmative vote of not less than three-fifths of the entire voting membership of the commission 
(Ord. No. 440, § 13.) 
 For state law as to vote required for adoption, etc., of plan, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-23-108.  
Sec. 2-11. - Appointment of employees; contracts with consultants; expenditures. 
The city council, upon the advice and request of the planning and zoning commission, may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary and with such consent may also contract with city planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning and zoning commission shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city council, which shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the work of such commission and shall approve all expenditures of funds. 
(Ord. No. 440, § 8.) 
 For state law as to employees, expenditures, etc., of planning commission, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-23-105.  
Sec. 2-12. - Preparation of annual budget by city manager. 
The city manager or his delegated representative shall be charged with preparing the planning and zoning commission's budget each year for the next calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 440, § 9.) 
 For state law as to appropriations for planning commission, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-23-105.  
Sec. 2-13. - Powers and duties generally. 
The planning and zoning commission shall perform the duties and shall have all the rights, powers and privileges specified and provided for by sections 31-23-105 to 31-23-124 and section 31-23-206 of the 1973 Colorado Revised Statutes. 
(Code 1968, § 2-1-5; Ord. No. 440, § 10.)  
Sec. 2-14. - Preliminary and final reports; public hearings. 
Such commission shall make preliminary reports and hold public hearings thereon before submitting final reports to the city council. The city council shall not hold its public hearings or take action until it has received the final report of such commission. 
(Ord. No. 440, § 11.) 
 For state law as to public hearings to be held by commission, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-23-108.  
Sec. 2-15. - To be ex officio zoning commission. 
The commission shall be vested with the power of a zoning commission and shall perform such duties as may be required of the zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 440, § 12.) 
 For state law requiring the transfer of all powers and records of the zoning commission to the planning commission, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-23-111.  
Article III. - City Clerk. 
 
Sec. 2-16. - Duties. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be custodian of the city seal and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal and shall attest the same. 
(b)  The city clerk shall administer oaths of office as specified in article II, section 5 of the city Charter. 
(c)  The city clerk shall be clerk of the council, and shall prepare agendas, attend the regular and special meetings of the council and shall record and maintain the minutes, ordinances and resolutions of the council. 
(d)  The city clerk shall be the alcoholic beverage license officer for the city council of the city. 
(e)  The city clerk shall issue all other licenses as specified by this Code, as amended. 
(f)  The city clerk shall be the elections officer for all city elections. 
(g)  The city clerk shall maintain custody of all city records not otherwise provided for by other departments. 
(h)  The city clerk shall be the ex officio clerk of the planning and zoning commission pursuant to chapter 2, article II, section 5 of the city Charter. 
(i)  The city clerk shall maintain the codified ordinances of the city by regular supplementation and by periodic recodification pursuant to article III, section 12 of the city Charter. 
(j)  As long as the city is the administrative entity of the Cortez sanitation district, the city clerk shall be clerk for the district and shall attend their board meetings, keep their records, maintain custody of the district seal, affixing it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal and attesting the same, and shall be the elections officer for all sanitation district elections. 
(k)  The city clerk shall prescribe the necessary procedures, forms and manuals required for the execution of the duties of the department of city clerk. 
(l)  The city clerk shall perform all other duties as assigned by the city manager and as prescribed in the Charter of the codified ordinances of the city, as amended. 
(m)  The city clerk, acting on behalf of the local liquor licensing authority, may establish reporting requirements and information necessary for licensing requests and activities coming before the local licensing authority. All such reporting and information requirements established by the city clerk shall not be inconsistent with state or local licensing requirements. Failure by any applicant to provide the information requested by the clerk shall result in the license being withheld until such requirements are met. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 1; Ord. No. 807, §§ 1—3.)  
Sec. 2-17. - Requirements. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  The city clerk shall take and subscribe an oath of office pursuant to article II, section 5 of the city Charter. 
(c)  The city clerk shall be subject to any other requirements as may be prescribed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 2.) 
(Ord. No. 1157, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 2-18. - Provision for deputy city clerk. 
Until, and including such time as a regular deputy city clerk may be employed by the city, one or more members of the city hall staff may be designated by the city clerk as deputy city clerk, subject to the approval of the city manager, in the event that the city clerk requires assistance or in the absence of the city clerk. The regular or designated deputy city clerk shall have full authority and responsibility as herein prescribed for the city clerk, in the event such authority or responsibility is delegated to the regular or designated city clerk, or in the absence of the city clerk. The regular or designated deputy city clerk shall be under the supervision of the city manager in the absence of the city clerk. The regular or designated deputy city clerk shall be deputized by oath. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 3.) 
(Ord. No. 1181, 9-24-13)  
Article IV. - Tree Commission. 
 
Sec. 2-19. - Commission created—Appointment, qualifications and terms of members. 
There is hereby created a tree commission for the city consisting of five members, all of whom shall be city residents and shall be appointed by the city council in the following manner and for the following terms: 
The original five members shall be appointed by the city council to serve terms as follows: two members for one year; two members for two years; and one member for three years. As the term of each member expires, the vacancy thus created shall be filled by a majority vote of the city council for a term of three years. If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of term, the city council by a majority vote shall appoint a new member to fill the expired terms. 
The three remaining members of the commission shall be ex officio members without vote and shall consist of one city councilmember, the parks and recreation director, a representative from the Colorado State Forest Service, and one of the members of the commission shall be trained or experienced as a landscape horticulturist, if available. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 1.)  
Sec. 2-20. - Absence from meetings. 
Should a member be absent for three consecutive regular meetings of such tree commission without cause, the office of such member shall be deemed to be vacant and the term of such member terminated and the secretary of the tree commission shall immediately inform the city council of such termination. An absence due to illness or an unavoidable absence from the city and notice thereof the secretary of the tree commission on or before the day of any regular meeting by such tree commission shall be deemed absence for cause. A regular meeting as provided for by law or by rule of the tree commission or any regularly advertised public hearing shall be deemed a regular meeting. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 2.)  
Sec. 2-21. - Election and term of chairman—Creation and filling of other offices. 
The tree commission shall elect its chairman from among the appointed members and shall create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the chairman shall be one year with the eligibility for reelection. The position of chairman shall be filled at the first regular meeting of each year. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 3.)  
Sec. 2-22. - Regular meetings—Calling of special meetings. 
The tree commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month during the months of January through May and September through December of each year, and such special meetings as are necessary in the opinion of the chairman; provided, that a special meeting may be called by any three members of the tree commission or the parks and recreation director upon due notice to the chairman and the other members of the tree commission. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 4.)  
Sec. 2-23. - Adoption of procedural rules—Records. 
The tree commission shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its meetings, resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations which record shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 5.)  
Sec. 2-24. - Majority vote required for adoption, extension or amendment of plans. 
In voting upon the adoption of any plan or any part thereof or any amendment, extension or addition by resolution of the tree commission, the same must be carried by the affirmative vote of a simple majority of the entire voting membership of the tree commission. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 6.)  
Sec. 2-25. - Powers and duties generally. 
The tree commission shall perform the following duties: 
(a)  To study, investigate, plan, advise, report and recommend to city council any action, program, plan or legislation which the commission shall find or determine to be necessary or advisable for the care, preservation, trimming, planting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in public ways, streets and alleys; 
(b)  To assist the city council and the citizens of the city in the dissemination of news and information regarding the selection, planting and maintenance of trees within the corporate limits, whether the same be on private or public property, and to make such recommendations from time to time to the city council as to desirable legislation concerning the tree program and activities for the municipality; 
(c)  To provide regular and special meetings at which the subject of trees insofar as it relates to the municipality may be discussed by the members of the commission, officers and personnel of the municipality, and all others interested in the tree program; 
(d)  To study and to recommend to city council a master street tree and shrub plan for the city; 
(e)  Chairman should stay in regular communication with the parks and recreation director. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 7.)  
Sec. 2-26. - Preliminary and final reports—Public hearings. 
Such tree commission shall make preliminary reports and hold public hearings thereon before submitting final reports to the city council. The city council shall not hold its public hearings or take action until it has received the final report of such tree commission. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 8.)  
Article V. - Public Library. 
 
Sec. 2-27. - Public library. 
The Cortez Library is an official department of the city of Cortez. 
The library director may institute and implement rules, regulations and policies with review and approval by the city manager regarding all matters concerning the conduct of persons in the library; 
The director may prescribe such rules, regulations and policies as needed for the orderly and efficient operation of the library; and 
The director and designated staff may exclude for such terms as the director deems appropriate those people who violate the policies, rules and regulations set by the director. 
(Ord. No. 868, § 1.) 
(Ord. No. 1131)  
CHAPTER 3. - AIRPORTS. 
 For charter provision as to aviation generally, see Char., art. XVIII. 
 For state law as to aeronautics, aircraft and airports, see C.R.S. 1973, § 41-1-101 et seq. 
 As to authority of cities to establish airports, regulate their use, etc., see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 41-4-201 to 41-4-205. 
 As to authority for joint city-county operation of airport, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 41-4-103 to 41-4-106. 
 As to motor vehicles and traffic generally, see ch. 16 of this Code.  
Article I. - In General. 
 
Secs. 3-1 to 3-4. - Reserved for future legislation.  
Sec. 3-5. - Revenue bond authority. 
The city may issue revenue bonds or other debt instruments in the name of the city and on behalf of the airport. 
(Ord. No. 1081 § 1.)  
Article II. - Airport Committee. 
 
Sec. 3-6. - Repealed October 10, 2006.  
Sec. 3-7. - Repealed October 10, 2006.  
Sec. 3-8. - Repealed October 10, 2006.  
Sec. 3-9. - Repealed October 10, 2006.  
Sec. 3-10. - Repealed October 10, 2006.  
Sec. 3-11. - Repealed October 10, 2006.  
Sec. 3-12. - Repealed October 10, 2006.  
CHAPTER 4. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.* 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Local option premises license. 
(a)  Optional premises licenses may be allowed within the city of Cortez. 
(b)  Licenses may be issued to motel premises that have licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Such licenses may be issued to allow said motel/hotels to allow the establishment to let patrons have or consume alcoholic beverages in their rooms or at the swimming pool area, if it has a swimming pool. 
(d)  The establishment shall ensure that only their employees take the beverages from the bar area to the room. 
(e)  The establishment shall not allow beverages to be taken out on any parking lot or any areas of the premises not specifically set forth herein. 
(f)  Application requirements: 
(1)  A map or other drawing illustrating the pool area and hours access will be provided to individual rooms; 
(2)  A description of the method which shall be used to identify the boundaries of the optional premises when it is in use and how the licensee will ensure alcoholic beverages are not removed from such premises; 
(3)  A description of the provisions which will be made to control the dispensing of alcoholic beverages to minor or visibly intoxicated individuals. 
(g)  A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1100.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 4, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 4-2. - Licensing for the golf course. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings set forth. 
(1)  Optional premises means the same as that defined in the Colorado Liquor Code under section 12-47-103(22) and section 12-47-130, C.R.S. the types of licenses authorized in this section are optional premises or hotel "restaurant with optional premises," which may be referred to as "optional premises" unless otherwise stated. 
(b)  Standards. The following standards are for the issuance of an optional premises license. The standards are adopted pursuant to the provisions of section 12-47-310, C.R.S. The standards adopted shall be considered in addition to all other standards applicable to the consideration of and/or issuance of licenses under the Colorado Liquor Code and any and all applicable local laws, rules and regulations. 
(c)  Form of application. Application for the optional premises license shall be made to the city clerk on forms, which shall contain the following information in addition to information, required by the state. The application shall be heard publicly by the local hearing officer. 
(1)  A map or other drawing illustrating the optional premises boundaries and the location of the proposed optional premises license requested; 
(2)  Proposed location(s) for permanent, temporary or moveable structure(s) which are proposed to be used for the sale or service of alcohol beverages and a statement as to whether mobile carts will be used for the sale or service of alcohol beverages; 
(3)  A description of the method which shall be used to identify the boundaries of the optional premises license when it is in use and how the licensee will ensure alcohol beverages are not removed from such premises; 
(4)  Proof of the applicant's right to possession of the optional premises including a legal description and supporting documentation to the satisfaction of the local licensing authority; 
(5)  A description of the provisions, including a description of facilities, which have been made for storing the alcohol beverages in a secured area on or off the optional premises and for future use on the optional premises if or when alcohol beverages are not served; and 
(6)  A description of the provisions which will be implemented to control over service and prevent under age service of alcohol beverages. 
(d)  Eligibility. The licensee is either a holder of a hotel-restaurant license which is located on or adjacent to an eighteen-hole golf course or is the operator/owner of a golf course within the city limits. 
(e)  Size of premises. There is no minimum size, other than being a regulation eighteen-hole course, of the optional premises license or number of optional premises licenses for the licensee. 
(f)  Additional conditions. Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the licensing authority in its discretion, from imposing conditions, restrictions or limitations on any optional premises license in order to serve the public health, safety and welfare. Any such conditions may be imposed when the license is initially issued, issued for any specific event, or renewed. The authority shall have the right to deny any request for an optional premises license or it may suspend or revoke the optional premises license in accordance with the procedures specified by law. 
(Ord. No. 1154, 7-26-11)  
Sec. 4-3. - Tastings. 
(a)  A retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee who wishes to conduct tastings shall submit an application or application renewal to the Cortez City Clerk on forms provided by the city clerk. The Cortez City Council, sitting as the local licensing authority, shall reject the application if the applicant fails to establish that he, she or it is able to conduct tastings without violating the provisions of this section or creating a public safety risk to the neighborhood. The neighborhood shall be the city of Cortez. City council shall establish its own application procedure and shall charge a reasonable application fee, set by annual resolution as part of the city's annual budget process. 
(b)  Tastings shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Tastings shall be conducted only by a person or persons who have completed a server training program that meets the standards established by the Colorado Liquor Enforcement Division in the Colorado Department of Revenue and who is either a retail liquor store licensee or a liquor-licensed drugstore licensee, or an employee of a licensee. Tastings shall take place only on a licensee's licensed premises. 
(2)  The alcohol used in tasting shall be purchased through a licensed wholesaler, licensed brew pub, or winery licensed pursuant to C.R.S. 12-47-403 at a cost that is not less than the laid-in cost of such alcohol. 
(3)  The size of an individual alcohol sample shall not exceed one ounce of malt or vinous liquor or one-half of one ounce of spirituous liquor. 
(4)  Tastings shall not exceed a total of five hours in duration per day, which need not be consecutive. 
(5)  Tastings shall be conducted only during the operating hours in which the licensee on whose premises the tastings occur is permitted to sell alcohol beverages, and in no case earlier than 11:00 A.M. or later than 7:00 P.M. 
(6)  The licensee shall prohibit patrons from leaving the licensed premises with an unconsumed sample. 
(7)  The licensee shall promptly remove all open and unconsumed alcohol beverage samples from the licensed premises or shall destroy the samples immediately following the completion of the tasting. 
(8)  The licensee shall not serve a person who is under twenty-one years of age or who is visibly intoxicated. 
(9)  The licensee shall not serve more than four individual samples to a patron during a tasting. 
(10)  Alcohol samples shall be in open containers and shall be provided to a patron free of charge. 
(11)  Tastings may occur on no more than four of the six days from a Monday to the following Saturday, not to exceed one hundred four days per year. 
(12)  No manufacturer of spirituous or vinous liquors shall induce a licensee through free goods or financial or in-kind assistance to favor the manufacturer's products being sampled at a tasting. The licensee shall bear the financial and all other responsibility for a tasting. 
(c)  A violation of a limitation specified in this section 4-3 of the Cortez City Code or of section C.R.S. 12-47-801 by a retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee, whether by his or her employees, agents, or otherwise, shall be the responsibility of the retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee who is conducting the tasting. 
(d)  A retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee conducting a tasting shall be subject to the same revocation, suspension, and enforcement provisions as otherwise apply to the licensee. 
(e)  Nothing in this section 4-3 Tastings of the Cortez City Code shall affect the ability of a Colorado winery licensed pursuant to C.R.S. 12-47-402 or 12-47-403 to conduct a tasting pursuant to the authority of C.R.S. 12-47-402(2) or 12-47-403(2)(e). 
(f)  A violation of this ordinance shall be punished as set forth in section 17-16A of the Cortez City Code now in affect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1182, 10-8-13)  
Sec. 4-4. - Liquor distances from schools. 
There is a five hundred-foot restriction between schools and all businesses for liquor licenses other than hotel and restaurant licenses. 
( Ord. No. 930 , 1-28-00; Ord. No. 1207 , 2-23-16)  
Sec. 4-5. - Distances requirements. 
(a)  Any distance to be computed regarding the distances applicable to liquor licensees where a distance requirement has been established by either state or local law shall be measured as follows. 
(b)  Said distance shall be computed by direct measurement from the nearest property line of the land used for non-licensee purposes to the main entry of the building in which malt, vinous, spirituous liquors, are to be sold, using a route of direct pedestrian access measured as a person would walk safely and properly without trespassing, with right angles at crossings and with the observance of traffic regulations and lights. 
( Ord. No. 1207 , 2-23-16)  
Sec. 4-6. - Outdoor dining—Central business district. 
(a)  The outdoor dining policy is consistent with the city's master plan by enhancing the downtown experience in the city core and generating an atmosphere that promotes interaction and a walking environment for tourists and others. 
(b)  Application for an outdoor dining license is required when the applicant possesses or is applying for a liquor license and wishes to serve alcohol on adjoining public sidewalk or city street, or when an applicant desires to provide dining services on adjoining public sidewalk or city street when applicable space exists. The outdoor dining license shall only apply to only that area of sidewalk or street adjoining such establishments subject to the limitations herein. 
(c)  Outdoor dining licenses for the service of food or alcoholic beverages are not permitted on Main Street, Colorado Highway 160 without the written approval of the appropriate agency of the State of Colorado, the actual owner of that property. Outdoor dining licenses are available only in the central business district. 
(d)  Applications shall be considered on a case-by-case basis, with consideration of such factors as: Existing street furniture/fixtures, view corridor, vehicular line of sight, night-time lighting and noise, pedestrian traffic and flow, signage, accessory structures within the dining area, and potential impact to neighboring businesses. 
(e)  Boundaries which delineate licensed dining areas shall include approved railings between thirty-six inches and forty-two inches in height. No permanent modifications to the sidewalk or street are allowed. The proposed railings or other construction must be approved by the City of Cortez Building Official. 
(f)  In all instances, outdoor dining licenses are restricted to those facilities that actually adjoin public sidewalks and city streets and must be contiguous with the building front or side. The sidewalks and city street must be large enough to accommodate the licensed use while leaving no less than four feet for pedestrian traffic with consideration of existing obstructions and fixtures such as lampposts and bicycle racks or when on a city street adequate space for vehicular traffic as determined by city staff. 
(g)  The licensing for outdoor dining areas shall be streamlined so that all licenses are subject to the same renewal date (January 1 of each calendar year). 
(h)  Fees for outdoor dining licenses shall be set annually based upon square footage licensed for use. Businesses shall pay an annual fee as set by Cortez City Council in its annual budget and fees ordinances and resolutions. 
(i)  The following process shall be followed in reviewing license requests: 
(1)  Applications are initially processed with the city clerk, who distributes them to the planning department, the public works department and the police department. 
(2)  Comments are returned to the city clerk for review and incorporation into an outdoor licensing agreement to be prepared by the city attorney and secured by the clerk. The clerk is also responsible for processing any applicable liquor license requests that can be processed concurrently with outdoor dining license requests. 
(3)  The initial license agreement with recommendations from the city clerk shall be forwarded to the city council for final review and approval. Properties seeking a license shall be posted with notice of the proposed council action no less than ten days prior to the scheduled action before the city council and such other times as necessary for liquor and other licenses. 
(j)  The licenses are revocable by the city clerk upon determination by the city that the continued use of the license area is detrimental to the public health or welfare or upon finding of violation of any term of this policy or the license agreement, or violation of other licenses or permits involving the licensed property including sales tax, liquor license and business license requirements, or violations of other applicable provisions of the city's municipal code and ordinances. For purpose of this provision, improper use of the railing or fencing that delineates the licensed area for signage, tethering of dogs, bicycles or other obstructions shall constitute a violation of the policy. Notice of revocation shall be provided in writing no less than thirty days in advance of such action, unless immediate revocation is determined to be needed for the protection of preservation of public health, safety and welfare. Renewal applications shall be submitted to the city clerk thirty days prior to license termination, 31 December of each year, to be processed by the city clerk and without additional council approval required. This renewal by the city clerk does not include liquor or other necessary licenses. 
(k)  City discretion not waived. The granting of an outdoor dining license agreement is completely discretionary. The city council may choose to deny an outdoor dining license agreement for any reason, even if an applicant meets the policy standards or consideration of factors stated herein. City council also reserves the absolute right to terminate this outdoor dining license permit process for any reason with respect to existing licenses, subject to the revocation process by the city clerk as set forth herein. 
(l)  Licensee may request a review by city council of a denial of renewal by the city clerk. 
( Ord. No. 1206 , 2-9-16; Ord. No. 1227 , 8-8-17)  
CHAPTER 4A. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT.  
Article I. - Definitions. 
 
Sec. 4A-1. - Definitions. 
Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the image is so displayed and distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore or adult video store or adult novelty store. A business having as a substantial and significant portion, as defined as fifteen percent or more, of its stock and trade, revenues, space, or advertising budget, resulting from the sale, rental, or viewing one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter; or photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, digitally or computer generated entertainment media, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar business, whether alcoholic beverages are served or not, which regularly features: 
(1)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult novelty store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment, or other similar business and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; or 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or 
(3)  The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or other similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
Adult motel. A hotel, motel, or similar business which offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons live performances characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas, or with closed-circuit television transmission, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic or electronic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising, including but not limited to newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television, or which offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten hours. 
Adult motion picture theater. A business where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic or electronic reproductions are regularly shown in a room or area designed to accommodate a minimum of twenty viewers and which films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic or electronic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar business that regularly features live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
Church. A place of religious worship and institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings, and other activities. The term "church" shall not carry a secular connotation and shall include buildings in which the religious services of any denomination are held. 
Clothing optional clubs. A business where alcoholic beverages are or are not served and where the customers are allowed to be fully or partially nude. 
Employee. A person who works or performs in and/or for a business, regardless of whether or not the person is paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the operator of said business. 
Good moral character. As used within the adult entertainment establishment licensing provisions of this Code, "good moral character" is defined as one who has not engaged in a specified criminal act within the times set forth in this chapter. 
Licensing officer. A "licensing officer," when used in conjunction with licensee of adult entertainment establishments, means the city manager or his/her designated representative whose function is to review adult entertainment establishment license applications and either issue a license or deny the license based upon the licensing provisions set forth in article IV of chapter 6 of this Code. For these purposes, a licensing officer shall also include his or her designee. 
Manager. An operator, other than a licensee, who is employed by a business to act as a manager or supervisor of employees or is otherwise responsible for the operation of a business. 
Massage parlor. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment, or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is administered, unless such treatment or manipulation is administered by a medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist, or similar professional person licensed by the state. This definition does not include an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa, or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory service. 
Material. Any physical object, facsimile, recording transcription, pictorial representation, motion picture, or reproduction, whether mechanical, electrical, or chemical, which is used as a means of communicating sensation or emotion to human beings to or through the visual, aural, or tactile senses. 
Nudity or state of nudity. The appearance of more than two-thirds of the human bare buttocks, or the anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the female breasts below the top of the nipple; or a state of dress which fails to opaquely cover more than two-thirds of the human buttocks, or the anus, male genitals, female genitals, pubic region or aureole or the female breast below the top of the nipple. 
Obscene material. That material which: 
(1)  Taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest of the average person, applying a contemporary state-wide standard; and 
(2)  Depicts or describes hard-core sexual conduct; 
(3)  Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
Obscene performance. That performance which: 
(1)  Taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest of the average person, applying a contemporary state-wide standard; and 
(2)  Presents or shows hard-core sexual conduct; 
(3)  Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
Operator. The owner, permit or license holder, custodian, manager, operator, or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises. 
Peep booth. A viewing room of less than one hundred fifty square feet of floor space. 
Performance. A presentation or exhibition, whether live or recorded, in a public place or place open to the public or to a segment thereof. 
Permittee and/or licensee. A person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as the applicant on the application for a permit and/or license. 
Person. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Principal owner. Any person owning, directly or beneficially, twenty percent or more of the ownership interest in any legal entity. 
Private room. A room in an adult motel that is not a peep booth, has a bed and bath in the room or adjacent room, and is used primarily for lodging. 
Promote. To produce, direct, manufacture, sell, provide, distribute, present, or exhibit for consideration or to offer or agree to do any of these things for consideration, or to have a financial interest in any of these things. 
Sadomasochistic material; sadomasochistic performance. That material or performance which: 
(1)  Taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest of the average person, applying a contemporary state-wide standard; and 
(2)  Depicts, presents, shows, or describes flagellation, mutilation, or torture, actual or simulated, in a sexual context; and 
(3)  Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
Sexual encounter establishment. A business or commercial establishment which, as one of its primary business purposes, offers a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of the exposure of specified anatomical areas, or when one or more of the persons exposes any specified anatomical area. 
Specified anatomical areas. "Specified anatomical areas" are defined as including: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female breasts below a point above the top of the nipple; 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernable turgid state even if completely and/or opaquely covered; 
(3)  Areas included within the definition of nudity. 
Specified criminal acts. Acts which include sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business, including but not limited to distribution of obscenity, sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, aggravated promotion of prostitution, compelling prostitution, sexual performance by a child, possession of child pornography, public lewdness, indecent exposure, indecency with a child, engaging in organized criminal activity as defined by the Colorado Revised Statutes, sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as defined by Colorado Revised Statutes, incest solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child as defined by the Colorado Revised Statutes, kidnapping or aggravated kidnapping as defined in the Colorado Revised statutes, robbery or aggravated robbery as defined in the Colorado Revised Statutes, bribery or retaliation as described in the Colorado Revised Statutes in violation of the Colorado Controlled Substances Act or Dangerous Drugs Act punishable as a felony, Class A misdemeanor or Class B misdemeanor, criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses, pandering, or tax violations associated with sexually oriented businesses, or crimes involving the use of or trafficking narcotic drugs, or violent acts against persons or property. 
Specified sexual activities. Acts, simulated acts, exhibitions, representations, depictions, or descriptions of: 
(1)  Human male genitals in a discernable and evident state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast; 
(3)  Intrusion, however slight, actual or simulated, by an object, any part of an animal's body, or any part of a person's body into the genital or anal openings of any person's body; 
(4)  Cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus, masturbation, bestiality, lewd exhibition of genitals or excretory function, actual or simulated, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, and zooerasty; 
(5)  Flagellation, mutilation, or torture, actual or simulated, including sadomasochism, in a sexual context. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business. Any business arrangement, gift, or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. 
Zoning administrator. The city manager or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Article II. - License Provisions. 
 
Sec. 4A-2. - License required. 
No adult entertainment establishment, as defined in section 4A-1 of this chapter, shall be permitted to operate within the city except as herein provided, and any said operation without a license is unlawful. It shall further be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor offense if he or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business and/or adult entertainment establishment and the person knows or reasonably should know that (a) the business does not have a sexually oriented business and/or adult entertainment establishment license; (b) the business has a license which is under suspension; (c) the business has a license which has been revoked; or (d) the business has a license which has expired. Further, any applicant must first obtain zoning approval prior to the issuance of a license, which zoning approval is subject to relevant zoning regulations contained in this chapter and Section 3.05 of the Land Use Code, and said decision of the applicant's zoning request shall be processed in the same manner and course as any other zoning request. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-3. - License for adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  The licensing officer is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and canceling sexually oriented business licenses for proposed or existing sexually oriented businesses. 
(b)  The zoning administrator is responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented business for which a license application has been submitted complies with all location requirements of Land Use Code section 3.05(b)(21) and for processing the zoning application request through special review pursuant to Section 6.10, conditional use permits; provided, however, the zoning administrator, planning and zoning commission, and/or city council may not rely solely on the special review criteria outlined in section 6.10(f) 1-6 in rendering a decision to approve or deny the zoning request. 
(c)  The Cortez police department is responsible for providing information on whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act during the time periods set forth in section 4A-5(e). 
(d)  The building inspection department is responsible for inspecting a proposed sexually oriented business in order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable statutes and ordinances. 
(e)  Time requirement for licensing. No later than thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all adult entertainment establishments lawfully operating within the city on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall apply for an adult entertainment establishment license. If an application is not received within thirty days of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, then such existing adult entertainment establishment must cease operations. Subject to Ordinance No. 919, Series 2000, amending the City Land Use Code section 3.05(b)(21)(4), the applicant is permitted a six-month amortization period from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. After the expiration of the amortization period, the licensing officer shall approve or deny the license subject to the provisions contained in sections 4A-8 through 4A-10 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-4. - Annual license renewal. 
The annual license fee for new adult entertainment establishments shall be one thousand dollars, and for transfer of location or ownership, one thousand dollars, and for the renewal of a license, one thousand dollars. 
A license may be issued only for one adult entertainment establishment located at a fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership, or corporation which desires to operate more than one adult entertainment establishment must have a license for each. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-5. - Application and conditions of license. 
The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(a)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he/she is at least eighteen years of age; 
(b)  If the applicant is a legal entity, the application shall state its complete name, the date and place of its organization, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of the state in which it is organized, and if it is organized under the laws of a state other than Colorado, that it is registered to do business in Colorado, the names and capacity of all officers, directors, managers and principal owners, and the name of the registered agent and the address of the registered office for service of process; 
(c)  If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he must state the sexually oriented business's fictitious name; 
(d)  The applicant's driver's license number, social security number, and his or her state or federally issued tax identification number; 
(e)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed has been convicted of a specified criminal activity for which: 
(1)  Less than four years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the latter date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor offense; 
(2)  Less than ten years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the latter date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or 
(3)  Less than ten years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction and the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the latter date, if the conviction is of one or more misdemeanor offenses; 
(4)  Sexual offenders cannot own, operate or be employed in adult business establishments; 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant; 
(f)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed has had a previous license under this or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from another town, city or county denied, suspended or revoked, and if so, the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation; 
(g)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed has been a principal owner of a legal entity whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, and, if so, the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension, or revocation; 
(h)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed holds any other permits and/or licenses under this chapter or similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another town or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses; 
(i)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, the name of the property owner, (including the information required by section 4A-5(b) if the property owner is a legal entity), street address, and telephone number(s), if any and a copy of any lease agreement or document evidencing the right to use the property for its intended purpose for the term of the license requested; 
(j)  The single adult entertainment establishment classification of license for which the applicant is filing; 
(k)  The mailing address and residential address of the applicant or other individual listed pursuant to section 4A-5; 
(l)  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The licensing officer may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. If the sexually oriented business has or will have a peep booth or booths subject to the provisions of section 4A-25, the sketch shall show the locations of each manager's station and designate any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted; 
(m)  A current certificate and straight-line drawing, prepared within thirty days prior to an initial application, by a Colorado registered land surveyor depicting: (1) the property lines and the structures of the property to be certified; and (2) the property lines of any residential zone district, church, public or private school, child care center, public community center, park, fairground, recreation center, any alcoholic beverage establishment located in the city at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, any area designated as an urban renewal project area pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes Section 31-25-107 within five hundred feet of the property to be certified; and (3) the property lines of any arterial or major or collector roadway within two hundred feet of the property to be certified; and (4) the property lines and structures of any other sexually oriented business within one thousand feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted. 
(n)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he/she must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than the individual, each principal owner of the applicant must sign the application for a license as applicant. 
In the event that the licensing officer determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly or inaccurately completed the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he/she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten days to properly or accurately complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a license shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application. The failure to correct the application in a timely manner shall be grounds for denial. 
The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-6. - Duty to supplement application. 
Applicants for a license under this chapter shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this chapter in the event that the information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within thirty days from the date of such change shall be grounds for suspension of a license. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-7. - Investigation and application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a sexually oriented business license properly filed with the licensing officer and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the licensing officer shall immediately stamp the application as received and send photocopies of the application to the zoning department, the Cortez police department, the building inspection department, and any other agency responsible under law for investigating compliance, such as health inspection services or the fire department. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application, and the proposed sexually oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under law. Said investigations shall be completed by the zoning department, Cortez police department, the building inspection department, and any other agency within forty-five days of receipt of the application by the licensing officer. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, and, in the event it disapproves, state the reasons therefore. The Cortez police department shall only be required to provide the information specified herein and in section 4A-5, application and conditions of license, and shall not be required to approve or disapprove applications. 
(b)  The building inspector, zoning department, or other agency shall disapprove an application if it finds that the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation, or other law in effect in the city. After its indication of approval or disapproval, said departments or agency(s) shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the licensing officer. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-8. - Issuance of license. 
The licensing officer shall grant or deny any complete application for a license within sixty days from the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of the sixtieth day, the application shall be deemed granted, unless the licensing officer notifies the applicant of a denial of the application in writing and states the reason(s) for that denial. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-9. - Grant of application for license. 
(a)  The licensing officer shall grant the application unless one or more of the criteria set forth in Section 4A-10 of this article, is present. 
(b)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall also indicate that sexually oriented businesses are subject to prohibitions against public indecency pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes Sections 18-7-208 and 18-7-301. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it can be easily read at any time. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-10. - Denial of application for license. 
(a)  The licensing officer shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  An applicant is under eighteen years of age; 
(2)  An applicant is overdue on his/her payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him/her or imposed upon him/her in relation to a sexually oriented business; 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this section for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(4)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have been disapproved by an inspecting agency pursuant to the provisions of this article; 
(5)  The application or license fees have not been paid; 
(6)  An applicant or the proposed business is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this chapter or any pertinent provisions of this code, including but not limited to, the zoning location requirements for a sexually oriented business set forth in the Cortez Land Use Code, section 3.05(b); 
(7)  The granting of the application would violate a statute, ordinance, or court order; 
(8)  The applicant has a license under this chapter, which has been suspended or revoked within the previous twelve months; 
(9)  An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in section 4A-5(e); 
(10)  An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ an employee who does not have a valid license as required in this article; 
(11)  An applicant is not of good moral character, as "good moral character" is defined in section 4A-1 of this chapter; 
(12)  The applicant has not demonstrated a legal right to use the premises for the term of the proposed license. 
(b)  If the licensing officer denies the application, he/she shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reason(s) for the denial pursuant to the time periods set forth in sections 6-57 and 6-58 of this Code. 
(c)  Whenever an application is denied, the city clerk shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. The applicant must appeal any adverse decision by a licensing officer by requesting a hearing before the city council within ten days of receipt of notification of the denial if the applicant disagrees with the denial. A public hearing on the denial shall be held by the city council within fourteen days thereafter or at the next city council meeting, whichever first occurs, unless the applicant agrees in writing to an extension of the time on the public hearing. 
(d)  Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the investigation of the application or his or her refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding the application, or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate with any investigation required by this chapter, shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the licensing officer. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-11. - Expiration of license. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless suspended or revoked, and may be reviewed only by making application as provided in this article (for renewals, filing of original survey may be sufficient). Application for renewal of a license shall be made at least thirty days before the expiration date of the license. If a renewal application is made fewer than thirty days before the expiration date of a license, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(b)  If, subsequent to denial of renewal, the licensing officer finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the license has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least ninety days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-12. - Suspension of license. 
(a)  The licensing officer shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty days if he/she determines that a licensee, or an employee of a licensee, has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; or 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter; or 
(3)  Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal, state or local, said determination being based on investigation by the division, department or agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In the event of such a statute, code, ordinance or regulation violation, the licensing officer shall promptly notify the licensee of the violation and shall allow the licensee a seven day period in which to correct the violation. If the licensee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the seven-day period, the licensing officer shall forthwith suspend the license and shall notify the licensee of the suspension; or 
(4)  Engaged in a license transfer contrary to section 4A-14 of this article. In the event that the licensing officer suspends a license on the ground that a licensee engaged in a license transfer contrary to section 4A-14, the licensing officer shall forthwith notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the applicable section of this chapter has been satisfied; or 
(5)  Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of operation provisions of the Land Use Code section 3.05(b)(21)(11); or 
(6)  Where the licensing officer has reason to believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred in a deliberate or wilful manner, or that the public health, safety, and welfare require immediate action on the part of the licensing officer, the licensing officer may summarily suspend the license of an adult use establishment or an adult use employee, and the notice of suspension shall contain notice that the adult use establishment or adult use employee may request a hearing to contest the suspension. Should the adult use establishment or the adult use employee within ten days after service of the suspension notice, request in writing, a hearing on the suspension, the licensing officer shall set a hearing date within fourteen days, or at the next city board meeting, whichever first occurs. No suspension shall exceed thirty days unless prior to expiration of the thirty-day suspension a revocation proceeding is commenced; or 
(7)  The licensing officer may impose a civil penalty against the licensee, for any violations meriting a suspension or revocation, as provided in section 4A-37. If the licensee fails to pay the civil penalty, the licensing officer may provide that at the end of the period of suspension, if the civil penalty remaining at the time is still unpaid, the license shall be revoked. 
(b)  The suspension shall remain in effect until the violation of the statute, Code, ordinance, or regulation in question has been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-13. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  The licensing officer shall revoke a sexually oriented business license upon determining that: 
(1)  A cause of suspension in section 4A-12 of this article occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve months; 
(2)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process that enhanced the applicant's opportunity to obtain a license; or 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances (as defined in Part 3 of Article 22 of Title 12, Colorado Revised Statutes) on the premises; or 
(4)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; or 
(5)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; or 
(6)  A licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which the time period set forth in section 4A-5(e) has not elapsed; or 
(7)  On two or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the licensed premises, constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city or state for any taxes or fees; or 
(9)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the licensed premises or personally engaged in the same; or 
(10)  The licensee has operated more than one sexually oriented business within the same building, structure, or portion thereof. 
(b)  When the licensing officer revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-14. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  A licensee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place or other than the address designated in the application for the license. 
(b)  A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another person unless and until such other person satisfies the following requirements: 
(1)  Obtains an amendment to the license from the licensing officer which provides that he/she is now the licensee, which amendment may be obtained only if he/she has completed and properly filed an application with the licensing officer, setting forth the information called for under section 4A-5 in the application; and 
(2)  Pays a transfer fee of twenty percent of the annual license fee. 
(c)  No license may be transferred when the licensing officer has notified the licensee that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the licensee. 
(d)  A licensee shall not transfer his license to another location. 
(e)  Any attempt to transfer a license either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the license shall be deemed revoked. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-15. - Judicial review of license denial, suspension of revocation. 
After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension, or revocation of a license and a hearing before the city council as set forth in sections 4A-4, 4A-10, 4A-12, and 4A-13, the applicant may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Article III. - Employee Requirements. 
 
Sec. 4A-16. - Sexually oriented business employees general requirements. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult use establishment shall be not less than eighteen years of age. Every employee shall be of good moral character as defined in section 4A-1 of this chapter. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on licensed premises, he or she shall first obtain a sexually oriented business employee license as set forth in section 4A-18 of this title. 
(c)  Prohibitions. Notwithstanding any other applicable prohibitions as set forth in section 4A-37 of this chapter, employees shall not be permitted to mingle with patrons in a nude state and are prohibited from kissing or touching patrons. Further, it is unlawful for any employee of a sexually oriented business to receive tips from patrons other than through the receipt of such tips from one or more tip boxes or other containers designed to receive the tips. All tips for such employee shall be placed by the patron of the sexually oriented business into the tip box. 
(d)  Violation of the provisions of this Code or the rules and regulations of the licensing officer shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-17. - Sexually oriented business employee license required. 
It is unlawful, and a person commits a misdemeanor, if he or she works as an employee of a sexually oriented business without first obtaining an employee's license. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-18. - Application for employee's license. 
(a)  An employee shall submit an application for an employee's license on a form to be provided by the licensing officer. The application shall contain the applicant's name, address, date of birth, phone number, and the information required in section 4A- 16 of this article. 
(b)  The licensing officer shall refer the employee license application to the Cortez police department for investigation to be made of such information as is contained on the application. The application process shall be completed within ten days from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the licensing officer shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the police department or other department of the city. 
(2)  The applicant is under age eighteen. 
(3)  The applicant has failed to provide the information required by this section. 
(4)  The license fee has not been paid. 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in section 4A-5(e) of this chapter. 
(6)  The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this chapter. 
(7)  The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the city within two years of the date of the current application. 
(c)  A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal by the licensing officer upon the written application of the applicant and finding by the licensing officer upon the written application of the applicant and finding by the licensing officer and the Cortez police department that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal act or committed any act during the existence of the previous license period which would be grounds to deny the initial permit application. 
(d)  The employee license shall be subject to a fifty dollar fee, and a renewal shall be subject to a twenty-five dollar fee. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Article IV. - Requirements for Licensed Establishments. 
 
Sec. 4A-19. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, licensing officer, building inspection department, the health department, and the fire department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business or at other times by mutual agreement. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent commits a misdemeanor if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time that it is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-20. - Records and reports—Authority to promulgate. 
(a)  Each licensee shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by the licensing officer and the chief of the fire department to implement this chapter and carry out its purpose. By applying for a license under this chapter, an individual, partnership, or corporation shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the exercise by the licensing officer of the powers given herein in the manner herein specified. 
(b)  The licensing officer is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or the Cortez City Code as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-21. - General requirements. 
In addition to the special requirements contained in sections 4A-22 through 4A-25 of this article, each licensed premises shall: 
(a)  Conform to the requirements of the currently adopted city construction codes, unless a requirement in the Uniform Building Code conflicts with a special requirement contained within this chapter. 
(b)  Conform to the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code, except to the extent that a requirement in the Uniform Fire Code conflicts with a special requirement contained in this chapter. 
(c)  In all cases wherein the occupant capacity, as determined by the fire chief, is at least fifty persons, exclusive of attendants and assistants, such structure shall have electric, battery-operated, emergency lights using reliable type storage batteries provided with suitable maintenance in properly charged condition, provided that dry batteries shall not be used, and further provided that electric storage batteries shall be approved by the fire chief for their intended use and shall comply with the National Electrical Code as adopted by the city. 
(d)  Conform to the requirements of the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city. 
(e)  Conform to all other ordinances of the city. 
For purposes of this section, the city of Cortez staff, including any health, building or fire officials shall render a decision regarding conformance to the general and special requirements noted in sections 4A-22 through 4A-25 of this article, below, within forty-five days of an application for a license. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 962 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-22. - Adult bookstore, adult novelty store and adult video store requirements. 
In addition to the general requirements noted in Section 4A-21 of this article, an adult bookstore, adult novelty store and adult video store shall observe the following special requirements: 
(a)  All materials and novelties shall be so displayed that they cannot be seen by anyone other than customers who have entered the licensed premises. 
(b)  If recordings are offered for sale or viewing on the premises and customers may listen to them while on the licensed premises, soundproof booths or rooms (peep booths) shall be available for use by customers who desire to listen or view such recordings, and each such booth or room on the premises are also subject to all requirements set forth in section 4A-25 of this article. 
(c)  It is unlawful for anyone to distribute for commercial purposes, sell or offer for sale any device, instrument or paraphernalia designed or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others. Such devices include but are not limited to phallic-shaped vibrators, dildos, muzzles, whips, chains, bather restraints, racks, nonmedical enema kits, body piercing implements (excluding earrings or other decorative jewelry), or other tools of sadomasochistic abuse. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-23. - Adult motion picture theater requirements. 
In addition to the general requirements contained in section 4A-21 of this article, an adult motion picture theater shall observe the following special requirements and any peep booths located on or in the premises of any adult motion picture theater are also subject to the requirements set forth in section 4A-25 of this article: 
(a)  An adult motion picture theater having only a hall or auditorium for the showing of film material shall be considered a "place of assembly" within the meaning of the currently adopted city construction codes and shall conform to the requirements therefore. 
(b)  An adult motion picture theater having both adult motion picture booths and a hall or auditorium shall conform to the special requirements for both facilities provided for in this section and Section 4A-25 of this article, provided that where the special requirements allow for common elements to be utilized or constructed, this may be done with the approval of the building inspector. 
(c)  There shall be provided within or adjacent to the common corridor, passageway or area in adult motion picture theaters having adult motion picture booths, adequate lavatories equipped with running water, hand-cleansing soap or detergent, and sanitary towels or hand-drying devices; common towels are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 962 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-24. - Adult cabaret, adult theater and adult motel requirements. 
In addition to the general requirements contained in Section 4A-21 of this article, an adult cabaret, adult theater and adult motel establishment shall observe the following special requirements: 
(a)  Any person employed or working in the licensed premises as a dancer shall, while dancing, perform upon a stage or similar structure specially designed for such dancing. Stages shall conform to the requirements of the currently adopted city construction codes and shall be a minimum of fifty square feet in size, including the requirements for appurtenant rooms if such appurtenant rooms are used by the establishment, provided that the dancers shall be provided with a dressing room or rooms that are not part of or used by the public as restrooms. 
(b)  Where a dancer performs upon a platform or other small structure designed to hold a small number of persons, which is not a stage nor equipped to be a stage for theatrical presentations, the platform shall be level and of sturdy construction and shall be securely fastened to the floor or wall during performances and shall be a minimum of seven feet from patrons to be seated. Steps and handrails shall be provided so that the dancer may ascend to the top of the platform safely under normal operating conditions of the establishment in all cases wherein the top of the platform is more than eight inches from the surface upon which the platform rests. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any employee of a sexually oriented business to receive tips from patrons except as set forth herein. A licensee that desires to provide for tips from its patrons shall establish one or more boxes or other containers to receive tips. All tips for such employees shall be placed by the patrons of the sexually oriented business into the tip box. A sexually oriented business that provides tip boxes for its patrons as provided for in this section shall post one or more signs to be conspicuously visible to the patrons of the premises in letters at least one inch high to read as follows: "All tips are to be placed in the tip box and not handed directly to employees. Any physical contact between a patron and employees is strictly prohibited." 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 962 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-25. - Requirements pertaining to the exhibition of sexually exhibit films or videos in peep booths. 
In addition to the general and special requirements noted in sections 4A-21 through 4A-24 of this article, a person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business which exhibits on the premises in a peep booth a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the requirements of this article as follows: 
(a)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion of the premises at which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two square feet of floor area with no dimension greater than eight feet. The diagram shall also designate the place at which this license will be conspicuously posted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The licensing officer may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by applicant. 
(b)  At least one employee must be on duty and situated at each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(c)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city or its designee. 
(d)  It is the duty of the owners and operators of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(e)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video display equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. The view area shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times, and no patron shall be permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to sections 4A-5 of this chapter. 
(f)  No door, screen or other covering shall be placed or allowed to remain on any peep booth, and no holes or openings shall be placed or allowed to remain in the wall between any two adjacent peep booths. The door or doors opening into the booth or room shall be incapable of being locked or otherwise fastened so that it or they will freely open from either side. Partitions between peep booths shall be considered nonbearing partitions, but they shall be so constructed as to have a fire-resistance rating of not less than one hour, or shall have approved sprinklers. 
(g)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (e) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials or persons at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has not been designated as an area which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this section. 
(h)  One clear window, facing the major portion of the licensed premises, covering not less than one-fourth of the wall area into which the window is set or a minimum size of two feet by two feet, whichever is greater, which window shall not be covered or obstructed in any manner while the booth or room is in use. 
(i)  No peep booth may be occupied by more than one person at one time. No holes, shall be allowed in the walls or partitions that separate each viewing room from adjoining viewing room or restroom. 
(j)  A person having a duty under this section commits a misdemeanor if he/she knowingly fails to fulfill the duties imposed by this section. 
(k)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access and an illumination of not less than two footcandles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-26. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It is unlawful for a licensee to admit or to permit the admission of minors under the age of eighteen years within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-27. - Sale to minors unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell, barter, or give, or to offer to sell, barter, or give, to any minor any service, material or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor, adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-28. - Cleaning of licensed premises requirements. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment, and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises, but shall be disposed of daily or as often as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-29. - Self-inspection of premises by licensee. 
The licensee of licensed premises, or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month, and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-30. - Sealing of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises, or any part thereof, may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his findings of a violation of this chapter resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within twenty-four hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe," as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-31. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises, or any part thereof, may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-32. - Interference with inspectors. 
No person shall interfere with or obstruct inspectors in the performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-33. - Tampering with notices, etc. 
No person shall mutilate, obstruct, tear down, remove, or otherwise tamper with any official notice, seal or poster unless authorized to do so by the licensing officer by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-34. - False statements prohibited. 
No person shall knowingly make, induce, or cause to be made by another a false, untrue, or misleading statement or a signature of another on a certificate, application, registration, report or other document required to be prepared pursuant to this chapter. No person shall knowingly make a false, untrue, or misleading oral statement to the licensing officer as to any matter investigated by the licensing officer. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-35. - Alterations prohibited. 
No person shall reproduce or alter or cause to be reproduced or altered a license, report, certificate or other document issued by the licensing officer if the purpose of the reproduction or alteration is the evasion or violation of a provision of this chapter or any other law. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-36. - Immunity from prosecution. 
All officers and employees of the city who are acting within the scope of their authority and duties under this chapter shall be immune from prosecution, civil and criminal, for trespass upon real property. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Article V. - Violations and Penalties. 
 
Sec. 4A-37. - Violations. 
Any person who knowingly and wilfully: 
(a)  Operates, or procures or acquiesces in the operation of, an unlicensed premises contrary to the relevant requirements of this Code; or 
(b)  Admits, or procures or acquiesces in the admission of, a minor within a licensed premises; or 
(c)  Sells, barters, or gives or offers to sell, barter or give, or in an offer to sell, barter, or give to any minor any service, device, or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult arcade, adult motion picture theater, passage parlor, adult theater or peep booth; or 
(d)  Maintains, or procures or acquiesces in the maintaining of, a licensed premises in an unsanitary or unsafe condition contrary to the provisions of this chapter; or 
(e)  Having a duty to conduct the self-inspection required herein, fails or refuses, or procures or acquiesces in a failure or refusal to conduct the self-inspection; or 
(f)  Interferes with, or procures or acquiesces in an interference with, an inspector contrary to relevant provisions of this Code; or 
(g)  Maintains, or procures or acquiesces in the maintenance of, a nuisance on a licensed premises shall be guilty of a violation of this Code, as amended. For violations that are of a continuing nature, each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-38. - Civil penalties. 
In addition to or in lieu of the penalties that may be otherwise imposed, the licensing officer may assess the following civil penalties: 
(a)  A person who operates or attempts to operate an adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult arcade, massage parlor, adult motion picture theater, adult theater or peep booth without having first obtained a license under this chapter may be assessed a civil penalty of up to three hundred dollars. 
(b)  An applicant for a license under this chapter, and any officer, director, partner, agent, or attorney of such an applicant, who knowingly makes a false statement or provides false information on any document or paper accompanying and forming a part of such application, shall be assessed a civil penalty of up to two hundred dollars for each such false statement or false item of information. 
(c)  A licensee or employee who fails or refuses to renew his license within the period granted herein may be assessed a civil penalty of up to fifty dollars for each day beyond said period that said refusal or failure continues, but not to exceed three hundred dollars for each refusal or failure. 
(d)  A licensee, and any agent, officer, servant, or employee of a licensee, who maintains a nuisance on the licensed premises or permits the licensed premises to be unsanitary or unsafe may be assessed a civil penalty of up to one hundred dollars for each day that the nuisance or unsafe or unsanitary condition continues. 
(e)  A licensee who moves his licensed premises without approval by the licensing officer or who changes the name of his business without notifying the licensing officer may be assessed a civil penalty up to three hundred dollars. 
(f)  A licensee or employee who does not keep the records and make the reports required by any of the agencies herein may be assessed a civil penalty of up to fifty dollars for each violation. 
(g)  A licensee, any agent, officer, servant, or employee of a licensee who fails to correct violations of the general and applicable special requirements for the licensed premises may be assessed a civil penalty of up to two hundred dollars for each violation observed and not corrected within the period prescribed by the licensing officer, the building official or the fire chief, as the case may be. 
(h)  Any person who aids or participates in a violation for which a civil penalty may be assessed under this chapter shall be considered a principal in the violation and may be assessed a civil penalty of up to the maximum amount prescribed for that violation. 
(i)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the city from taking such other lawful action in any court of competent jurisdiction as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or noncompliance. Such other lawful actions shall include but not be limited to an equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages. All remedies and penalties provided for herein shall be cumulative and independently available to the city, and the city shall be authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this section to the full extent of the law. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-39. - Assessment and recovery of civil penalty. 
Civil penalties shall be assessed by the licensing officer, based upon findings certified by the building official, the police department, health inspection services, or the chief of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 4A-40. - Criminal penalties. 
If any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or violates any of the criminal provisions contained in this chapter, such person upon conviction of such offense shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part); amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 5, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 4A-41. - Prohibition of the display of specified anatomical areas or non-live entertainment or performances exhibiting specified sexual activities in commercial establishments servicing and/or selling liquor. 
(a)  No retail license for or on a premises that allows consumption of alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any person to appear on said license premises displaying specified anatomical areas or non-live performance or entertainment exhibiting specified sexual activities as defined in section 4A-1 of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of an offense against the city of Cortez, punishable as provided in sections 4A-38 and 4A-40 of this article. 
(c)  If the owner, operator, licensee, lessor, lessee, manager, employee, or any other person participating in the operation of a commercial establishment located within the city at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises shall be convicted of any of the offenses herein, then the city clerk shall revoke the occupational license for said establishment after giving a reasonable notice thereof to the holder of said license and affording the holder an opportunity to be heard at the next city board meeting on as to why the revocation should not be issued. 
(d)  If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter, and the city council of the city hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified in this chapter and each part, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof, regardless of the fact that any one or more parts, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid. 
(e)  The city council of the city hereby finds, determines and declares that this chapter is necessary and proper for the health, safety and welfare of the city and the inhabitants thereof. 
(f)  In view of the extraordinary potential risk for the proliferation of adverse secondary effects associated with sexually oriented businesses as located within the city absent the requirements of the regulations contained in this chapter, and the potential adverse consequences on the city and its inhabitants in the event the ordinance codified in this chapter does not become effective immediately, the city council of the city finds and declares that an emergency exists and the ordinance codified in this chapter is declared to be necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety and welfare. 
Therefore, pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes Section 31-16-105, as amended, this chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately upon adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Reference Liquor and Beer Code Regulations 47-900.) 
(Ord. No. 919, § 3 (part).)  
CHAPTER 5. - ANIMALS AND FOWL. 
 For state law as to authority of city to regulate, etc., certain animals, see C.R.S. 1973, § 13-12-010(59). As to estrays, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 13-12-701 to 13-12-707. 
 As to health and sanitation generally, see Ch. 14 of this Code. 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Dog. A domestic canine of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized. 
Cat. A domestic feline of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized. 
Owner. Any adult person, keeping or harboring a dog or cat for a period of seven days or more or any household having a dog or cat in its possession shall be presumed to be the owner of such dog or cat. 
Running at large. A dog shall be deemed to be running at large when it is off or away from the premises of its owner or keeper, or is not under direct control of such owner or keeper either by leash, cord or chain. 
Harboring. The act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing a premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care for a period of seven days or more. 
Fierce, dangerous or vicious propensities. A dog that bites, attacks or charges human beings or other animals unless such dog is provoked into making such an attack by acts designed to, and having the effect of provoking such an animal to bite, or attack or charge a person or animal making provocative attacks. A dog that in a vicious and terrorizing manner attacks or approaches or charges in apparent attitude of attack upon a person or other animal without provocation upon a street, sidewalk or other public ground, or other places to include the curtilage of private property normally open to the public; provided however, that if such biting or attacks occurs upon the premises of the owner of the animal, and the person or animal so bitten or attacked is not an invited guest, business or other authorized visitor, this definition shall not apply to such dog. 
Inoculation, vaccination or vaccination for rabies. The inoculation of an animal shall be with a vaccine listed in the "Compendium of Animal Rabies Control." 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2; Ord. No. 889.)  
Sec. 5-2. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep, harbor or allow to remain on the premises any male or female dog or male or female cat over the age of four months within the corporate limits of the city unless such person shall first obtain a license for such dog or cat. In order for a dog or cat license to be issued, a current rabies vaccination is required. The vaccination requirement shall be in accordance with the "Compendium of Animal Rabies Control." If there is no proof of a current rabies vaccination, a dog or cat license deposit must be left at the city animal shelter at the time of reclaiming an impounded animal. The license will then be issued upon verification of a current rabies vaccination to be provided by the dog or cat owner or by the veterinarian who has done the vaccination. The license shall be obtained by paying to the chief of police or an authorized representative a license fee as set by the city council by resolution. 
It shall be unlawful for a person or persons to maintain on any premises more than four dogs over ten weeks of age without first applying for and receiving a conditional use permit to operate the premises as a kennel. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2; Ord. No. 889.)  
Sec. 5-3. - Issuance of tag and receipt. 
Upon the payment of such license fee the chief of police or an authorized representative shall issue a license tag and receipt to the owner or person obtaining a license for such dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2; Ord. No. 889.)  
Sec. 5-4. - Persons required to pay the fee. 
Such fees, as required, shall be paid by the owner or person in charge of each and every dog remaining or residing within the city or at any time thereafter brought into the city for residence or keeping. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-5. - Fees generally. 
Such fees shall be paid pro rata for the remainder of the year within which such dog is in or is brought into the city for residence or keeping. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-6. - Expiration of fees. 
License fees shall be due and payable on the date of the rabies vaccination. The license shall expire on the date the rabies vaccination expires. Rabies vaccination periods may be one or three years. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2; Ord. No. 889.)  
Sec. 5-7. - Tags to be worn by dogs. 
All dogs shall wear or otherwise carry a license tag upon the collar or harness to be worn at all times within the city limits. 
The owner of any cat shall provide proof of rabies vaccination upon request. 
In the event of any loss or destruction of the original tag, the owner of the dog shall obtain a replacement tag from the chief of police or an authorized representative at a cost to be set by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2; Ord. No. 889; Ord. No. 908.)  
Sec. 5-8. - Rabies control—Vaccination required. 
It shall be the duty of every person who owns or harbors any dog or cat in the city to have such dog or cat inoculated by a person legally authorized to do so. Vaccinations shall be performed as set forth in the "Compendium of Animal Rabies Control" as promulgated by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2; Ord. No. 889.)  
Sec. 5-9. - Chief of police to supply certificates and tags. 
The chief of police shall prepare certificates in triplicate together for distribution to persons legally authorized to vaccinate animals for rabies. Spaces for the following information and for any other such information as the chief of police may require to be filled in by persons legally authorized to vaccinate animals shall be provided. Minimum information requirements shall be as follows: 
(a)  The name and address of the owner or harborer of the inoculated animal; 
(b)  Date of rabies inoculation; 
(c)  Expiration date of rabies inoculation; 
(d)  The year and rabies tag number of the animal tag; 
(e)  Breed, age, color and sex of the inoculated animal. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2; Ord. No. 889.)  
Sec. 5-10. - Information required on tags. 
Rabies tags issued by persons qualified to vaccinate animals shall be made of a durable material suitable to be attached to the collar or harness of an inoculated animal. Such tags shall state the following: 
(a)  The year of issue. 
(b)  Rabies vaccination. 
(c)  The name of the clinic. 
(d)  City and state. 
(e)  Clinic's telephone number. 
(f)  Rabies tag number. 
The cost of the inoculation shall be paid by the owner of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2; Ord. No. 889.)  
Sec. 5-11. - Duties of persons performing vaccinations. 
It shall be the duty of each person legally authorized to perform vaccinations on animals when inoculating any dog or cat to fill out one triplicate certificate obtained from the chief of police with the information required and immediately present one triplicate copy to the owner or harborer of the inoculated animal. One triplicate copy will then be mailed to the chief of police or an authorized agent on a monthly basis. The remaining triplicate copy shall be retained by the person performing the vaccination. 
At the time of a rabies inoculation of any dog or cat the person performing the rabies vaccination shall also provide to the owner or harborer of such animal a rabies tag as evidence of such rabies inoculation. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2; Ord. No. 889.)  
Sec. 5-12. - Tags to be worn by dogs—Certificates retained by owner. 
Every owner or harborer of a dog shall attach the tag evidencing inoculation of antirabies vaccine to the collar or harness of the inoculated dog and such collar or harness shall be worn by the animal at all times. The copy of the certificate shall be retained by the owner or harborer of the inoculated dog for inspection by the chief of police or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-13. - Certificate required as proof. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or harbors a vaccinated animal to fail or refuse to exhibit his copy of the certificate of vaccination to any person charged with enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-14. - Chief of police to keep official registry. 
The chief of police or an authorized representative shall file and register copies of such triplicate certificates received as provided in this chapter and retain and file such as the official registry of all dogs and cats inoculated with antirabies vaccine for the city. Such vaccination registration shall be valid for a period from the date the vaccination was given until the date of its expiration in accordance with the type of vaccine and its expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2; Ord. No. 889.)  
Sec. 5-15. - Free vaccinations at the discretion of the chief of police. 
The chief of police may at his discretion provide for vaccination of any dog without cost or at a reduced rate to the owner or harborer thereof in hardship cases and in such instances that vaccination services are not available elsewhere for a reasonable fee. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-16. - Possession of certificates and tags. 
Only those persons who legally own or harbor a dog legally vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be permitted to possess the certificate and tag as evidence of a rabies vaccination. No person or persons may affix a rabies tag evidencing a rabies vaccination to the collar or harness of any dog or cat except the tag issued for the animal at the time of vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2; Ord. No. 889.)  
Sec. 5-17. - Authority of humane officer. 
Any police officer, humane officer or other officer as designated by the chief of police is authorized to enforce any and all sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-18. - Interference with humane officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, threaten, obstruct, delay or resist any such officer or agent, in the performance and discharge of his duty. 
A person commits interference if he knowingly prevents, or attempts to prevent or delays a humane officer, acting under color of his official authority from discharging his duties by: 
(a)  Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the humane officer or another; 
(b)  Using any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing physical injury to the humane officer or another. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-19. - Duty of humane officer. 
It shall be the duty of the humane officer or other designated representative of the chief of police to apprehend animals found running at large or otherwise in violation of this chapter and to impound such animals in the city pound or other place designated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-20. - Fowl or poultry prohibited, exception. 
(a)  Definition. Fowl or poultry shall include but is not limited to all chickens, ducks, geese, pigeons, guineas, bantams, and pinioned wild fowl. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any fowl or poultry within the city of Cortez, subject to the following exemption: 
(1)  A maximum of six chicken hens may be kept per premises of the owner or keeper. "Premises" shall be defined as all contiguous lands of the owner or keeper, including buildings thereon. 
(2)  The chicken hens must at all times be kept within a fenced backyard area of the owner or keeper's premises, and shall also be provided with a secure predator-resistant enclosure or henhouse. Chicken hens shall be confined or caged when being transported. 
(3)  At all times chicken enclosures must be kept clean with no offensive odors, excessive dust or waste at all times. 
(4)  Chicken enclosures must be set back at least ten feet from the property line. 
(5)  Roosters are prohibited. 
(6)  The chicken enclosures shall not be kept in a manner which constitutes a nuisance, safety hazard or health problem. 
(7)  The city may require a permit for the keeping of chickens. 
(8)  The municipal judge is hereby authorized and directed to impose increased penalties for subsequent violations by the same owner or keeper (defendant) for subsequent violations involving the same poultry and the municipal judge shall have the authority to issue warrants or other orders causing the abatement of any nuisance caused by poultry and after conviction for any violation of this section may enter such orders are appropriate to abate any nuisance caused by any poultry including its destruction or its removal from town. 
(b)  The penalty for violating any of the sections of this section shall be punished as set forth in section 17-16A, sentencing, municipal court. 
(c)  In addition to other authority allowed by law, the municipal judge shall have authority to issue warrants causing the impoundment of any vicious animal or abatement of a nuisance, and following a conviction for any violation of this chapter, may enter such orders as appropriate to abate any nuisance caused by any animals, including vicious animals, including the destruction of the animal or its removal from the city. 
(Ord. No. 1175, 3-12-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1175, adopted March 12, 2013, repealed the former § 5-20, and enacted a new § 5-20 as set out herein. The former § 5-20 pertained to keeping of fowl or poultry and derived from Ord. No. 654.  
Sec. 5-21. - Temporary keeping of horses, etcetera, for fairs, rodeos, etcetera. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to the temporary keeping of horses, cattle or other livestock upon any property within the city, used for the exclusive purpose of conducting rodeos, fairs, horse shows and similar functions, provided that such animals shall not be kept upon such premises more than one week prior to, or one week subsequent to the rodeo, fair, horse show or similar function. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-22. - Riding, leading or driving horses, mules, cattle or goats on certain public areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, lead or drive horses, mules, cattle or goats on a public park, or public sidewalk in the city, or upon any of the parkway located in the center of the street within the city. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-23. - Releasing penned animals. 
It shall be unlawful to break open or in any manner directly or indirectly aid or assist in breaking open any pen, enclosure or cage, with the intent of releasing any animal contained therein. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any impounded animal from the animal shelter, pound or kennel without the consent of the humane officer or designated officer or agency. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-24. - Maintenance of certain animal yards. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who lawfully keeps any horse, mule, cow, sheep, goat, poultry or any other animal within the city to permit the yard or place therein which such animals are kept to become foul, noisome, putrid, malodorous, unwholesome or offensive, or in any way dangerous or detrimental to human health, comfort or welfare. Any place so maintained is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be subject to abatement. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-25. - Maintenance of swine or dangerous reptiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or keep any swine or poisonous or dangerous reptile within the city. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-26. - Maintenance of horses, goats, etcetera. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or keep any horse, mule, cattle, sheep or goats within the city within one hundred fifty feet of any building occupied as a residence, or place of human habitation, restaurant, church, public building or public park other than the keeper's own residence or place of business. Animals so kept or maintained shall not be permitted to run at large within the city. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-27. - Burial of dead animals and fowl. 
No person shall bury or cause to be buried any dead animals or fowl or part thereof within the city. Any person having any dead animal or fowl unfit for food, an animal or fowl sick or injured and past recovery, or any animal or fowl in an offensive condition on his premises within the city, shall at once remove or cause such animal or fowl to be removed to the sanitary landfill at his own expense. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-28. - Maintenance of animals that disturb the peace. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any animal within the city which habitually or with regularity disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. To include, but not limited to: excessive barking, whining or howling, molesting passersby, chasing vehicles, bicycles or people, attacking other domestic animals, depositing excretory matter on property other than that of the owner, damaging property or repeatedly running at large. The keeping of any such animal is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-29. - Poisoning of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to poison a domestic animal or to distribute poison or toxicants on public or private property in any manner whatsoever with the intent of poisoning any domestic animal. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-30. - Keeping of vicious animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or have about any dog, animal or reptile which has bitten, attacked or molested any person or persons, or keep, harbor or have about any dog or animal with known tendencies toward being vicious, ill-tempered or harmful. 
No dog of fierce, dangerous or vicious propensities, nor female dog in heat, or other animal, shall be allowed to run at large or upon the premises of another, other than the premises of the owner or keeper of such animal. If any dog is found to be running at large it shall be taken up and impounded. 
If any dangerous, fierce or vicious animal so found at large cannot be safely taken up and impounded, such animal may be slain by the chief of police, or his designated representative without notice to owner or harborer. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-31. - Running at large. 
A dog shall be deemed to be running at large and permitted by the owner to run at large under any of the following circumstances: 
(a)  When the dog is off or away from the premises of the owner or keeper thereof and not under the direct control of such owner or keeper either by leash, cord or chain. 
(b)  When the dog is left unattended on any public property, whether or not the dog is secured by a leash, cord, chain or other means. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-32. - Cruelty to animals. 
Abandoning animals. It is hereby prohibited and shall be unlawful for any person to willfully abandon any animal or to withhold food or water or adequate shelter from any animal such that its health is endangered or it is caused to suffer unduly. It is also prohibited to leave animals unattended in hot vehicles. 
It shall also be unlawful for any person to torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable, tease, provoke, or needlessly kill any animal within the bounds of the city of Cortez. A violation of this section shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2; Ord. No. 1020.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 6, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 5-33. - Allowing felines to disturb others. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who harbors a feline animal (cat) to allow that animal to disturb other persons. Feline animals (cats) determined to be in fact disturbing others, on property other than the property of the owner or harborer of the feline animal, shall be taken up and impounded by the chief of police or his designated representatives by any means not designed to harm the animal. Impounded feline animals are subject to impound fees as set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-34. - City animal pound created. 
There is hereby created a city animal pound which may be operated by local vendors on an annual contract basis which shall be operated under the direction and control of the chief of police. 
All animals impounded shall be housed and cared for at the city animal pound; provided, however, that during an emergency period when pound facilities are inadequate, the chief of police is authorized to make provisions for additional care and housing elsewhere. 
All animals impounded shall be properly housed, fed, watered and cared for under the guidelines of the state of Colorado department of health. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-35. - Impounding of animals running at large. 
If any animal described in this chapter is found to be running at large in the city, it shall be the duty of the chief of police or his authorized representative to take up and confine such animal in a secure place designated for that purpose. 
Animals injured on public property may be impounded and given adequate veterinary medical treatment pending notification of the owner. If the injured animal is treated and/or impounded, the owner of such animal shall be liable for all expenses incurred in the treatment and/or impoundment of the animal. 
Animals injured on public property or property other than the owners, and the owner is unknown or unable to be promptly notified, and the animal is obviously seriously injured and suffering, the animal, at the discretion of the chief of police or his authorized representative, may be destroyed on sight without liability to the city or officers involved. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-36. - Notice of impoundment. 
During the first working day of the impounding of any animal found running at large in violation of any provisions of this chapter, a written notice shall be posted at the designated place of impoundment describing such animal, the license tag number (if any) of such animal, the name of such owner or reputed owner, if known, and the hour and date of impounding. The owner of any animal so impounded may reclaim such animal upon presenting to the city animal shelter a receipt showing that such animal is properly licensed and vaccinated for rabies, if required, and upon payment to the city of all costs and charges incurred by the city for pickup and impounding of such animal. If such dog or cat owner or harborer is unable to produce a valid rabies certificate, a rabies deposit must be left at the city animal shelter, which will be refunded once a rabies certification is presented and if presented within ten working days to the chief of police or an authorized agent. Charges for pickup and impounding any animal and for keeping any animal on a per diem basis shall be determined by the city council by resolution and hereinafter referred to as "impoundment fee." 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2; Ord. No. 889.)  
Sec. 5-37. - Disposition of unclaimed animals. 
All animals impounded for running at large or otherwise impounded shall be kept for a minimum period of five days before disposal either by adoption or euthanasia, the five days herein meaning days that the shelter is open to the public for redemption of animals, with the following exceptions: 
(a)  The chief of police or his designated representative may determine that an animal without identification may be disposed of within three days if it is determined that the shelter has no additional resources for the animal or determines it to be dangerous. 
(b)  If the shelter receives the animal from the owner or representative of the owner, it becomes the property of the shelter and may be disposed of by the shelter and in the manner that shelter policy dictates. 
(c)  If the animal is abandoned it becomes the property of the shelter and the chief of police or his designated representative may dispose of the animal in the manner and time that the chief of police or his designated representative determines. 
(d)  If an animal, in the opinion of the chief of police or his designated representative, is in great pain and suffering, it may be euthanized after exhausting reasonable efforts to contact the owner, if the owner is known. The shelter will use reasonable efforts to contact the owner for up to twenty-four hours. 
(e)  An animal may be euthanized at any time when in the judgment of the chief of police or his designated representative it is dangerous and represents a threat to employees of the shelter or other animals. 
At the expiration of five working days from the date of impoundment, the animal may be adopted or disposed of by euthanization, unless claimed by owner. 
Uncontrollable or vicious animals may be destroyed at the owner's expense upon written authorization from the owner of the animal requesting prompt euthanization for valid and lawful reasons or as authorized by the chief of police or a designated representative. 
If an injured or ill animal at the city animal shelter appears to be suffering, the animal at the discretion of the chief of police or an authorized agent may be immediately euthanized. If the animal has only minor injuries or sickness it will be made comfortable for the five-day period as set forth in section 5-37 for unclaimed animals. Veterinarian treatment for sick animals within the shelter will be at the discretion of the chief of police or an authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2; Ord. No. 889; Ord. No. 1073.)  
Sec. 5-38. - Quarantine and disposition of animals which bite or attack persons. 
Any dog or other animal which has bitten a person shall be observed for a period of ten days from the date of the bite. The procedure and place of observation shall be designated by the investigating officer, the chief of police or his authorized representative. If the dog, cat or other animal is not confined on the owner's premises, confinement shall be impoundment in the city animal pound or at any veterinary hospital of the owner's choice. Such confinement shall be at the expense of the owner. Stray dogs, cats or other animals whose owners cannot be located shall be confined in the city animal pound. Refusal to produce the dog, cat or other animal upon request of the chief of police or his authorized representative constitutes a violation of this section and each day of such refusal constitutes a separate and individual violation. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2.)  
Sec. 5-39. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction thereof shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 2; amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 7, 9-25-12)  
CHAPTER 6 - BUILDINGS. 
 As to plumbing generally, see Ch. 21 of this Code.  
Article I. - In General. 
 For state law as to authority of city to regulate building construction generally, see CRSA § 31-15-601. 
 
Sec. 6-1. - International Building Codes—Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by reference, as though the same were fully printed and set forth herein, the International Fire Code (IFC), 2009 Edition, Copyright 2009, 1st Printing, prepared by the International Code Council (ICC), 5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, and containing a total of five hundred and three pages. 
There is hereby adopted by reference, as though the same were fully printed and set forth herein, the International Building Code (IBC), 2009 Edition, Copyright 2009, 1st Printing, prepared by said International Code Council, containing one volume with a total of seven hundred and six pages. 
There is likewise adopted by reference, as though the same were fully printed and set forth herein, the International Residential Code (IRC), 2009 Edition, Copyright 2009, 1st Printing, except for Section 105.2 #1, Section 105.2 #10, and Section 313, prepared by said International Code Council, and containing a total of eight hundred ninety-one pages. 
There is likewise adopted by reference, as though the same were fully printed and set forth herein, the International Existing Building Code, (IEBC), 2009 Edition, Copyright 2009, 1st Printing, prepared by said International Code Council, and containing a total of two hundred ninety-four pages. 
There is likewise adopted by reference, as though the same were fully printed and set forth herein, the International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2009 Edition, Copyright 2009, 1st Printing, prepared by said International Code Council, and containing a total of one hundred forty-five pages. 
There is likewise adopted by reference, as though the same were fully printed and set forth herein, the International Plumbing Code (IPC), 2009 Edition, Copyright 2009, 1st Printing, prepared by said International Code Council, and containing a total of one hundred seventy pages. 
There is likewise adopted by reference, as though the same were fully printed and set forth herein, the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), 2009 Edition, Copyright 2009, 1st Printing, prepared by said International Code Council, and containing a total of ninety pages. 
There is likewise adopted by reference, as though the same were fully printed and set forth herein, the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), 2009 Edition, Copyright 2009, 1st Printing, prepared by said International Code Council, and containing a total of fifty pages. 
There is likewise adopted by reference, as though the same were fully printed and set forth herein, the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2009 Edition, Copyright 2009, 1st Printing, prepared by said International Code Council, and containing a total of one hundred seventy-seven pages. 
There is likewise adopted as set forth herein, the following local minimum construction standards: 
THE CITY OF CORTEZ SUPPLEMENT TO THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING AND RESIDENTIAL CODES 
(a)  Due to the unique soils and weather conditions that each structure must perform under, the City of Cortez has adopted the following specific construction standards. The items listed are more stringent than the standards delineated within the currently-adopted construction codes enforced by the City of Cortez. 
(1)  Minimum eight inches by sixteen inches concrete spread footing with two #4 rebar suspended horizontally to allow for three inches of concrete coverage. 
Exception: Minimum concrete spread footing may be less than eight inches by sixteen inches, if the foundation is designed and stamped by a Colorado Licensed Engineer and foundation design is site specific. 
(2)  Minimum eight-inch wide stem wall with two #4 rebar installed horizontally and verticals spaced at forty-eight inches on center minimum for dwellings. When insulated concrete forms are utilized, the width shall be measured from interior to interior of said forms. 
Exception: Minimum stem wall width may be less than eight inches if the foundation stem wall is designed and stamped by a Colorado Licensed Engineer and stem wall design is site specific. 
(3)  Gypsum wall board installed on a ceiling shall be a minimum of five-eights-inch in thickness. 
(4)  Sheathing for roofs shall be a minimum of five-eighths-inch in thickness installed with the required one-eighth-inch air gap. 
(5)  Roofing material installed must be rated to withstand a ninety-mph three-second wind gust/forty mph sustained. 
There are likewise previously-adopted appendix chapters in ordinance form that council has determined are desirable to retain, as though the same were fully printed and set forth herein, as part of the construction codes for the City of Cortez, Colorado, as follows: 
(a)  Ordinance No. 851, Series 1997—Construction Standards for the Construction of Straw Bale Homes with Load Bearing and Non-Load Bearing Walls; 
(b)  Ordinance No. 862, Series 1998—Construction and Maintenance Standards for Commercial Wireless Antennas and Supporting Towers; 
(c)  Ordinance No. 953, Series 2001—Manufactured Housing Installations in Accordance with State Resolution #37; and 
(d)  NFPA-211 Standards for Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents, and Solid Fuel-Burning Appliances, 2000 Edition, Copyright 2000, 1st Printing, prepared by the National Fire Protection Association, 11 Tracy Drive, Avon, MA, and containing a total of forty-seven pages. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 2; Ord. No. 962 (part): Ord. No. 1087, § 2 (part).) 
(Ord. No. 1137, § II) 
 For state law as to authority of city to adopt by reference, see CRSA § 31-16-201 et seq. 
 As to the Fire Prevention Code, see §§ 10-1, 10-2 of this Code. As to the Plumbing Code, see §§ 21-1, 21-2.  
Sec. 6-1.1. - Repealed by Ord. No. 634.  
Sec. 6-2. - Currently adopted city construction codes—Copies on file. 
Three true and exact official copies of the above-described 2009 Editions of the IBC, IRC, IEBC, IMC, IPC, IECC, IPMC, IFGC, and IFC are on file in the municipal offices of the city of Cortez, Colorado, duly certified by the mayor and attested by the city clerk, and may be examined, duplicated, or copied by any interested person during the regular business hours of said offices, all such reproduction or copying to be at the expense of the person requesting the same. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 3; Ord. No. 962 (part): Ord. No. 1087, § 3 (part).) 
(Ord. No. 1137, § III)  
Sec. 6-2.1. - Approved and inspected modular homes. 
Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, and any modular home erected upon a foundation within the city which bears an inspection tag of "Factory Built" issued by the state of Colorado, shall be deemed to satisfy the minimum requirements of the currently adopted city construction codes of this city and such modular home shall be approved by the city building inspector upon satisfactory evidence that such modular home has been so inspected, the state inspection tag being attached to the same certified as meeting state requirements. Except as herein amended, the currently adopted city construction codes shall remain unchanged. 
(Ord. No. 457, § 1; Ord. No. 962 (part).)  
Sec. 6-3. - Repealed by Ord. No. 539.  
Sec. 6-4. - Repealed by Ord. No. 539.  
Sec. 6-4.1. - Electrical inspections required. 
All structures which have been issued a city building permit must have a final electrical inspection done by the state electrical inspector prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy by the city's building department.  
Sec. 6-5. - Fire limits—Permit required for rebuilding, altering or enlarging. 
Where a building is partially destroyed by fire within the fire limits and the owner desires to rebuild such building, or to alter or enlarge a building already constructed, he shall make application for a permit as in the case of a new building, and the building official shall decide whether or not he may rebuild, alter or enlarge such building with the same material. 
(Code 1968, § 13-2-1.) 
 For state law as to authority of city to regulate building construction within fire limits, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-12-101(43). 
 As to fire protection generally, see Ch. 10 of this Code.  
Sec. 6-6. - Same—Described. 
The fire limits of the city shall be as are set out on a map which shall be kept in the office of the city clerk. The fire limits shall be as are set by the city council and described on such map. Such map shall be available for public inspection during the normal office hours of the city clerk. 
 For state law as to authority of city to prescribe fire limits, see C.R.S 1973, § 31-15-601(d), (k).  
Sec. 6-6.1. - Unsafe buildings. 
All structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe, unsanitary or deficient because of inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light and ventilation, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or which involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance shall be deemed an unsafe condition. Unsafe structures shall be taken down and removed or made safe, as the building official deems necessary and as provided for in appropriate chapters of the currently adopted city construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 488, § 12; Ord. No. 962 (part).)  
Sec. 6-6.2. - Erection of buildings within potential flood areas; duties of building inspector and zoning and planning commission. 
(a)  The city building inspector shall review all building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a location that has a flood hazard, any proposed new construction or substantial improvement (including prefabricated and mobile homes) must: 
(1)  Be designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage; and 
(3)  Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
(b)  The city zoning and planning commission shall review subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments to assure that: 
(1)  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(c)  The city zoning and planning commission shall require new or replacement water supply systems or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, and require on-site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 473, §§ 1—3.)  
Sec. 6-6.3. - Repealed November 27, 2001. 
 For state law as to authority of city to adopt by reference, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 31-16-202 to 31-16-204.  
Sec. 6-6.4. - Repealed November 27, 2001.  
Sec. 6-6.5. - Repealed November 27, 2001.  
Sec. 6-6.6. - NFPA-211 Standard adopted. 
(a)  Adoption by reference. There is hereby adopted by reference, as though the same were fully printed and set forth herein, the NFPA-211 Standard for Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents, and Solid Fuel-Burning Appliances, 2000 Edition, prepared by the National Fire Protection Association, NG-Fire Safety, I Batterymarch Park, PO Box 9101, Quincy, MA 02269-9101, with a total of forty-seven printed pages. 
(b)  Copies on file. Three true and exact official copies of the above NFPA-211 Standard are on file in the municipal offices of the city, duly certified by the mayor and attested by the city clerk, and may be examined, duplicated, or copied by any person interested during the regular business hours of said offices, all such reproduction or copying to be at the expense of the person requesting the same. 
(Ord. No. 879, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 962 (part).)  
Article II. - Numbering of Buildings. 
 For state law as to authority of city to compel the numbering of buildings, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31 15-601(i). 
 
Sec. 6-7. - "House" defined. 
For the purposes of this article, the word "house" shall mean any building used for dwelling or business purposes. 
(Code 1968, § 13-6-1.)  
Sec. 6-8. - System established; street designations and operation of system generally. 
(a)  The intersection of Main and Market Streets shall be the base points for such numbering system. Main Street shall be the base for the numbering of houses on streets running north or south or at a relative curve or angle from Main Street. Market Street shall be the base for the numbering of houses on streets running east or west or at a relative curve or angle from Market Street. 
(b)  All streets running north, south, east, or west or at a relative curve or angle from the base street shall contain the appropriate prefix, North, South, East or West as a part of the official name of such street. 
(c)  The north and east sides of streets shall be even numbers and the numbers on the south or west sides of street shall be odd numbers. 
(d)  There is hereby established a number for each twelve and one-half feet, which number shall be in consecutive odd or even order depending upon the side of the street, beginning with 1 and 2 at the property adjacent to the base street; numbers in the first block from the base street shall be from 1 to 99, in the second block from 100 to 199 and in such manner each block removed from the base street shall begin a new hundred serial. In new subdivisions, the 12.5 foot distance for numbering shall be followed as closely as is reasonably possible, but with modifications that may seem necessary. 
(Code 1968, § 13-6-2; Ord. No. 592, § 1.)  
Sec. 6-9. - Display and regulation of number plates. 
Each house within the limits of the city shall display in a prominent place upon the front side of such house, a number plate and number, which shall be of uniform size, style and type as follows: 
(a)  All numbers shall be upon a reflector type plate. 
(b)  All plates shall be nine inches by three and one-fourth inches in size. 
(c)  All numbers shall be three inches by three inches in size. 
(d)  All plates shall be made of metal with glass face, with black background and white reflector numbers. 
(Code 1968, § 13-6-3.)  
Sec. 6-10. - Building official to furnish information. 
The building official shall upon request furnish information as to the correct number or numbers applicable to any house upon being furnished with the proper lot and block number. 
(Code 1968, § 13-6-4.)  
Sec. 6-11. - Compliance with article required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any house within the city limits to fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1968, § 13-6-5.)  
Sec. 6-11.1. - Street numbering in certain annexed areas and subdivisions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any language in this article to the contrary, from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in sections 6-11.1 through 6-11.3, it shall be the duty of the city manager and his staff, and he is likewise empowered and directed, to cause to be examined all official plats of annexed areas and subdivisions now on file or to be hereafter filed with the city of Cortez. 
(b)  Upon such examination it shall be his duty, aided by his staff, to assign numbers to each lot platted on such plat and to cause such number to be engraved on the official plat of the city, whether any such lot is vacant or occupied by a building. 
(c)  Such numbering of said lots shall be in an orderly sequential manner so that each lot bears a logical numbering sequence with all other lots in said subdivision or addition to the end that confusion and duplication of numbers within said subdivision or addition will be avoided. 
(d)  Such plats, after the numbers have been engraved thereon, shall be indexed and preserved in an orderly filing system in the city administration building and it shall be the duty of all persons owning a structure erected upon such lot to display a number plate upon such building as required by section 6-7 of this article. 
(e)  After all numbers have been engraved on said official plats it shall be the duty of the city manager to notify the owner or occupant of the official number assigned to said premises with a demand that such number be attached to any building thereon. 
(f)  If any such lot is vacant and unoccupied, it shall be the duty of the city building inspector to notify the owner of any building to be thereafter erected thereon of such official number and the same shall be printed on any building permit thereafter issued. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1.)  
Sec. 6-11.2. - Official status of such numbers. 
(a)  The numbers engraved on such lots or parcels of land within said annexed areas and/or subdivisions shall be deemed to be the official house or building number for all purposes including, but not limited to, mail service United States Postal System or any other authorized delivery service serving the inhabitants of such annexed area and/or subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1.)  
Sec. 6-11.3. - Conflicts. 
(a)  In the numbering of such lots should it appear that any structure has affixed a house or business number thereon which conflicts with the orderly sequential numbers engraved thereon, it shall be the duty of the owner of such house or business building to remove such conflicting number and to install the proper number upon being notified of such conflict by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1.)  
Sec. 6-11.4. - Street renumbering in the city. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any language in this article to the contrary, from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, it shall be the duty of the city manager and his staff, and he is likewise empowered and directed to cause to be examined the entire numbering system and street naming system in the city of Cortez and upon such examination it shall be his duty, aided by his staff, to assign or reassign numbers to each business, lot or individual tract. Such numbering shall be in an orderly sequential manner so that each identified area bears a logical numbering sequence with all the others in that area to the end that confusion and duplication and improper spacing of numbers shall be avoided or corrected. 
(b)  Such numbers shall be indexed and preserved in an orderly filing system in the City Administration Building on official plats, and it shall be the duty of all persons owning a structure erected upon such lot to display a number plate on such building as required by Section 6-7 of this article. 
(c)  After all such numbers have been assigned and placed on such official plats, it shall be the duty of the city manager and his staff, to notify the owner/occupant of the official number assigned to such premises with a demand that such number be attached to any building thereon. 
(d)  If any such lot is vacant and unoccupied, it shall be the duty of the city building inspector to notify the owner of any building to be thereafter erected thereon of the official number and the same shall be printed on any building permit thereafter issued. 
(e)  Conflicts. If, in the numbering of such lots, tracts or premises as hereinbefore provided, should it appear that any structure has been affixed to a house or business the number therein which conflicts with the orderly sequential numbers engraved thereon, it shall be the duty of the owner of such lot, tract or premises to remove such conflicting numbers and to install a proper number on the improvements upon being notified of such conflict by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 663.)  
Article III. - Building Department, Building Official and Board of Appeals. 
 
Sec. 6-12. - Building department created. 
There is hereby established in the city the building department which shall be under the jurisdiction of the building official designated by the appointing authority. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 5.)  
Sec. 6-13. - Building official—Powers and duties generally. 
(a)  Generally. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of the currently adopted city construction codes. 
(b)  Appointment of deputies. In accordance with the procedure and with the approval of the chief appointing authority of the municipality, the building official may appoint such number of officers, inspectors, assistants and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. He may deputize such employees as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the building department. 
(c)  Reports and records. The building official shall submit a report to the proper city official not less than once a year, covering the work of the department during the preceding period. He shall incorporate in such report a summary of his recommendations as to desirable amendments to the currently adopted city construction codes. 
(d)  Account of fees and monies. The building official shall keep a permanent, accurate account of all fees and other monies collected and received under the currently adopted city construction codes, the names of the persons upon whose account the same were paid, the date and amount thereof, together with the location of the building or premises to which they relate. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 6; Ord. No. 962 (part).)  
Sec. 6-14. - Same—Right of entry for inspection—Buildings under construction. 
Whenever in the judgment of the building official or any of his deputies it becomes necessary to make an inspection of a building under construction, the building official or his authorized representative shall have at all times right to enter upon the premises where such building is being constructed and upon presenting his credentials to the owner thereof or such person as is in charge of construction and stating his reasons therefor, he shall then have the right to make such reasonable inspection of such premises to determine whether compliance with the provisions of the currently adopted city construction codes is met. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 7; Ord. No. 962 (part).)  
Sec. 6-15. - Same—Same—Occupied building. 
(a)  Inspection. The building inspector or his authorized representative shall have the right during daylight hours to make an inspection of such occupied building whenever he has reasons to believe that such inspection is reasonably necessary to enforce any of the provisions of the currently adopted city construction codes; provided, however, that in case of an occupied building, the building inspector must first present himself to the owner or occupant as the case may be, and after presenting his credentials shall make a request for an inspection of the premises stating his reasons therefor. If the owner or occupant should refuse entry to the building inspector after he has presented his credentials and stated his reasons for making such inspection and should the building inspector or his representative then believe that such refusal was arbitrary, capricious or unreasonable, the building inspector shall then have a right to file a complaint in the municipal court of the city, charging the owner or occupant or both with unreasonable refusal to permit his inspection. The court shall then set the matter for hearing and the defendant shall have the right to be represented at such hearing by counsel of his choice. If the court should determine that the request for admittance by the building official or his representative was unreasonable, capricious and without any basis and that the request for inspection was an unreasonable request, then the court shall dismiss the matter. On the other hand, if the court should find that the reasons for inspection given by the building official or his authorized representative were not arbitrary, unreasonable or capricious and that the refusal of the defendant to permit such inspection was in fact unreasonable, arbitrary or capricious, then the court may find the defendant guilty and he may be fined in the manner and to the extent as provided in this article. 
(b)  Final inspection to ensure compliance with standards. After the building inspector has completed his inspection he shall then deliver to the owner or occupant a written list of requirements necessary to comply with applicable portions of this Code and the owner or occupant shall have a reasonable time to comply with such requirements. Upon so complying the owner or occupant shall notify the building inspector by certified mail of that fact and the inspector shall then have a right to make a final inspection to determine if such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 6; Ord. No. 484, § 2; Ord. No. 962 (part).)  
Sec. 6-16. - Same—Same—Unsafe buildings. 
Whenever the building official or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which makes such building or premises unsafe as defined in section 6-7 of this Code, the building official or his authorized representative shall first present himself to the owner thereof or the occupant and deliver to such owner or occupant, written reasons why the building official believes that such premises are unsafe as defined herein. If the owner or occupant believes that such reasons appear to be reasonable and that a dangerous condition does in fact exist, then he may admit the building official or his representative to the premises to make such inspection to the end that such dangerous condition may be removed. If on the other hand, the owner or occupant believes that such request is arbitrary, capricious or unreasonable and he should refuse such request, then the building official shall have the right to file a complaint in the municipal court of the city charging such owner or occupant or both with such unreasonable refusal and the matter shall be heard by the court as provided in section 6-15, subsection (a) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 6.)  
Sec. 6-17. - Same—Same—Emergencies. 
Whenever in the judgment of the building official or his authorized representative, it appears that there exists in a building a condition which poses an immediate threat to life or property and there is not sufficient time because of such emergency and the threat to human life or property in which to provide notice as in sections 6-14 to 6-16 of this Code, the building official shall make every bona fide effort to locate the owner or occupant thereof and to notify him orally of the dangerous condition. If the owner or occupant then refuses admission to the premises of the building official or his representative, the building official with the aid of the city attorney's office may then apply for and obtain a mandatory injunction from the district court of the county, such injunction to be ex parte and without notice as provided by law, and with such injunctive order the building official or his representative may then enter the premises and take such steps as are necessary to remove the threat of harm to life, limb or property as the case may be; provided, however, that if the threat is so pressing and the time within which to remedy the same is so short as to make it impossible to apply to the district court for such mandatory injunction and should the threat of harm to life, limb or property be so grave and immediate that action must be taken at once, the building official shall have the right in the company of the chief of police of the city and the chief of the fire department to enter such premises with or without consent of the occupant or owner in order to remove such dangerous condition or instrumentality. 
"Authorized representative" shall include the officers named in section 6-11.2, subsection (b). 
No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper demand is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official or his authorized representative for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article. Any person violating this section may be found guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the fines set forth in section 6-26. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 6.)  
Sec. 6-18. - Same—Stop-work orders. 
Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the provisions of the currently adopted city construction codes, the building official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the building official to proceed with the work. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 8; Ord. No. 962 (part).)  
Sec. 6-19. - Same—Occupancy violations. 
Whenever any structure is being used contrary to the provisions of the currently adopted city construction codes, the building official may order such use discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within ten days after receipt of such notice or make the structure, or portion thereof, comply with the requirements of the currently adopted city construction codes; provided, however, that in the event of an unsafe building, section 6-7 of this Code shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 9; Ord. No. 962 (part).)  
Sec. 6-20. - Same—Liability. 
The building official or any employee charged with the enforcement of the currently adopted city construction codes, acting in good faith and without malice for the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against the building official or employee, because of such act or omission performed by him in the enforcement of any provisions of the currently adopted city construction codes, shall be defended by the legal department of the city until final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 10; Ord. No. 962 (part).)  
Sec. 6-21. - Same—Cooperation of other officials. 
The building official may request, and shall receive so far as may be necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the city. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 11.)  
Sec. 6-22. - Board of appeals created. 
There is hereby created a board of appeals which shall be created in accordance with paragraph 6-15, board of adjustment of the Cortez Land Use Code, and all provisions of paragraph 6-15 shall be adhered to. 
All appeals to the board shall be in accordance with paragraph 6-15 of the Cortez Land Use Code. 
(Ord. No. 488, § 13; Ord. No. 963 (part): Ord. No. 1006 (part).)  
Sec. 6-23. - Repealed February 10, 2004.  
Sec. 6-24. - Repealed February 10, 2004.  
Sec. 6-25. - Repealed February 10, 2004.  
Sec. 6-26. - Repealed February 10, 2004.  
CHAPTER 7. - CIVIL DEFENSE AND EMERGENCIES. 
 For state law as to authority of city to establish civil defense organization, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 28-1-2, 28-2-108. As to civil defense generally, see C.R.S. 1973, § 28-2-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Mayor to establish program; scope of program. 
The mayor of the city is hereby empowered and authorized to promulgate in writing such rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary for the protection of life and property within the city from dangers or hazards created or increased by the existing state of war or for the coordinating of an efficient program of civilian defense, including, but not by way of limitation: 
(a)  Defense of the city and its inhabitants against air raids or attack, warnings to be given, black-outs and care of persons and property during such emergency. 
(b)  Prevention of sabotage of property within the city and designation of insignia and symbols to be used by authorized civil defense workers or organizations. 
(c)  Control of traffic movements, evacuation of residents, systems of warning and alarm and conduct of persons during practice black-outs. 
(Code 1968, § 1-5-1.)  
Sec. 7-2. - Mayor may delegate authority. 
The mayor is authorized to delegate in writing to such agencies or persons as he may designate or appoint for such purpose the authority granted by this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 1-5-2.)  
Sec. 7-3. - Enforcement of chapter. 
The law enforcement authorities of the city are authorized and directed to enforce the orders, rules and regulations made or issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 1-5-3.)  
Sec. 7-4. - Disclaimer of liability of city, etc. 
Neither the city, nor its agents or representatives who, in good faith, carry out, comply with or attempt to carry out or comply with any order, rule, regulation or command promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be liable for any injury or death to any person or damage to any property as the result of such activity. 
(Code 1968, § 1-5-4.)  
Sec. 7-5. - Effect of section 7-4 on workman's compensation, etc.; chapter and rules promulgated thereunder deemed governmental function. 
(a)  Section 7-4 shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits or compensation to which he might otherwise be enTitled under the Workman's Compensation Act or other pension law. 
(b)  This chapter and any rules, regulation or order promulgated hereunder shall constitute the exercise by the city of its governmental functions. 
(Code 1968, § 1-5-5.)  
CHAPTER 7A. - DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY.  
Article I. - Property Received as Evidence. 
 
Sec. 7A-1. - Safekeeping by officer pending disposition—Records required. 
When personal property comes into the possession of a police officer of the city either in execution of a search warrant, or pursuant to an arrest of a person with or without warrant, or is received or taken by him as evidence in connection with any public offense, he shall hold it in safe custody until it is received into evidence or, if it is not used as evidence, until it can be disposed of as provided in this chapter. While in the custody of such officer, a proper record shall be maintained reflecting the ownership of the property, if known, and the case or cases for which it was taken or received and is being held. 
(Ord. No. 577, Art. I.)  
Sec. 7A-1.1. - Property turnover. 
Any property turned over to the Cortez police department by any other law enforcement agency shall be subject to all provisions of this Chapter 7, including being subject to destruction or return in accordance with the guidelines set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1090 (part).)  
Sec. 7A-2. - Return of property not needed as evidence—Procedure. 
Property so obtained which is not needed as evidence shall be returned to the owner if he may lawfully possess it. When the police officer or the agency by which he is employed becomes aware that the property is not needed, the district attorney and/or the city attorney shall be so advised, giving a description and details of ownership. When the police chief or his designated agent, by such notice or otherwise, becomes aware that the property is not needed, he shall give written notice to the owner. Upon proof of ownership and of lawfulness of possession satisfactory to the police chief, the police chief shall give the owner written authorization which shall entitle the owner to receive the property from the person having custody of it. When property so obtained is received in evidence, it shall be retained by the clerk of the court last receiving it or shall be returned by him to the custody of the police officer until all direct appeals and retrials are final, at which time the property shall be returned in accordance with this section. 
In the event that the district attorney or city attorney considers it necessary to retain control over the evidence, in anticipation of possible collateral attacks upon the judgment or of use in some potential prosecution, he may decline to authorize return. 
(Ord. No. 577, Art. II; Ord. No. 812, § 1.)  
Sec. 7A-3. - Receipt from owner of returned property. 
Whenever property is returned to the owner, a receipt shall be taken from him listing in detail the property returned. The receipt shall be retained on record (shall be held in accordance with Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, Sections 24-80-101 through 24-80-112) in the files of the city police department or the court where the case is finally resolved. 
(Ord. No. 577, Art. III.)  
Sec. 7A-4. - Sale of unclaimed property—Disposition of proceeds. 
If the property is not claimed by the owner before the expiration of thirty days from the receipt of notice, or if the owner is unknown and no claim of ownership has been made, the city police department having possession of the property shall sell it at public auction, as provided by law for the sale of personal property on execution, and with the proceeds pay: 
(a)  The necessary expenses incurred in the preservation of such property and its sale; and 
(b)  Any balance to the director of finance under the provisions of Article VIII of the Charter. 
The said property may also be destroyed at the discretion of the police chief or his designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 577, Art. IV; Ord. No. 1090 (part); Ord. No. 1098 (part).)  
Sec. 7A-5. - Property seized from person—Duplicate receipts. 
When money or other property is seized with or without a warrant, the police officer seizing it shall at the time deliver a receipt to the person from whom it is taken and file a duplicate in the office of the city police department. If the custody of the property is transferred to another police agency or the property is placed in evidence, a copy of the receipt shall accompany it until disposition of the property is made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 577, Art. V.)  
Article II. - Found Property. 
 
Sec. 7A-6. - Storage period. 
When personal property is turned over to the police department by citizens who found the same, the property shall be stored by the city for a period of not less than thirty days or until someone who can establish themselves as the rightful owner claims and removes the property. 
(Ord. No. 674, 1; Ord. No. 1098 (part).)  
Sec. 7A-7. - Return to finder. 
If the property is maintained for a period of thirty days and is unclaimed by any person, then the property may be returned to the finder of the same, who shall acknowledge receipt of the property. The receipt shall contain the warning: 
The City of Cortez or the Police Department make no determination as to the legal ownership of the property, but is returning same to the finder who first brought the property to the City of Cortez. If, in the future, there is any question concerning the true ownership of the property then the City of Cortez has expressed no opinion as to the ownership and the question shall be resolved between the person who claims to be the legal owner and the party who returned the property to the City of Cortez. 
The receipt shall adequately describe the property. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 2; Ord. No. 1098 (part).)  
Sec. 7A-8. - Unclaimed property. 
The property will be disposed of in accordance with Section 7A-4 of this Code in the event that the party turning the property into the city as lost property does not make a claim thereon within thirty days after the date of turning said property in to the city. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 3; Ord. No. 1098 (part).)  
Sec. 7A-9. - Retention of receipts. 
All receipts, both from the city and from the finder who removes the property from the city's possession, according to this article, shall be retained for a period of at least three years. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 4.)  
Article III. - Disposal of Unclaimed Property. 
 
Sec. 7A-10. - Purpose of provisions. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and disposition of unclaimed property which is in the possession of or under the control of the city. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 1.)  
Sec. 7A-11. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise required by context or use, words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
(a)  "Director" shall mean the director of finance, or designee thereof. 
(b)  "Municipality" means the city of Cortez, Colorado. 
(c)  "Owner" means a person or entity, including a corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity other than this municipality, or a duly authorized legal representative or successor in interest of same, which owns unclaimed property held by the municipality. 
(d)  "Unclaimed property" means any tangible or intangible property, including any income or increment derived therefrom, less any lawful charges, that is held by or under the control of the city and which has not been claimed by its owner for a period of more than five years after it became payable or distributable. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 2.)  
Sec. 7A-12. - Procedure for disposition of property. 
(a)  Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of twenty-five dollars or more, the director shall send a written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner as shown by the records of the municipal department holding the property. The notice shall include a description of the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the director with a written claim for the return of the property within thirty days of the date of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the municipality and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(b)  Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of less than twenty-five dollars or having no last known address of the owner, the director shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall include a description of the property, the owner of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property and, when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the director with a written claim for the return of the property within sixty days of the date of the publication of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the municipality and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(c)  If the director receives no written claim within the thirty-day claim period, the property shall become the sole property of the city and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(d)  If the director receives a written claim within the thirty-day claim period, the director shall evaluate the claim and give written notice to the claimant within ninety days thereof that the claim has been accepted or denied in whole or in part. The director may investigate the validity of a claim and may request further supporting documentation from the claimant prior to disbursing or refusing to disburse the property. 
(e)  In the event that there is more than one claimant for the same property, the director may, in the director's sole discretion, resolve such claims, or may resolve such claims by depositing the disputed property with the registry of the district court in an interpleader action. 
(f)  In the event that all claims filed are denied, the property shall become the sole property of the city and any claim of the owner of such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(g)  Any legal action filed challenging a decision of the director shall be filed pursuant to Rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure within thirty days of such decision or shall be forever barred. If any legal action is timely filed, the property shall be disbursed by the director pursuant to the order of the court having jurisdiction over such claim. 
(h)  The director is authorized to establish and administer procedures for the administration and disposition of unclaimed property consistent with this article, including compliance requirements for other municipal officers and employees in the identification and disposition of such property. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 3; Ord. No. 1098 (part).)  
Sec. 7A-13. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Any property which is held by the police department pursuant to the provision of Municipal Ordinance No. 577 or Ordinance No. 674, said ordinances being codified as chapter 7A, sections 7A-1 to 7A-9, shall be exempt from the provisions of this article and shall be disposed of in accordance with Chapter 7A sections 7A-1 to 7A-9. 
(b)  Any property which is held by the city pursuant to the provisions of Municipal Ordinance No. 555, codified as chapter 18A, sections 18A-1 through 18A-7, shall be exempted from the provisions of this article and shall be disposed of in accordance with chapter 18, section 18A-8. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 4.)  
CHAPTER 8. - ELECTRICITY.  
CHAPTER 9. - FINANCE AND TAXATION. 
 For charter provision as to city finances generally, see Char., art. VII. As to taxation generally, see Char., art. VII, §§ 12, 13, 15, 19. 
 For state law authorizing city to control finances of city, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 31-15-301 to 31-15-302. As to city finances generally, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 31-20-201 to 31-20-202. As to power to tax, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 31-15-302, 31-20-101 to 31-20-107. 
 As to the occupation tax for alcoholic beverages, see §§ 4-3 to 4-10 of this Code. As to licenses and business regulations generally, see Ch. 15. As to public improvements generally, see Ch. 22. As to the rates, charges and bills for the use of the water system, see §§ 27-21 to 27-29.  
Article I. - In General. 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Purchase orders—Requisite to validity of accounts. 
No account rendered by any person to or on behalf of the city shall be valid unless a purchase order has been issued upon such form as designated by the director of finance and signed by the city manager or by a purchasing agent designated by such manager. 
(Ord. No. 417, § 1.) 
 For charter provision as to a division of purchase generally, see Char., art. IX.  
Sec. 9-2. - Same—When required. 
The provisions of section 9-1 shall apply to all bills or accounts rendered to or on behalf of the city for materials, equipment, supplies, labor or services. 
(Ord. No. 417, § 2.)  
Sec. 9-3. - Reserved for future legislation.  
Sec. 9-4. - Same—Approval of bills in excess of two thousand dollars. 
All bills or accounts to be incurred by the city in excess of two thousand dollars shall first be approved at a regular meeting of the city council and by the city council of the city of Cortez. All bills or accounts below two thousand dollars must be approved by a department head and the city manager prior to payment. In the event an account or bill must be paid which exceeds the two thousand dollar limit prior to a city council meeting, a city council person must be notified and approve the expenditure prior to payment being made. 
(Ord. No. 1040.)  
Sec. 9-5. - Sales and use tax—Collection—Limitation of Actions. 
(a)  No sales or use tax, or interest thereon or penalties with respect thereto, shall be assessed, nor shall any notice of lien be filed, or distraint warrant issued, or suit for collection be instituted, nor any other action to collect the same be commenced, more than three years after the date on which the tax was or is payable; nor shall any lien continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, notice of lien with respect to which has been filed prior to the expiration of such period, in which cases such lien shall continue only for one year after the filing of notice thereof. In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, the tax, together with interest and penalties thereon, may be assessed, or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may be begun at any time. Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the director of finance may agree in writing to an extension thereof, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing. 
(b)  In the case of failure to file a return, the sales tax, use tax, or both may be assessed and collected at any time. 
(c)  Other Remedies. Nothing in sections 9-5 and 9-6 shall preclude the city from utilizing any other applicable penalties or remedies for the collection or enforcement of sales or use taxes. 
(Ord. No. 645, Art. 1 § 1.)  
Sec. 9-6. - Same—Standard reporting form and map/location guide. 
(a)  The city shall use the standard municipal sales and use tax reporting form and any subsequent revisions thereto adopted by the executive director of the department of revenue by the first full month commencing one hundred twenty days after the effective date of the regulation adopting or revising such standard form. 
(b)  Map/Location Guide of Municipal Boundaries. The city shall make available to any requesting vendor, a map showing the boundaries of the city. For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the requesting vendor may rely on such map/location guide and any update thereof available to such vendor in determining whether to collect a sales or use tax or both. No penalty shall be imposed or action for deficiency maintained against such a vendor who in good faith complies with the most recent map/location guide available to it. 
(Ord. No. 645, Art. 1 § 2.)  
Sec. 9-6A. - Collection of delinquent charges, assessments and taxes by the county treasurer. 
(a)  Until paid all fees, rates, penalties, charges or assessments together with interest on delinquencies, and reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the collection of same by the city shall constitute a perpetual lien on and against the property served real or personal and any such lien may be foreclosed in the same manner as provided for by state law for the foreclosure of mechanic's liens or may be collected in any other manner legally permissible including certification to the Montezuma County Treasurer for collection as provided in CRS 31-20-105 Municipalities May Certify Delinquent Charges. 
(b)  There shall be included in any amount certified to the county treasurer any cost of collection charged to the city of Cortez by the county treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 1171, 9-25-12)  
Article II. - Retail Sales. 
 For charter provision as to taxation, see Char., art. VII, §§ 12, 13, 15, 19. 
 For state law authorizing city to levy taxes, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 31-12-101(5), 31-20-101 to 31-20-107.  
Division 1. - Generally. 
 
Sec. 9-7. - Words and phrases defined. 
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the following meaning: 
Agricultural producer. A person regularly engaged in the business of using land for the production of commercial crops or commercial livestock. The term includes farmers, market gardeners, commercial fruit growers, livestock breeders, dairymen, poultrymen, and other persons similarly engaged, but does not include a person who breeds or markets animals, birds, or fish for domestic pets nor a person who cultivates, grows, or harvests plants or plant products exclusively for that person's own consumption or casual sale. 
Aircraft. A device that is used or intended to be used for flight in the air. 
Aircraft part. Any tangible personal property that is intended to be permanently affixed or attached as a component part of an aircraft. 
Aircraft simulator. A flight simulator training device (FSTD) as defined in Part I of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations that is qualified in accordance with Part 60 of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations for use in a Federal Aviation Administration Approved Flight Training Program. 
Aircraft simulator part. Any tangible personal property that is originally designed and intended to be permanently affixed or attached as a component part of an aircraft, and which will also function when it is permanently affixed or attached as a component part of an aircraft simulator. 
Airline company. Any operator who engages in the carriage by aircraft of persons or property as a common carrier for compensation or hire, or the carriage of mail, or any aircraft operator who operates regularly between two or more points and publishes a flight schedule. Airline company shall not include operators whose aircraft are all certified for a gross takeoff weight of twelve thousand five hundred pounds or less and who do not engage in scheduled service or mail carriage service. 
Auction. Any sale where tangible personal property is sold by an auctioneer who is either the agent for the owner of such property or is in fact the owner thereof. 
Automotive vehicle. Any vehicle or device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, or any device used or designed for aviation or flight in the air. Automotive vehicle includes, but is not limited to, motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers, or mobile homes. Automotive vehicle shall not include devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Business. All activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, direct or indirect. 
Candy. A preparation of sugar, honey, or other natural or artificial sweeteners in combination with chocolate, fruit, nuts, or other ingredients or flavorings in the form of bars, drops, or pieces. Candy does not include any preparation containing flour, products that require refrigeration or marijuana infused products. 
Carrier access services. The services furnished by a local exchange company to its customers who provide telecommunications services which allow them to provide such telecommunications services. 
Charitable Organization. Any entity which: 
(1)  Has been certified as a nonprofit organization under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and 
(2)  Is an organization which exclusively, and in a manner consistent with existing laws and for the benefit of an indefinite number of persons or animals, freely and voluntarily ministers to the physical, mental, or spiritual needs of persons or animals, and thereby lessens the burden of government. 
City or town. The municipality of the City of Cortez. 
Coins. Monetized bullion or other forms of money manufactured from gold, silver, platinum, palladium or other such metals now, in the future or heretofore designated as a medium of exchange under the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign nation. 
Coin-operated device. Any device operated by coins or currency or any substitute therefor. 
Collection costs. Shall include, but is not limited to, all costs of audit, assessment, bank fees, hearings, execution, lien filing, distraint, litigation, locksmith fees, auction fees and costs, prosecution and attorney fees. 
Commercial packaging materials. Containers, labels, and/or cases, that become part of the finished product to the purchaser, used by or sold to a person engaged in manufacturing, compounding, wholesaling, jobbing, retailing, packaging, distributing or bottling for sale, profit or use, and is not returnable to said person for reuse. Commercial packaging materials does not include commercial shipping materials. 
Commercial shipping materials. Materials that do not become part of the finished product to the purchaser which are used exclusively in the shipping process. Commercial shipping materials include but are not limited to containers, labels, pallets, banding material and fasteners, shipping cases, shrink wrap, bubble wrap or other forms of binding, padding or protection. 
Community organization. A nonprofit entity organized and operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare, primarily engaged in promoting the common good and general welfare of the community, so long as: 
(1)  No part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual; 
(2)  No substantial part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence legislation; and 
(3)  Which does not participate in, or intervene in (including the publishing or distributing of statements), any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office. 
Construction equipment. Any equipment, including mobile machinery and mobile equipment, which is used to erect, install, alter, demolish, repair, remodel, or otherwise make improvements to any real property, building, structure or infrastructure. 
Construction materials. Tangible personal property which, when combined with other tangible personal property, loses its identity to become an integral and inseparable part of a structure or project including public and private improvements. Construction materials include, but are not limited to, such things as: Asphalt, bricks, builders' hardware, caulking material, cement, concrete, conduit, electric wiring and connections, fireplace inserts, electrical heating and cooling equipment, flooring, glass, gravel, insulation, lath, lead, lime, lumber, macadam, millwork, mortar, oil, paint, piping, pipe valves and pipe fittings, plaster, plumbing fixtures, putty, reinforcing mesh, road base, roofing, sand, sanitary sewer pipe, sheet metal, site lighting, steel, stone, stucco, tile, trees, shrubs and other landscaping materials, wall board, wall coping, wallpaper, weather stripping, wire netting and screen, water mains and meters, and wood preserver. The above materials, when used for forms, or other items which do not remain as an integral and inseparable part of completed structure or project are not construction materials. 
Consumer. Any person in the city who purchases, uses, stores, distributes or otherwise consumes tangible personal property or taxable services, purchased from sources inside or outside the city. 
Contract auditor. A duly authorized agent designated by the taxing authority and qualified to conduct tax audits on behalf of and pursuant to an agreement with the municipality. 
Contractor. Any person who shall build, construct, reconstruct, alter, expand, modify, or improve any building, dwelling, structure, infrastructure, or other improvement to real property for another party pursuant to an agreement. For purposes of this definition, contractor also includes subcontractor. 
Cover charge. A charge paid to a club or similar entertainment establishment which may, or may not, entitle the patron paying such charge to receive tangible personal property, such as food and/or beverages. 
Data processing equipment. Any equipment or system of equipment used in the storage, manipulation, management, display, reception or transmission of information. 
Digital product. An electronic product including, but not limited to: 
(1)  "Digital images" which means works that include, but are not limited to, the following that are generally recognized in the ordinary and usual sense as "photographs," "logos," "cartoons," or "drawings"; 
(2)  "Digital audio-visual works" which means a series of related images which, when shown in succession, impart an impression of motion, together with accompanying sounds, if any; 
(3)  "Digital audio works" which means works that result from the fixation of a series of musical, spoken, or other sounds, including ringtones. For purposes of the definition of "digital audio works", "ringtones" means digitized sound files that are downloaded onto a device and that may be used to alert the customer with respect to a communication; and 
(4)  "Digital books" which means works that are generally recognized in the ordinary and usual sense as "books". 
Distribution. The act of distributing any article of tangible personal property for use or consumption, which may include, but not be limited to, the distribution of advertising gifts, shoppers guides, catalogs, directories, or other property given as prizes, premiums, or for goodwill or in conjunction with the sales of other commodities or services. 
Dual residency. Those situations including, but not limited to, where a person maintains a residence, place of business or business presence, both within and outside the city. A person shall be deemed to have established a legitimate residence, place of business or business presence outside of the city for purposes of dual residency if the person has a physical structure owned, leased or rented by such person which is designated by street number or road location outside of the city, has within it a telephone or telephones in the name of such person and conducts business operations on a regular basis at such location in a manner that includes the type of business activities for which the business (person), as defined in this Code, is organized. 
Dwelling unit. A building or any portion of a building designed for occupancy as complete, independent living quarters for one or more persons, having direct access from the outside of the building or through a common hall and having living, sleeping, kitchen and sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants. 
Engaged in business in the city. Performing or providing services or selling, leasing, renting, delivering or installing tangible personal property for storage, use or consumption, within the city. Engaged in business in the city includes, but is not limited to, any one of the following activities by a person: 
(1)  Directly, indirectly, or by a subsidiary maintains a building, store, office, salesroom, warehouse, or other place of business within the taxing jurisdiction; 
(2)  Sends one or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons into the taxing jurisdiction to solicit business or to install, assemble, repair, service, or assist in the use of its products, or for demonstration or other reasons; 
(3)  Maintains one or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons on duty at a location within the taxing jurisdiction; 
(4)  Owns, leases, rents or otherwise exercises control over real or personal property within the taxing jurisdiction; or 
(5)  Makes more than one delivery into the taxing jurisdiction within a twelve-month period by any means other than a common carrier. 
Factory built housing. A manufactured home or modular home. 
Farm closeout sale. Full and final disposition of all tangible personal property previously used by a farmer or rancher in farming or ranching operations which are being abandoned. 
Farm equipment. Any farm tractor, as defined in section 42-1-102(33), C.R.S., any implement of husbandry, as defined in section 42-1-102(44), C.R.S., and irrigation equipment having a per unit purchase price of at least one thousand dollars. Farm equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, attachments and bailing wire, binders twine and surface wrap used primarily and directly in any farm operation. Farm equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, parts that are used in the repair or maintenance of the farm equipment described in this paragraph, all shipping pallets, crates, or aids paid for by a farm operation, and aircraft designed or adapted to undertake agricultural applications. Farm equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, dairy equipment. Except for shipping pallets, crates or aids used in the transfer or shipping of agricultural products, farm equipment does not include: 
(1)  Vehicles subject to the registration requirements of section 42-3-103, C.R.S., regardless of the purpose for which such vehicles are used; 
(2)  Machinery, equipment, materials, and supplies used in a manner that is incidental to a farm operation; 
(3)  Maintenance and janitorial equipment and supplies; and 
(4)  Tangible personal property used in any activity other than farming, such as office equipment and supplies and equipment and supplies used in the sale or distribution of farm products, research, or transportation. 
Farm operation. The production of any of the following products for profit, including, but not limited to, a business that hires out to produce or harvest such products: 
(1)  Agricultural, viticultural, fruit, and vegetable products; 
(2)  Livestock; 
(3)  Milk; 
(4)  Honey; and 
(5)  Poultry and eggs. 
Finance director. The finance director of the City of Cortez or such other person designated by the municipality; finance director shall also include such person's designee. 
Garage sales. Sales of tangible personal property, except automotive vehicles, occurring at the residence of the seller, where the property to be sold was originally purchased for use by members of the household where such sale is being conducted. The term includes, but is not limited to, yard sales, estate sales, and block sales. 
Gross sales. The total amount received in money, credit, property or other consideration valued in money for all sales, leases, or rentals of tangible personal property or services. 
Internet access services. Services that provide or enable computer access by multiple users to the Internet, but shall not include that portion of packaged or bundled services providing phone or television cable services when the package or bundle includes the sale of Internet access services. 
Internet subscription service. Software programs, systems, data and applications available online through rental, lease or subscription, that provide information and services including, but not limited to, data linking, data research, data analysis, data filtering or record compiling. 
License. A City of Cortez sales and/or use tax license. 
Linen services. Services involving the provision and cleaning of linens, including but not limited to rags, uniforms, coveralls and diapers. 
Lodging services. The furnishing of any rooms or accommodations by any person, partnership, association, corporation, estate, representative capacity or any other combination of individuals by whatever name known to a person who, for consideration possesses or has the right to use or possess any room, including but not limited to a hotel, inn, bed and breakfast, apartment, lodging house, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest ranch, trailer coach, mobile home, auto camp, trailer court and park, any portion of a dwelling unit or other area which accommodates a guest, or similar establishment, for a period of less than thirty days under any rental agreement, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement. 
Machinery. Any apparatus consisting of interrelated parts used to produce an article of tangible personal property. The term includes both the basic unit and any adjunct or attachment necessary for the basic unit to accomplish its intended function. 
Manufactured home. Any preconstructed building unit or combination of preconstructed building units, without motive power, where such unit or units are manufactured in a factory or at a location other than the residential site of the completed home, which is designed and commonly used for occupancy by persons for residential purposes, in either temporary or permanent locations, and which unit or units are not licensed as a vehicle. 
Manufacturing. The operation or performance of an integrated series of operations which places a product, article, substance, commodity, or other tangible personal property in a form, composition or character different from that in which it was acquired whether for sale or for use by a manufacturer. The change in form, composition or character must result in a different product having a distinctive name, character or use from the raw or prepared materials. 
Medical marijuana. Marijuana acquired, possessed, cultivated, manufactured, delivered, transported, supplied, sold, or dispensed to a person who qualifies as a patient with a debilitating medical condition(s) under article XVIII, section 14, of the Colorado Constitution, and which person holds a valid "registry identification card" issued by the State of Colorado pursuant to Colorado Constitution, article XVIII, section 14. 
Mobile machinery and self-propelled construction equipment. Those vehicles, self-propelled or otherwise, which are not designed primarily for the transportation of persons or cargo over the public highways, and those motor vehicles which may have originally been designed for the transportation of persons or cargo over the public highways, and those motor vehicles which may have originally been designed for the transportation of persons or cargo but which have been redesigned or modified by the mounting thereon of special equipment or machinery, and which may be only incidentally operated or moved over the public highways. This definition includes but is not limited to wheeled vehicles commonly used in the construction, maintenance, and repair of roadways, the drilling of wells, and the digging of ditches. 
Modular home. Any structure that consists of multiple sections fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation and assembly at the building site, and is constructed to the building codes adopted by the state division of housing, created in section 24-32-706, C.R.S., and is designed to be installed on a permanent foundation. 
Motor fuel. Gasoline, casing head or natural gasoline, benzol, benzene and naphtha, gasohol and any other liquid prepared, advertised, offered for sale, sold for use or used or commercially usable in internal combustion engines for the generation of power for the propulsion of motor vehicles upon the public highways. The term does not include fuel used for the propulsion or drawing of aircraft or railroad cars or railroad locomotives. 
Newspaper. A publication, printed on newsprint, intended for general circulation, and published regularly at short intervals, containing information and editorials on current events and news of general interest. The term newspaper does not include: Magazines, trade publications or journals, credit bulletins, advertising inserts, circulars, directories, maps, racing programs, reprints, newspaper clipping and mailing services or listings, publications that include an updating or revision service, or books or pocket editions of books. 
Online garage sales. Sales of tangible personal property, except automotive vehicles, occurring online, where the property to be sold was originally purchased for use by the seller or members of the seller's household. 
Parent. A parent of a student. 
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by court or otherwise, or any group or combination acting as a unit. 
Photovoltaic system. A power system designed to supply usable solar power by means of photovoltaics, a method of converting solar energy into direct current electricity using semiconducting materials that create voltage or electric current in a material upon exposure to light. It consists of an arrangement of several components, including solar panels to absorb and convert sunlight into electricity, a solar inverter to change the electric current from DC to AC, as well as mounting, cabling, metering systems and other electrical accessories to set up a working system. 
Precious metal bullion. Any precious metal, including but not limited to, gold, silver, platinum, palladium, that has been put through a process of refining and is in such a state or condition that its value depends upon its precious metal content and not its form. 
Prepress preparation material. All materials used by those in the printing industry including, but not limited to, airbrush color photos, color keys, dies, engravings, light-sensitive film, light-sensitive paper, masking materials, Mylar, plates, proofing materials, tape, transparencies, and veloxes, which are used by printers in the preparation of customer specific layouts or in plates used to fill customers' printing orders, which are eventually sold to a customer, either in their original purchase form or in an altered form, and for which a sales or use tax is demonstrably collected from the printer's customer, if applicable, either separately from the printed materials or as part of the inclusive price therefor. Materials sold to a printer which are used by the printer for the printer's own purposes, and are not sold, either directly or in an altered form, to a customer, are not included within this definition. 
Preprinted newspaper supplements. Inserts, attachments or supplements circulated in newspapers that: 
(1)  Are primarily devoted to advertising; and 
(2)  The distribution, insertion, or attachment of which is commonly paid for by the advertiser. 
Prescription drugs for animals. A drug which, prior to being dispensed or delivered, is required by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. section 301, et seq., as amended, to state at a minimum the symbol "Rx Only," and is dispensed in accordance with any order in writing, dated and signed by a licensed veterinarian specifying the animal for which the medicine or drug is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. 
Prescription drugs for humans. A drug which, prior to being dispensed or delivered, is required by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. section 301, et seq., as amended, to state at a minimum the symbol "Rx Only," and is dispensed in accordance with any written or electronic order dated and signed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, or given orally by a practitioner and immediately reduced to writing by the pharmacist, assistant pharmacist, or pharmacy intern, specifying the name and any required information of the patient for whom the medicine, drug or poison is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. 
Price or purchase price. The aggregate value measured in currency paid or delivered or promised to be paid or delivered in consummation of a sale, without any discount from the price on account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, and exclusive of any direct tax imposed by the federal government or by this article, and, in the case of all retail sales involving the exchange of property, also exclusive of the fair market value of the property exchanged at the same time and place of the exchange, if: 
(1)  Such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business, or 
(2)  Such exchanged property is a vehicle and is exchanged for another vehicle and both vehicles are subject to licensing, registration, or certification under the laws of this state, including, but not limited to, vehicles operating upon public highways, off-highway recreation vehicles, watercraft, and aircraft. Any money or other consideration paid over and above the value of the exchanged property is subject to tax. 
Price or purchase price includes: 
(1)  The amount of money received or due in cash and credits. 
(2)  Property at fair market value taken in exchange but not for resale in the usual course of the retailer's business. 
(3)  Any consideration valued in money, whereby the manufacturer or someone else reimburses the retailer for part of the purchase price and other media of exchange. 
(4)  The total price charged on credit sales including finance charges which are not separately stated at the time of sale. An amount charged as interest on the unpaid balance of the purchase price is not part of the purchase price unless the amount added to the purchase price is included in the principal amount of a promissory note; except the interest or carrying charge set out separately from the unpaid balance of the purchase price on the face of the note is not part of the purchase price. An amount charged for insurance on the property sold and separately stated at the time of sale is not part of the purchase price. 
(5)  Installation, applying, remodeling or repairing the property, delivery and wheeling-in charges included in the purchase price and not separately stated. 
(6)  Transportation and other charges to effect delivery of tangible personal property to the purchaser. 
(7)  Indirect federal manufacturers' excise taxes, such as taxes on automobiles, tires and floor stock. 
(8)  The gross purchase price of articles sold after manufacturing or after having been made to order, including the gross value of all the materials used, labor and service performed and the profit thereon. 
Price or purchase price shall not include: 
(1)  Any sales or use tax imposed by the State of Colorado or by any political subdivision thereof. 
(2)  The fair market value of property exchanged if such property is to be sold thereafter in the retailers' usual course of business. This is not limited to exchanges in Colorado. Out of state trade-ins are an allowable adjustment to the purchase price. 
(3)  Discounts from the original price if such discount and the corresponding decrease in sales tax due is actually passed on to the purchaser, and the seller is not reimbursed for the discount by the manufacturer or someone else. An anticipated discount to be allowed for payment on or before a given date is not an allowable adjustment to the price in reporting gross sales. 
Private communications services. Telecommunications services furnished to a subscriber, which entitles the subscriber to exclusive or priority use of any communication channel or groups of channels, or to the exclusive or priority use of any interstate inter-communications system for the subscriber's stations. 
Prosthetic devices for animals. Any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for animal use which replaces a body part or aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed, manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular patient; and is prescribed by a licensed veterinarian. Prosthetic devices include, but are not limited to, prescribed auditory, ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental, or orthopedic devices or appliances, and oxygen concentrators with related accessories. 
Prosthetic devices for humans. Any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for human use which replaces a body part or aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed, manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular patient; and is prescribed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts. Prosthetic devices include, but are not limited to, prescribed auditory, ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental, or orthopedic devices or appliances, and oxygen concentrators with related accessories. 
Purchase or sale. The acquisition for any consideration by any person of tangible personal property, other taxable products or taxable services that are purchased, leased, rented, or sold. These terms include capital leases, installment and credit sales, and property and services acquired by: 
(1)  Transfer, either conditionally or absolutely, of title or possession or both to tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services; 
(2)  A lease, lease-purchase agreement, rental or grant of a license, including royalty agreements, to use tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services. The utilization of coin-operated devices, except coin-operated telephones, which do not vend articles of tangible personal property shall be considered short term rentals of tangible personal property; 
(3)  Performance of taxable services; or 
(4)  Barter or exchange for other tangible personal property, other taxable products, or services. 
The terms purchase and sale do not include: 
(1)  A division of partnership assets among the partners according to their interests in the partnership; 
(2)  The transfer of assets of shareholders in the formation or dissolution of professional corporations, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(3)  The dissolution and the pro rata distribution of the corporation's assets to its stockholders, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(4)  A transfer of a partnership or limited liability company interest; 
(5)  The transfer of assets to a commencing or existing partnership or limited liability company, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(6)  The repossession of personal property by a chattel mortgage holder or foreclosure by a lienholder; 
(7)  The transfer of assets from a parent company to a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least eighty percent by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the subsidiary company; 
(8)  The transfer of assets from a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least eighty percent by the parent company to a parent company or to another subsidiary which is owned at least eighty percent by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the parent corporation or the subsidiary which received the assets; 
(9)  The transfer of assets between parent and closely held subsidiary companies, or between subsidiary companies closely held by the same parent company, or between companies which are owned by the same shareholders in identical percentage of stock ownership amounts, computed on a share-by-share basis, when a tax imposed by this article was paid by the transferor company at the time it acquired such assets, except to the extent that there is an increase in the fair market value of such assets resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating, or physical changing of the assets by the transferor company. To such an extent any transfer referred to in this paragraph shall constitute a sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, a closely held subsidiary corporation is one in which the parent company owns stock possessing or membership interest at least eighty percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote and owns at least eighty percent of the total number of shares of all other classes of stock. 
Rail carrier. As defined in section 10102 of Title 49 of the United States Code as of October 10, 2013, and as it may be amended hereafter. 
Rail carrier part. Any tangible personal property that is originally designed and intended to be permanently affixed or attached as a component part of a locomotive or rail car used by a rail carrier. 
Recreation services. All services relating to athletic or entertainment participation events and/or activities including but not limited to pool, golf, billiards, skating, tennis, bowling, health/athletic club memberships, coin-operated amusement devices, video games and video club memberships. 
Renewable energy. Any energy resource that is naturally regenerated over a short time scale and derived directly from the sun (such as thermal, photochemical, and photoelectric), indirectly from the sun (such as wind, hydropower, and photosynthetic energy stored in biomass), or from other natural movements and mechanisms of the environment (such as geothermal and tidal energy). Renewable energy does not include energy resources derived from fossil fuels, waste products from fossil sources, or waste products from inorganic sources. 
Resident. A person who resides or maintains one or more places of business within the city, regardless of whether that person also resides or maintains a place of business outside of the city. 
Retail sales. All sales except wholesale sales. 
Retailer. Any person selling, leasing, renting, or granting a license to use tangible personal property or services at retail. Retailer shall include, but is not limited to, any: 
(1)  Auctioneer; 
(2)  Salesperson, representative, peddler or canvasser, who makes sales as a direct or indirect agent of or obtains such property or services sold from a dealer, distributor, supervisor or employer; 
(3)  Charitable organization or governmental entity which makes sales of tangible personal property to the public, notwithstanding the fact that the merchandise sold may have been acquired by gift or donation or that the proceeds are to be used for charitable or governmental purposes; 
(4)  Retailer-Contractor, when acting in the capacity of a seller of building supplies, construction materials, and other tangible personal property. 
Retailer-contractor. A contractor who is also a retailer of building supplies, construction materials, or other tangible personal property, and purchases, manufactures, or fabricates such property for sale (which may include installation), repair work, time and materials jobs, and/or lump sum contracts. 
Return. Any form prescribed by the city/town administration for computing and reporting a total tax liability. 
Sale that benefits a Colorado School. A sale of a commodity or service from which all proceeds of the sale, less only the actual cost of the commodity or service to a person or entity as described in this Code, are donated to a school or a school-approved student organization. 
Sales tax. The tax that is collected or required to be collected and remitted by a retailer on sales taxed under this Code. 
School. A public or nonpublic school for students in kindergarten through 12th grade or any portion thereof. 
Security system services. Electronic alarm and/or monitoring services. Such term does not include non-electronic security services such as consulting or human or guard dog patrol services. 
Soft drink. A nonalcoholic beverage that contains natural or artificial sweeteners. "Soft drink" does not include beverages that contain milk or milk products, soy, rice, or similar milk substitutes, or greater than fifty percent of vegetable or fruit juice by volume. 
Software program. A sequence of instructions that can be measured, interpreted and executed by an electronic device (e.g. a computer, tablets, smart phones) regardless of the means by which it is accessed or the medium of conveyance. Software program includes: 
(1)  Custom software program, which is a software program prepared to the special order or specifications of a single customer; 
(2)  Pre-written software program, which is a software program prepared for sale or license to multiple users, and not to the special order or specifications of a single customer. Pre-written software is commonly referred to as "canned," "off-the-shelf ("COTS")," "mass produced" or "standardized"; 
(3)  Modified software, which means pre-written software that is altered or enhanced by someone other than the purchaser to create a program for a particular user; and 
(4)  The generic term "software," "software application," as well as "updates," "upgrades," "patches," "user exits," and any items which add or extend functionality to existing software programs. 
Software as a service. Software that is rented, leased or subscribed to from a provider and used at the consumer's location, including but not limited to applications, systems or programs. 
Software license fee. A fee charged for the right to use, access, or maintain software programs. 
Software maintenance agreement. An agreement, typically with a software provider, that may include: 
(1)  Provisions to maintain the right to use the software; 
(2)  Provisions for software upgrades including code updates, version updates, code fix modifications, enhancements, and added or new functional capabilities loaded into existing software; or 
(3)  Technical support. 
Solar thermal systems. A system whose primary purpose is to use energy from the sun to produce heat or cold for: 
(1)  Heating or cooling a residential or commercial building; 
(2)  Heating or cooling water; or 
(3)  Any industrial, commercial, or manufacturing process. 
Sound system services. The provision of broadcast or pre-recorded audio programming to a building or portion thereof. Such term does not include installation of sound systems where the entire system becomes the property of the building owner or the sound system service is for presentation of live performances. 
Special fuel. Kerosene oil, kerosene distillate, diesel fuel, all liquefied petroleum gases, and all combustible gases and liquids for use in the generation of power for propulsion of motor vehicles upon the public highways. The term does not include fuel used for the propulsion or drawing of aircraft, railroad cars or railroad locomotives. 
Special sales event. Any sales event which includes more than three vendors taking place at a single location for a limited period of time not to exceed seven consecutive days. 
Storage. Any keeping or retention of, or exercise dominion or control over, or possession of, for any length of time, tangible personal property not while in transit but on a stand still basis for future use when leased, rented or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the City from any person or vendor. 
Student. Any person enrolled in a school. 
Tangible personal property. Personal property that can be one or more of the following: Seen, weighed, measured, felt, touched, stored, transported, exchanged, or that is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. 
Tax. The use tax due from a consumer or the sales tax due from a retailer or the sum of both due from a retailer who also consumes. 
Tax deficiency or deficiency. Any amount of tax, penalty, interest, or other fee that is not reported and/or not paid on or before the date that any return or payment of the tax is required under the terms of this Code. 
Taxable sales. Gross sales less any exemptions and deductions specified in this Code. 
Taxable services. Services subject to tax pursuant to this Code. 
Taxpayer. Any person obligated to collect and/or pay tax under the terms of this Code. 
Telecommunications service. The service of which the object is the transmission of any two-way interactive electronic or electromagnetic communications including but not limited to voice, image, data and any other information, by the use of any means but not limited to wire, cable, fiber optical cable, microwave, radio wave, Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), or any combinations of such media, including any form of mobile two-way communication. "Telecommunications service" does not include separately stated non-transmission services which constitute computer processing applications used to act on the information to be transmitted' to their exemption language. 
Television and entertainment services. Audio or visual content, that can be transmitted electronically by any means, for which a charge is imposed. 
Therapeutic device. Devices, appliances, or related accessories that correct or treat a human physical disability or surgically created abnormality. 
Toll free telecommunications service. A telecommunications service that allows a caller to dial a number without incurring an additional charge for the call. 
Total tax liability. The total of all tax, penalties and/or interest owed by a taxpayer and shall include sales tax collected in excess of such tax computed on total sales. 
Transient/temporary sale. A sale by any person who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods within the city for a period of no more than seven consecutive days. 
Transient/temporary vendor. Any person who engages in the business of transient/temporary sales. 
Use. The exercise, for any length of time by any person within the city of any right, power or dominion over tangible personal property or services when rented, leased or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the city from any person or vendor or used in the performance of a contract in the city whether such tangible personal property is owned or not owned by the taxpayer. Use also includes the withdrawal of items from inventory for consumption. 
Use tax. The tax paid or required to be paid by a consumer for using, storing, distributing or otherwise consuming tangible personal property or taxable services inside the city. 
Wholesale sales. A sale by wholesalers to retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other wholesalers for resale and does not include a sale by wholesalers to users or consumers not for resale; latter types of sales shall be deemed to be retail sales and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
Wholesaler. Any person doing an organized wholesale or jobbing business and selling to retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other wholesalers, for the purpose of resale, and not for storage, use, consumption, or distribution. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-1; Ord. No. 572, § 1; Ord. No. 645, Art. 2 § 1; Ord. No. 741, § 1; Ord. No. 752, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 954, § 1.) 
(Ord. No. 1169, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 1231 , 10-10-17)  
Sec. 9-8. - Promulgation of rules to effectuate article. 
To provide uniform methods of adding the tax, or the average equivalent thereof, to the selling price, it shall be the duty of the director of finance, with the approval of the city manager, to formulate and promulgate, after a hearing, appropriate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-6.)  
Sec. 9-9. - Service of notices. 
All notices required to be given to the retailer or vendor under the provisions of this article shall be in writing and if mailed, shall be postpaid and sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to such retailer or vendor at his last known address. The giving of such notice shall be sufficient for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-26.)  
Sec. 9-9A. - Notice of sales and use tax ordinance amendment. 
(a)  In order to initiate a central register of sales and use tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales tax collection, the finance director of the city shall file with the Colorado Municipal League prior to the effective date of this section a copy of the city sales and use tax ordinance reflecting all provisions in effect on the effective date of this section. 
(b)  In order to keep current the central register of sales and use tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales tax collection, the finance director of the city shall file with the Colorado Municipal League prior to the effective date of any amendment a copy of each sales and use tax ordinance amendment enacted by the city. 
(c)  Failure of the city to file such ordinance or ordinance amendment pursuant to the section shall not invalidate any provision of the sales and use tax ordinance or any amendment thereto. 
(Ord. No. 752, § 1 (part).)  
Sec. 9-10. - License and tax to be in addition to other taxes, etc. 
The license and tax imposed by this article shall be in addition to all other licenses and taxes imposed by law, except as otherwise provided by this article. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-27.)  
Sec. 9-11. - Administration of article. 
The administration of this article is hereby vested in the director of finance, who shall prescribe forms and reasonable rules and regulations in conformity with this article for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the taxes imposed hereunder and for a proper administration and enforcement hereof. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-29.)  
Sec. 9-11A. - Participation in simplification meetings. 
The finance director shall cooperate with and participate on an as needed basis with a permanent statewide sales and use tax committee convened by the Colorado Municipal League which is composed of state and municipal sales and use tax officials and business officials. Said committee will meet for the purpose of discussing and seeking resolution to sales and use tax problems which may arise. 
(Ord. No. 752, § 1 (part).)  
Sec. 9-12. - Enforcement of article; offenses prohibited generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any retailer or vendor to refuse to make any return provided to be made under this article, to make any false or fraudulent return or false statement on any return, to fail and refuse to make payment to the director of finance of any taxes collected or due the city, to in any manner evade the collection and payment of the tax, or any part thereof or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation of this article. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have jurisdiction to enforce this section. In addition to the foregoing offenses, it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully swear to or verify any false statement. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-28.)  
Sec. 9-13. - Purpose of tax; distribution of tax into general, capital improvements and equipment funds. 
(a)  The city council hereby declares that except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) of this section, the purpose of the levy of the taxes imposed by Articles II and III of this chapter is for the raising of funds for the payment of the expenses of operating the city, for improvements, and for equipment acquisition and replacements. In accordance with these purposes, except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) of this section, 78.6 percent of the revenue collected under Article II and III of this chapter shall be deposited in the general fund of the city; 14.3 percent of the revenue collected under Articles II and III of this chapter shall be deposited in a capital streets improvements fund of the city for streets, sidewalks, public parking, curb and gutter, and storm drainage; and 7.1 percent of the revenue collected under Articles II and III of this chapter shall be deposited in the equipment fund of the city. 
(b)  All revenue received by the city from the recreation sales tax shall be deposited into the family recreation center fund, hereby established pursuant to Article VII, section 6 of the Cortez City Charter. Revenues deposited into the family recreation center fund shall be expended solely for the purpose of constructing, equipping, operating and maintaining the family recreation center, or for the payment of recreation bonds. In any calendar year, prior to the use of any revenues on deposit in the family recreation center fund for construction, equipment, operation or maintenance purposes, a sufficient amount of revenues deposited in the family recreation center fund must first be allocated or applied to the payment of the principal of an interest due on recreation bonds during such calendar year. In the event that any base sales tax revenues are deposited into the family recreation center fund pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the city council may, in its sole discretion, treat such deposit as an interfund loan to be repaid from recreation sales tax revenues at a later date. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the allocation of revenues from the base sales tax revenues pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, in the event that the city has recreation bonds outstanding and there is not or will not be sufficient revenues on deposit in the family recreation center fund for payment of the recreation bonds, when due, revenues from the base sales tax shall be deposited into the family recreation center fund solely for the purpose of paying the principal of and interest due on the recreation bonds. 
(Ord. No. 641, § 2; Ord. No. 876, § 1; Ord. No. 954, § 2.) 
 For charter provision as to general fund, see Char., art. VII, § 5.  
Division 2. - Licenses. 
 
Sec. 9-14. - Required; application; fees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling at retail without first having obtained a license therefor, which license shall be granted and issued by the director of finance and shall be in force and effect as long as they meet the provisions that follow: 
Such license will be invalidated and must be reissued and repurchased if there is a: 
(1)  Change in business name, or 
(2)  Change in business address, or 
(3)  Change in business ownership. 
Such license shall be granted only upon application stating the name and address of the person desiring such a license, the name of such business and its location, including the street number of such business and such other facts as the director of finance may require. For each license issued a fee of ten dollars shall be paid. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-2.)  
Sec. 9-15. - Required for each separate place of business. 
In case business is transacted at two or more separate places by one person, a separate license for each place of business shall be required. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-2.)  
Sec. 9-16. - Numbering; contents; display; transfer. 
Each license shall be numbered and shall show the name, residence, place and character of business of the licensee and shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which it is issued. No license shall be transferable. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-2.)  
Sec. 9-17. - Revocation by city manager. 
The city manager on reasonable notice and after a full hearing may revoke the license of any person found by the city manager to have violated any provision of this article. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-2.)  
Sec. 9-18. - Review of revocation by city manager. 
Any finding and order of the city manager revoking the license of any person shall be subject to review by the district court of the district where the business of the licensee is conducted, upon application by the aggrieved party. The procedure for review shall be, as nearly as possible, the same as now provided for by Rule 106 (a) (4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-2.)  
Sec. 9-19. - Exemption of persons selling certain commodities. 
No license shall be required for any person engaged exclusively in the business of selling commodities which are exempt from taxation under this article. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-2.)  
Division 3. - Taxation.  
Subdivision I. - In General. 
 
Sec. 9-20. - Property and services subject to tax—Generally. 
There is hereby levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax set forth in section 9-26 as follows: 
(a)  On the purchase price paid or charged upon all sales and purchases of tangible personal property at retail. 
(b)  In the case of retail sales involving the exchange of property, on the purchase price paid or charged, including the fair market value of the property exchanged at the time and place of the exchange, excluding however from the consideration or purchase price, the fair market value of the exchanged property; provided, that such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business. 
(c)  Upon telephone services for all local calls originating in the city on telephone instruments located in the city. 
(d)  For gas and electric service, whether furnished by municipal, public or private corporations or enterprises, for gas and electricity furnished and sold for domestic and commercial consumption and not for resale. 
(e)  Upon the amount paid for food or drink served or furnished in or by cafes, restaurants, lunch counters, cafeterias, hotels, drugstores, social clubs, night clubs, cabarets, resorts, snack bars, caterers, carryout shops, and other like places of business at which prepared food or drink is regularly sold, including sales from pushcarts, motor vehicles, and other mobile facilities. 
Cover charges shall be included as part of the amount paid for such food or drink. However, meals provided to employees of the places mentioned in this subsection at no charge or at a reduced charge and which are considered as part of their salary, wages, or income shall be exempt from taxation. 
(f)  On the entire amount charged to any person or persons for rooms or accommodations. 
(g)  Upon the amount paid for all food furnished in any convenience or grocery store or any other such place at which food is sold to the public for off-premises consumption. 
(h)  Every vendor of individual items of a tangible personal property through a coin-operated vending machine is exempt from the requirement that the sales tax be added to the price of each sale. Instead, the sales tax is levied on the gross receipts from the machine if the individual sale is more than thirty cents. There is no tax imposed if the individual sale is thirty cents or less. When the selling price of the item is more than thirty cents, tax applies to the selling price, not just to the amount in excess of thirty cents. 
(i)  All new and used mobile homes, not previously taxed by the city, shall be taxed on fifty-two percent of the sales prices. 
(j)  Computer software will be subject to sales or use tax if it meets all of the following criteria: (1) The software is pre-packaged for repeated sale or license; (2) The use of the software is governed by a tear-open non-negotiable license agreement; (3) The software is delivered to the customer in a tangible medium. Software is not delivered to the customer in a tangible medium if it is provided through an application by electronic software delivery, or transferred by load and leave software delivery. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-3; Ord. No. 536, § 1; Ord. No. 572, §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 660, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 778, § 1.) 
(Ord. No. 1169, 8-14-12)  
Sec. 9-21. - Same—Exemption of certain items. 
The following shall be exempt from taxation under the provisions of this article: 
(a)  All sales to the United States government, to the state, its departments and institutions and political subdivisions thereof, including the city in their governmental capacities only. 
(b)  To determine whether a corporation qualifies for the exemption, the following information must be submitted to the department by the corporation: 
(1)  The organization certificate of incorporation; 
(2)  A copy of the corporation's federal exemption letter; 
(3)  The corporation's bylaws; and 
(4)  The organization's financial statements sharing the source of funds and its expenditures. 
A religious, charitable or eleemosynary corporation which makes repeated sales of tangible personal property to the public and otherwise meets the definition of a retailer must have a sales tax license and collect and remit tax in the same manner as any other retailer. The fact that the merchandise sold may have been acquired as a gift or donation or that the proceeds are to be used for charitable purposes, does not make the sales exempt from tax. Purchases by a nonprofit organization or association are subject to the tax if they are not religious, charitable or eleemosynary corporations. 
(c)  All sales which the city is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States, the state or the Charter or ordinances of the city. 
(d)  All sales of cigarettes; provided, that this exemption in no way or manner affects the present city tax on cigarettes or any future tax on cigarettes. 
(e)  All sales and purchases of commodities and services under the provisions of this section to any occupant who is a permanent resident of an apartment, hotel, lodge house, motor hotel, guest house, guest ranch, mobile home, auto camp, trailer court or park and who enters into or has entered into a written agreement for occupancy of a room or accommodation for a period of at least thirty consecutive days during the calendar year or preceding year. 
(f)  All sales of motor fuel upon which there has accrued or has been paid the motor fuel tax prescribed by state law. 
 For state law as to motor fuel taxes, see C.R.S. 1973, § 39-27-101 to 39-27-121. 
(g)  Sales of tangible personal property shall be exempted from the operation of this chapter if both the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The sales are to those who are residents of or doing business outside the city. 
(2)  The articles purchased are to be delivered to the purchaser outside the city by common carrier, by the conveyance of the seller or by mail. 
(h)  All sales of drugs dispensed in accordance with a prescription; all sales of insulin in all its forms dispensed pursuant to the direction of a licensed physician; all sales of glucose usable for treatment of insulin reactions; all sales of urine and blood testing kits and materials; all sales of insulin measuring and injecting devices, including hypodermic syringes and needles; all sales of prosthetic devices; all sales of wheelchairs and hospital beds; all sales of drugs or materials when furnished by a doctor as part of professional services provided to a patient; and all sales of corrective eyeglasses, contact lenses, or hearing aids; when sold in accordance with a written recommendation from a licensed doctor, all sales of therapeutic devices, appliances, or related accessories, with a retail value of more than one hundred dollars, which are sold to correct or treat a human physical disability or surgically created abnormality; all sales of therapeutic devices, appliances or related accessories, with a retail value of one hundred dollars or less, which are sold to correct or treat a human physical disability or surgically created abnormality. 
(i)  All sales and purchases of meat cattle, sheep, lambs, swine, goats, mares and stallions for breeding purposes and all farm auction close-out sales. 
(j)  All sales and purchases of feed for livestock or poultry, seeds and orchard trees. The storage, use or consumption of such property shall be exempt from taxation. 
(k)  All sales made to schools, other than schools held or conducted for private or corporate profit. 
(l)  All sales and purchases of straw and other bedding for use in the care of livestock shall be exempt from taxation and the storage use, or consumption of straw and other bedding for use in the care of livestock shall be exempt from taxation. 
(m)  Any subsequent sale of a mobile home after such mobile home has been once subject to the payment of sales tax shall be exempt from taxation. 
(n)  All sales of construction and building materials to contractors for use in the building, erection, alteration, or repair of structures, highways, roads, streets and other public works owned and used by: 
(1)  The United States Government, the state, the city in their governmental capacities only; 
(2)  Charitable organizations in the conduct of their regular charitable functions and activities; or 
(3)  Schools, other than schools held or conducted for private or corporate profit. 
(o)  All sales made by farmer's markets as defined in section 9-7. 
(p)  Sales Tax—Nonapplicability. For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the sales tax shall not apply to the sale of construction and building materials, as the term is used in section 29-2-109, C.R.S., if such materials are picked up by the purchaser, and if the purchaser of such materials presents to the retailer a building permit or other documentation acceptable to the city evidencing that a local use tax has been paid or is required to be paid. 
(q)  Any food, as specified in 7 U.S.C. section 2012(g), as such section exists on October 1, 1987, or is thereafter amended, which is purchased with food stamps pursuant to the federal food stamp program, is exempt. 
(r)  Any food, as specified in 42 U.S.C. section 1786, as such section exists on October 1, 1987, or is thereafter amended, which is purchased with WIC vouchers or checks pursuant to the federal special supplementation program for women, infants and children, is exempt. 
(Code 1968, §§ 4-1-12, 4-1-13; Ord. No. 572, §§ 4, 5; Ord. No. 580, § 1; Ord. No. 645, Art. 2 § 3; Ord. No. 690, § 2.)  
Sec. 9-22. - Same—Exemption of certain sales and purchases deemed wholesale. 
(a)  Sales to and purchases of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing, compounding for sale, profit or use any article, substance or commodity where tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product or service which is manufactured, compounded or furnished and the container, label or the furnished shipping case thereof shall be deemed to be wholesale sales and shall be exempt from taxation under this article. 
(b)  Sales and purchases of electricity, coal, fuel oil or coke for use in processing, manufacturing, mining, refining, irrigation, building construction, telegraph, telephone and radio communication, street and railroad transportation services, all industrial uses and newsprint and printers ink for use by publishers of newspapers and commercial printers shall be deemed to be wholesale sales and shall be exempt from taxation under this article. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-1.)  
Sec. 9-23. - Same—Procedure to be followed in cases of dispute. 
Should a dispute arise between the purchaser and seller as to whether or not any such sale is exempt from taxation under this article, nevertheless the seller shall collect and the purchaser shall pay such tax and the seller shall thereupon issue to the purchaser a receipt or certificate on forms prescribed by the director of finance showing the names of the seller and purchaser, the items purchased, the date, price, amount of tax paid and a brief statement of the claim or exemption. The purchaser thereafter may apply to the director of finance for a refund of such taxes and it shall then be the duty of the director of finance to determine the question of exemption, subject to review by the courts. It shall be a violation of this article for any seller to fail to collect or any purchaser to fail to pay the tax levied by this article on sales on which the exemption is disputed. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-1.)  
Sec. 9-24. - Taxation of grant of continuous use of tangible personal property by lease or contract. 
(a)  The sales tax on lease payments shall be paid by the lessee and shall be remitted by the lessor to the city when delivery of the property to the lessee occurs within the boundary of the city. The burden of proof to show the location of such delivery shall be upon the lessor. 
(b)  Payment and remittance of sales tax to the city shall be made on each payment made under the lease, including each payment under any option to purchase contained in the lease, each payment for termination of the lease, and each payment for purchase of the leased property if same is sold to the lessee after termination of the lease, regardless of the subsequent location of the property. 
(Ord. No. 645, Art. 2 § 2.)  
Sec. 9-25. - Confidentiality of returns. 
(a)  Divulging of information generally. Except in accordance with judicial order or as otherwise provided by this article, the director of finance, his agents, clerks and employees shall not divulge any information gained from any return filed under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Use in court. The officials charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the director of finance in an action under the provisions of this article to which he is a party, on behalf of any party to an action or proceeding under the provisions of this article or to punish a violator thereof when the report of facts shown by such report is directly involved in such action or proceeding. However, in either event the court may require the production of, and may admit in evidence, so much of such returns, or of the facts shown thereby, as are pertinent to the action or proceeding and no more. 
(c)  Areas not covered. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person, or his duly authorized representative, of a copy of any return or report filed in connection with his tax, nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and the items thereof, nor to prohibit the inspection by the city attorney or any other legal representative of the city, of the report or return of any person who brings an action to set aside or review the tax based thereon or against whom an action or proceeding is contemplated or has been instituted under this article. 
(d)  Preservation period. Reports and returns shall be preserved for three years and thereafter until the director of finance, with approval of the city manager, orders them destroyed. 
(e)  Penalties. It shall be unlawful for any city officer or employee or any member, officer or employee of the office of the director of finance to divulge any information classified by this section as confidential, in any manner, except in accordance with proper judicial order or otherwise as provided by law. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-14.)  
Subdivision II. - Computation. 
 
Sec. 9-26. - Tax levied; schedule of amounts. 
There is hereby imposed a tax upon all sales of commodities and services specified in section 9-20, in accordance with the following schedule: 
(a)  On all sales three and one-half percent shall be added to the selling price; and 
(b)  In addition to the base sales tax imposed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, on all sales fifty-five one-hundredths of one percent shall be added to the selling price commending on January 1, 2002, and terminating on the earliest permitted date following the payment in full of all recreation bonds. 
(Ord. No. 954, § 3.)  
Sec. 9-27. - Addition of amount to sales prices. 
Retailers shall add the tax imposed by section 9.26, or the average equivalent thereof, to the sale price or charge, showing such tax as a separate and distinct item, and when added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge and shall be a debt from the consumer or user to the retailer until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. The retailer shall be entitled, as collecting agent of the city, to apply and credit the amount of his collections against the current sales tax rate to be paid by him under the provisions of section 9-28, remitting any excess of collections over such current sales tax rate less the three and one-third percent collection expense allowance, to the director of finance of the city in the retailer's next monthly sales tax return. 
(Ord. No. 641, § 4; Ord. No. 954, § 4.)  
Sec. 9-28. - Liability of retailer for payment; returns generally; penalty for late payments. 
(a)  Every retailer shall, irrespective of the provisions of section 9-26, be liable and responsible for the payment of an amount equivalent to the current sales tax rate on all sales made by him of commodities or services as specified in section 9-20 and shall before the twentieth day of each month make a return to the director of finance for the preceding calendar month and remit an amount equivalent to the current sales tax rate on such sales to the director of finance, less one and one-third percent of such tax to cover the vendor's expense in the collection and remittance of such tax. 
(b)  Before the twentieth day of each month every retailer shall make a return to the director of finance for the preceding calendar month and remit an amount equivalent to the current sales tax rate on such sales to the director of finance, less one and one-third percent of such tax to cover the vendor's expense in the collection and remittance of such tax. Such returns of the taxpayer, or his duly authorized agent, shall contain such information and shall be made in such manner and upon such forms as the director of finance may prescribe. The director of finance may extend the time for making returns and paying the taxes due under such reasonable rules and regulations as he may prescribe, but no such extension shall be for a greater period than is provided in section 9-29. The burden of proving that any retailer is exempt from collecting the tax or from making such returns, shall be on the retailer or vendor under such reasonable requirements of proof as the director of finance may prescribe. 
(c)  Sales tax returns not received or postmarked by the twentieth of the month in which they are due and payable shall be declared delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty and an interest charges as per section 9-37 and section 9-38. 
(d)  If any amount of sales or use tax is not paid on or before the last date prescribed for payment, interest on such amount at the rate imposed under section 9-37(c) shall be paid for the period from such last date to the date paid. The last date prescribed for payment shall be determined without regard to any extension of time for payment and shall be determined without regard to any notice and demand for payment issued, by reason of jeopardy, prior to the last date otherwise prescribed for such payment shall be deemed to be the date the liability for the tax arises, and in no event shall it be later than the date notice and demand for the tax is made by the director of finance. 
(e)  Interest prescribed under section 9-28 shall be paid upon notice and demand and shall be assessed, collected, and paid in the same manner as the tax to which it is applicable. 
(f)  If any portion of a tax is satisfied by credit of an overpayment, then no interest shall be imposed under this section on the portion of the tax so satisfied for any period during which, if the credit had not been made, interest would have been allowed with respect to such overpayment. 
(g)  Interest prescribed under section 9-28 on any sales or use tax may be assessed and collected at any time during the period within which the tax to which such interest relates may be assessed and collected. 
(h)  Two percent of the tax collected in accordance with section 9-28(a) above shall be transferred by the city to the Chamber of Commerce or other non-profit organization for purposes reasonably related to the enhancement of retail sales within the city, as may be authorized by the city council pursuant to subsequent ordinance, resolution or contract. 
The city may contract with the Chamber of Commerce or other non-profit organization for the administration of this fund in a manner that will best promote the purposes for which this fund is intended. 
(Ord. No. 641 § 5; Ord. No. 645, Art. 2 § 4; Ord. No. 939; Ord. No. 954, § 5; Ord. No. 1029.)  
Sec. 9-29. - Acceptance of reports on other than monthly basis. 
(a)  If the accounting methods regularly employed by a vendor in the transaction of such business or other conditions are such that reports of sale made on a calendar month basis impose unnecessary hardship, the director of finance, upon written request of the vendor, may accept reports at such intervals as will in his opinion better suit the convenience of the taxpayer and will not jeopardize the collection of the tax; provided, that the director of finance may by rule permit taxpayers whose monthly tax collected is less than ten dollars to make returns and pay taxes at intervals not greater than every three months. 
(b)  If any vendor has been granted permission to file reports and pay tax on other than a monthly basis and shall become delinquent, the permission may be revoked by the director of finance at any time. Immediately following notice of such revocation, the vendor will be required to file reports and pay tax, interest and penalties on a monthly basis. 
(c)  Applications for permission to file reports and pay tax on a quarterly basis, if approved, shall take effect on the first day of the next calendar quarter which begins at least fifteen days after the date of approval. Until such effective date, reports must be made on the monthly basis. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-8; Ord. No. 572, § 7.)  
Sec. 9-30. - Single returns for business with multiple locations, and flea markets, bazaars and fairs. 
A retailer doing business in two or more locations or places, taxable under this article, may file one return covering all such business activities engaged in within the city. 
The operator of a flea market, bazaar or fair shall obtain a sales tax license, and shall report and remit to the city the city sales taxes collected by flea market sellers, and vendors at bazaars and fairs, on such form as shall be provided by the director of finance; however, flea market sellers, or vendors at bazaars and fairs, who have a current city sales tax license shall be allowed to remit their taxes under their current license provided the same is reported to the operator of the flea market, bazaar or fair. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 2, 1991.)  
Sec. 9-31. - Statements, etc., of assumption by retailer. 
It shall be unlawful for any retailer to advertise, hold out or state to the public or to any consumer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof imposed by this article will be assumed or absorbed by the retailer or that it will not be added to the selling price of the property sold, or if added, that any part thereof will be refunded. 
A vendor who sells malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by the drink shall, at the time of making his first retail sale of such beverage, elect either of the following methods to impose the tax: 
(a)  The tax may be included in the price of the drink; or 
(b)  The tax may be separately stated and added to the price of the drink. 
The vendor may elect to operate under method (a) for drinks sold at the bar and method (b) for drinks sold at tables, or he may elect to operate under the same method for drinks sold at the bar and tables. Once having made the election he must continue to collect the tax in the manner elected, unless permission to change the election is first obtained from the director of finance. If the vendor elects to use different methods on bar and tables sales, he must keep adequate records. 
If the vendor elects to include the tax on the price of the drink, the following method must be used to determine taxable sales: exempt sales are deducted from gross sales and the difference is divided by the total of one hundred percent plus the applicable sales tax percentage. 
Vendors dispensing liquor, wine or beer by the drink, who purchase ingredients which they use in mixing the drink are not required to pay sales tax on the purchase of such ingredients. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-7; Ord. No. 572, § 8.)  
Sec. 9-32. - Credit sales. 
Whenever an article is sold under a conditional sales contract whereby the seller retains title as security for all or part of the purchase price, or whenever the seller takes a chattel mortgage on the article to secure all or part of the purchase price, the total tax based on the total selling price shall become immediately due and payable. This tax shall be charged and collected by the seller. No refund or credit shall be allowed to either party to the transaction in case of repossession. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-10.)  
Sec. 9-33. - Remittance of excess collections. 
If any vendor, during the reporting period, collects as a tax an amount in excess of the current sales tax rate on his total taxable sales, he shall remit to the director of finance the full net amount of such tax and show such excess. The retention by the retailer or vendor of any excess tax collections over the current sales tax rate on the total taxable sales of the retailer or vendor, or the intentional failure to remit punctually to the director of finance the full amount required to be remitted by the provisions of this article, is hereby declared to be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 641, § 6; Ord. No. 954, § 6.)  
Sec. 9-34. - Refunds and credits—When allowed; conditions prerequisite to grant; assignment; false statements generally. 
(a)  A refund shall be made or a credit allowed, for the tax paid under dispute by any purchaser who has an exemption provided by this article. Such refund shall be made by the director of finance after compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  Applications for refund must be made within sixty days after the purchase of the goods on which an exemption is claimed. 
(2)  Applications must be supported by the affidavit of the purchaser accompanied by the original paid invoice or sales receipt and certificate issued by the seller. 
(3)  Application must be made upon such forms as shall be prescribed and shall contain such information as the director of finance shall prescribe. 
Upon receipt of such application, the director of finance shall examine it with all due speed and shall give notice to the applicant by order in writing of his decision thereon. Aggrieved applicants, within ten days after such decision is mailed to them, may petition the director of finance for a hearing on the claim in the manner provided in Sections 9-46 and 9-48. The right of any person to a refund under this section shall not be assignable and such application for refund must be made by the same person who purchased the goods and paid the tax thereon as shown in the invoice of the sale thereof. It shall be unlawful for any applicant for refund under the provisions of this section or any other person to make a false statement in connection with such application. 
(b)  A refund shall be made or a credit allowed, for the tax paid in error or by mistake. Such refund shall be made by the director of finance after compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  Applications for refund must be made within three years after the date of purchase of the goods for which the refund is claimed. 
(2)  Applications must be supported by the affidavit of the purchaser accompanied by the original paid invoice or sales receipt and certificate issued by the seller. 
(3)  Application must be made upon such forms as shall be prescribed and shall contain such information as the director of finance shall prescribe. 
Upon receipt of such application, the director of finance shall examine it with all due speed and shall give notice to the applicant by order in writing of his decision thereon. Aggrieved applicants, within ten days after such decision is mailed to them, may petition the director of finance for a hearing on the claim in the manner provided in sections 9-46 and 9-48. The right of any person to a refund under this section shall not be assignable and such application for refund must be made by the same person who purchased the goods and paid the tax thereon as shown in the invoice of the sale thereof. It shall be unlawful for any applicant for refund under the provisions of this section or any other person to make a false statement in connection with such application. 
(c)  Sales Tax—Credit for Sales or Use Taxes Previously Paid to another Municipality. For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city's sales tax shall not apply to the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by another statutory or home rule municipality located within the state equal to or in excess of the current sales tax rate. A credit shall be granted against the city's sales tax with respect to such transaction equal in amount to the lawfully imposed local sales or use tax previously paid by the purchaser or user to the previous statutory or home rule municipality. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the current Cortez city sales tax rate. 
(d)  Claims for Recovery. The intent of this section is to streamline and standardize procedures related to situations where tax has been remitted to the incorrect municipality. It is not intended to reduce or eliminate the responsibilities of the taxpayer or vendor to correctly pay, collect, and remit sales and use taxes to the city. 
(1)  As used herein, "claim for recovery" means a claim for reimbursement of sales and use taxes paid to the wrong taxing jurisdiction. 
(2)  When it is determined by the director of finance of the city that sales and use tax owed to the city has been reported and paid to another municipality, the city shall promptly notify the vendor that taxes are being improperly collected and remitted, and that as of the date of the notice the vendor must cease improper tax collections and remittances. 
(3)  The city may make a written claim for recovery directly to the municipality that received tax and/or penalty and interest owed to the city, or, in the alternative, may institute procedures for collection of the tax from the taxpayer or vendor. The decision to make a claim for recovery lies in the sole discretion of the city. Any claim for recovery shall include a properly executed release of claim from the taxpayer and/or vendor releasing its claim to the taxes paid to the wrong municipality, evidence to substantiate the claim, and a request that the municipality approve or deny in whole or in part, the claim within ninety days of its receipt. The municipality to which the city submits a claim for recovery may, for good cause, request an extension of time to investigate the claim, and approval of such extension by the city shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(4)  Within ninety days after receipt of a claim for recovery, the city shall verify to its satisfaction whether or not all or a portion of the tax claimed was improperly received, and shall notify the municipality submitting the claim in writing that the claim is either approved or denied in whole or in part, including the reason for the decision. If the claim is approved in whole or in part, the city shall remit the undisputed amount to the municipality submitting the claim within thirty days of approval. If a claim is submitted jointly by a municipality and a vendor or taxpayer, the check shall be made to the parties jointly. Denial of a claim for recovery may only be made for good cause. 
(5)  The city may deny a claim on the grounds that it has previously paid a claim for recovery arising out of an audit of the same taxpayer. 
(6)  The period subject to a claim for recovery shall be limited to the thirty-six month period prior to the date the municipality that was wrongly paid the tax receives the claim for recovery. 
(Ord. No. 645, Art. 2 § 5; Ord. No. 752, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 9-35. - Same—Burden of proof; review of decisions; duties of the city clerk. 
The burden of proving that sales, services and commodities, on which tax refunds are claimed, are exempt from taxation under this article or were not at retail shall be on the one making such claim under such reasonable requirements of proof as the director of finance may prescribe. 
Should the applicant for refund be aggrieved at the final decision of the director of finance, he may proceed to have such decision reviewed by the courts in the manner provided for review of other decisions of the director of finance as provided in section 9-48; except, that such review shall be in the district court of the county. 
Duties of the city clerk may be performed by a duly qualified deputy. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-13.)  
Sec. 9-36. - Same—Penalties. 
If any person is convicted under the provisions of section 9-34, such conviction shall be prima facie evidence that all refunds received by such person during the current year were obtained unlawfully and the director of finance is hereby empowered and directed to bring appropriate action for recovery of such refunds. 
A brief statement of the above mentioned penalties shall be printed on each application form for refund. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-13.)  
Sec. 9-37. - Examination of returns generally; refund of excess; payment of deficiency and interest. 
(a)  As soon as practicable after the return is filed, the director of finance shall examine it. If it appears that the correct amount of tax to be remitted is greater or less than that shown in the return to be due, the tax shall be recomputed. 
(b)  If the amount paid exceeds that which is due, the excess shall be refunded or credited against any subsequent remittance from such persons. 
(c)  If the amount paid is less than the amount due, the difference, together with interest thereon at a rate established by the state commissioner of banking pursuant to section 39-21-110.5, C.R.S., from the time the return was due, shall be paid by the vendor ten days after written notice and demand to him from the director of finance. 
(Ord. No. 645, Art. 2 § 6.)  
Sec. 9-38. - Penalties for deficiencies generally. 
(a)  When due to negligence or intentional disregard. If any part of the deficiency referred to in section 9-37 is due to negligence or intentional disregard of authorized rules and regulations with knowledge thereof, but without intent to defraud, there shall be added a penalty equal to the sum of fifteen dollars for such failure or ten percent thereof and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed under subsection (c) of this section plus one-half percent per month from the date when due, not exceeding eighteen percent in the aggregate. Such interest and addition shall become due and payable ten days after written notice and demand to him by the director of finance. 
(b)  If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, there shall be added one hundred percent of the total amount of the deficiency and in such case, the whole amount of the tax unpaid, including the additions, shall become due and payable ten days after written notice and demand by the director of finance and an additional three percent per month on the amount shall be added from the date the return was due until paid. 
(c)  The annual rate of interest on delinquent taxes under subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be that established by the state commissioner of banking pursuant to section 39-21-110.5, C.R.S. 
(Ord. No. 645, Art. 2 § 7.)  
Sec. 9-39. - Investigations and hearings—Powers of director of finance generally. 
For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return or for the purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any person the director of finance, or his duly authorized deputies, may hold investigations and hearings concerning any matters covered by this article, may examine any relevant books, papers, records or memoranda of any such person, may require the attendance of such person, of any officer or employee of such person or of any person having knowledge of such sales and may take testimony and require proof for his information. The director of finance and his duly authorized deputies shall have power to administer oaths to such persons. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-17.)  
Sec. 9-39A. - Coordinated audit procedure. 
(a)  Any taxpayer licensed in this city pursuant to section 9-l4, and holding a similar sales tax license in at least four other Colorado municipalities that administer their own sales tax collection, may request a coordinated audit as provided herein. 
(b)  Within fourteen days of receipt of notice of an intended audit by any municipality that administers its own sales tax collection, the taxpayer may provide to the finance director of this city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written request for a coordinated audit indicating the municipality from which the notice of intended audit was received and the name of the official who issued such notice. Such request shall include a list of those Colorado municipalities utilizing local collection of their sales tax in which the taxpayer holds a current sales tax license and a declaration that the taxpayer will sign a waiver of any passage-of-time based limitation upon this city's right to recover tax owed by the vendor for the audit period. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (g), any taxpayer that submits a complete request for a coordinated audit and promptly signs a waiver of section 9-45, ten-day period may be audited by this city during the twelve months after such request is submitted only through a coordinated audit involving all municipalities electing to participate in such an audit. 
(d)  If this city desires to participate in the audit of a taxpayer that submits a complete request for a coordinated audit pursuant to subsection (c), the finance director shall so notify the finance director of the municipality whose notice of audit prompted the taxpayer's request within ten days after receipt of the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit. The finance director shall then cooperate with other participating municipalities in the development of arrangements for the coordinated audit, including arrangement of the time during which the coordinated audit will be conducted, the period of time to be covered by the audit, and a coordinated notice to the taxpayer of those records most likely to be required for completion of the coordinated audit. 
(e)  If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by this city, this city's finance director shall facilitate arrangements between this city and other municipalities participating in the coordinated audit unless and until an official from some other participating municipality agrees to assume this responsibility. The finance director shall cooperate with other participating municipalities to, whenever practicable, minimize the number of auditors that will be present on the taxpayer's premises to conduct the coordinated audit on behalf of the participating municipalities. Information obtained by or on behalf of those municipalities participating in the coordinated audit may be shared only among such participating municipalities. 
(f)  If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by this city, this city's finance director shall, once arrangements for the coordinated audit between the city and other participating municipalities are completed, provide written notice to the taxpayer of which municipalities will be participating, the period to be audited and the records most likely to be required by participating municipalities for completion of the coordinated audit. The finance director shall also propose a schedule for the coordinated audit. 
(g)  The coordinated audit procedure set forth in this section shall not apply: 
(i)  When the proposed audit is a jeopardy audit, 
(ii)  To audits for which a notice of audit was given prior to the effective date of this section, 
(iii)  When a taxpayer refuses to promptly sign a waiver of section 9-45, or, 
(iv)  When a taxpayer fails to provide a timely and complete request for a coordinated audit as provided in subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 752, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 9-40. - Same—Service of subpoenas; witness fees. 
All subpoenas issued under the terms of this article may be served by any authorized person. 
The fees of witnesses for attendance and trial shall be the same as the fees of witnesses before the district court, such fees to be paid when the witness is excused from further attendance. When the witness is subpoenaed at the instance of the director of finance, such fees shall be paid in the same manner as other expenses of the director of finance under the terms of this article. When a witness is subpoenaed at the instance of any party to such proceeding, the director of finance may require that the cost of service of the subpoena and the fee of the witness be borne by the party at whose instance the witness is summoned. In such case, the director of finance, in his discretion, may require a deposit to cover the cost of such service and witness fees. Such subpoena shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued out of a court of record. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-18.)  
Sec. 9-41. - Same—Compelling attendance of witnesses, production of records, etc. 
The district court of the twenty-second judicial district of the state or any judge thereof, either in term time or vacation, upon the application of the director of finance, may compel the attendance of witnesses, the production of books, papers, records or memoranda and the giving of testimony before the director of finance or any member or his duly authorized deputies, by an attachment for contempt, or otherwise, in the same manner as production of evidence may be compelled before such court. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-19.)  
Sec. 9-42. - Same—Taking of depositions. 
The director of finance or any party in an investigation or hearing before the director of finance may insist that the deposition of witnesses residing within or without the state be taken in the manner prescribed by law for like depositions in civil actions in courts of this state and to that end may compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records or memoranda. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-20.)  
Sec. 9-43. - Records of sales. 
It shall be the duty of every person engaged or continuing in business in this city, for the transaction of which a license is required under this article, to keep and preserve suitable records of all sales made by him and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for the collection of which he is liable. It shall be the duty of every person to keep and preserve for a period of three years all invoices of goods and merchandise purchased for resale and all such books, invoices and other records shall be open for examination at any time by the director of finance or his duly authorized agent. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-21.)  
Sec. 9-44. - Tax liens generally. 
(a)  Priority generally. The tax imposed by this article shall be a first and prior lien upon the goods and business fixtures of or used by any retailer under lease, title, retaining contract or other contract arrangement, excepting stock of goods sold or for sale in the ordinary course of business, and shall take precedence on all such property over other liens or claims of whatsoever kind or nature. 
(b)  Withholding of purchase money. Any retailer who sells out his business or stock of goods or quits business shall be required to make out the return as provided in this article, within ten days after the date he sold his business or stock of goods or quit business, and his successor in business shall be required to withhold a sufficient sum of the purchase money to cover the amount of such taxes due and unpaid until such time as the former owner produces a receipt from the director of finance showing that the taxes have been paid, or a certificate that no taxes are due. If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods fails to withhold the purchase money as above provided and the taxes are due and unpaid after the ten-day period allowed, he, as well as the vendor, shall be personally liable for the payment of the taxes unpaid by the former owner. Likewise, anyone who takes any stock of goods or business fixtures of or used by any retailer under lease, title-retaining contract or other contract arrangement, by purchase, foreclosure sale or otherwise, takes such subject to the lien for any delinquent sales tax owed by such merchant and shall be liable for the payment of all delinquent sales taxes of such prior owner, not, however, exceeding the value of property so taken or so acquired. 
(c)  Priority in case of receivership, etc. Whenever the business or property of any taxpayer subject to this article is placed in receivership, bankruptcy or assignment for the benefit of creditors, or seized under distraint for property taxes, all taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this article and for which such retailer is in any way liable under the terms of this article shall be a prior and preferred claim against all the properties of such taxpayer, except as to pre-existing claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor or purchaser whose rights have attached prior to the filing of the notice as provided in section 9-45 of this chapter on the property of the taxpayer, other than the goods, stock in trade and business fixtures of such taxpayer. 
An individual who is a corporate stockholder, or a member of a partnership or of an LLC shall not avoid liability hereunder by filing an individual bankruptcy or other legal action, the city adopting all the protection as provided by sections 39-21-116 and 39-21-116.5, C.R.S., as amended. 
(d)  Sales by sheriff, etc. No sheriff, lessor, assignee or other officer shall sell the property of any person subject to this article under process or order of any court, without first ascertaining from the director of finance the amount of any taxes due and payable under this article. If there are any such taxes due, owing or unpaid, it shall be the duty of such officer to pay the amount of such taxes out of the proceeds of such sale before making payment of any monies to any judgment creditor or other claims of whatsoever kind or nature, except the costs of the proceedings and other pre-existing claims or liens as above provided. For the purpose of this section, the term "taxpayer" shall include "retailer." 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-22; Ord. No. 1041.)  
Sec. 9-45. - Recovery of taxes, penalties and interest. 
(a)  Amounts paid to retailer to be held in trust for city. All sums of money paid by the purchaser to the retailer as taxes imposed by this article shall be and remain public money, the property of the director of finance, in the hands of such retailer and he shall hold such money in trust for the sole use and benefit of the city until paid to the director of finance as provided by this article. It shall be unlawful for a retailer to fail to pay such tax to the director of finance. 
(b)  Estimation and assessment where returns not made. If any person neglects or refuses to make a return in payment of the tax required by this article, the director of finance shall make an estimate, based on such information as may be available as to the amount of taxes due for the period or periods for which the taxpayer is delinquent and upon the basis of such estimated amount, compute and assess in addition thereto, a penalty equal to the sum of fifteen dollars for such failure or ten percent thereof and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed under subsection (i) of this section plus one-half percent per month from the date when due, not exceeding eighteen percent in the aggregate. Promptly thereafter, the director of finance shall give to the delinquent taxpayer written notice of such estimated taxes, penalty and interest, which notice must be served personally, or by registered or certified mail. Such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment which shall become final and due and payable from such taxpayer to the director of finance ten days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing by registered or certified mail; provided, that within such ten-day period such delinquent taxpayer may petition the director of finance for a revision or modification of such assessment, and shall, within such ten-day period, furnish the director of finance with the facts and correct figures showing the correct amount of such taxes. Such petition shall be in writing. The facts and figures shall be submitted either in writing or orally and shall be given under oath of such taxpayer. Thereupon the director of finance shall modify such assessment in accordance with the facts submitted, which facts he deems correct. Such assessment shall be considered the final order of the director of finance and may be reviewed under Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure as provided in this article; provided, that the taxpayer gives written notice to the director of finance of such intention within five days after receipt of the final order of assessment. 
(c)  Notice and imposition of tax lien. If any taxes, penalty or interest imposed by this article and shown due by returns filed by the taxpayer or as shown by assessments duly made as provided by this article are not paid within five days after such are due, the director of finance shall issue a notice, setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount of the tax, penalties and interest, the date of the accrual thereof and that the city claims a first and prior lien therefor on the real and tangible personal property of a taxpayer other than the goods, stock in trade and business fixtures of such taxpayer. Such notice shall be on forms prepared by the director of finance and shall be verified by him or his duly qualified deputy or any duly qualified agent of the director of finance, whose duties are the collection of such tax, and may be filed in the office of the clerk and recorder of any county in this state in which the tax payer owns real or tangible personal property. The filing of such notice shall create such lien on such property in that county and constitute a notice thereof. After such notice has been filed, or concurrently therewith, or at any time when taxes due are unpaid, whether such notice is filed or not, the director of finance may issue a warrant directed to any duly authorized revenue collector or to the sheriff of any county in this state commanding him to levy upon, seize and sell a sufficient amount of the real and personal property of the tax debtor found within his county for the payment of the amount due, together with interest, penalties and costs, as now or hereafter provided by Code or ordinance, subject to valid pre-existing claims or liens as above provided. 
(d)  Levy and sale of property by sheriff, etc. Such revenue collector or sheriff shall levy upon a sufficient amount of the property of the taxpayer, or any property used by such taxpayer in conducting his retail business, and such property so levied upon shall be sold in all respects, with like effect and in such manner as is prescribed by law in respect to executions against property upon judgment of a court of record, and the remedies of garnishment shall apply. The sheriff shall be entitled to such fees in executing such warrant as are allowed by law for similar services. 
(e)  Release of liens. Any lien for taxes as shown on the records of county clerk and recorders as provided by this article shall, upon payment of all taxes, penalties and interest covered thereby, be released by the director of finance in the same manner as mortgages or judgments are released. 
(f)  Treatment as debt due and collection by law. The director of finance may also treat any such taxes, penalties or interest due and unpaid as a debt due the city from the vendor. In case of failure to pay the tax or any portion thereof, or any penalty or interest thereon when due, the director of finance may recover at law the amount of such taxes, penalties and interest in any county or district court of the county wherein the taxpayer resides or has his principal place of business having jurisdiction of the amounts sought to be collected. The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the director of finance as provided by this article, shall be prima facie proof of the amount due. Such action may be actions in attachment and writs of attachment may be issued to the sheriff and in any such proceeding no bond shall be required of the director of finance, nor shall any sheriff require of the director of finance an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of execution upon any judgment entered in such proceedings. The director of finance may prosecute appeals or writs of error in such cases without the necessity of providing bond therefor. It shall be the duty of the city attorney when requested by the director of finance to commence action for the recovery of taxes due under this article. Such remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies or other remedies provided in this article. 
(g)  City as party defendant in actions affecting ownership of property. In any action affecting the title to real estate or the ownership or rights to possession of personal property, the city may be made a party defendant for the purpose of obtaining a judgment or determination of its lien upon the property involved therein. 
(h)  Waiver of assessed penalties; interest in excess of six percent deemed penalty. The director of finance is hereby authorized to waive, for good cause shown, any penalty assessed in this article. Any interest imposed in excess of six percent per annum shall be deemed a penalty. 
(i)  The annual rate of interest on delinquent taxes under subsection (b) of this section shall be that established by the state commissioner of banking pursuant to section 39-21-100.5, C.R.S. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-23; Ord. No. 645, Art. 2 § 8; Ord. No. 1089.)  
Sec. 9-45A. - Standardization of certain protest or appeal periods. 
(a)  Notices of Assessment. An appeal of a notice of assessment issued to a vendor or taxpayer for failure to file a return, underpayment of tax owed or as a result of an audit shall be submitted in writing to the finance director within twenty calendar days from the date of the notice of assessment. Any such appeal shall identify the amount of tax disputed and the basis for the appeal. The time period set forth in this section may, in the absolute discretion of the finance director, be waived for good cause on written application of a vendor or taxpayer. 
(b)  Denial of Refunds. An appeal of a denial of a refund shall be submitted in writing to the finance director within twenty calendar days from the date of the denial of the refund and shall identify the amount of the refund requested and the basis for the appeal. The time period set forth in this section may, in the absolute discretion of the finance director, be waived for good cause on written application of a vendor or taxpayer. 
(c)  Appeal from administrative hearing decision of the finance director. 
Appeal of Hearing Decision. An appeal of a final decision of the finance director in a hearing held pursuant to section 9-46 shall be commenced within thirty days of such decision. 
(Ord. No. 752 § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 9-46. - Hearings for review of assessments generally. 
If any person, having made a return and paid the tax provided for in this article, feels aggrieved by the assessment made upon him by the director of finance, he may apply to the director of finance by petition in writing within ten days after the notice is mailed to him for a hearing and a correction of the amount of the tax so assessed, in which petition he shall set forth the reasons why such hearing should be granted and the amount by which such tax should be reduced. The director of finance shall notify the petitioner in writing of the time and place fixed by him for such hearing. After such hearing, the director of finance shall make such order in the matter as is just and lawful and shall furnish a copy of such order to the petitioner. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-24.)  
Sec. 9-47. - Hearings to be held in city. 
Every hearing before the director of finance shall be held in the city. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-26.)  
Sec. 9-48. - Decisions of director of finance. 
(a)  To be written; notice; date of finality. Every decision of the director of finance shall be in writing and notice thereof shall be mailed to the vendor within ten days. All such decisions shall become final upon the expiration of thirty days after notice of such decision has been mailed to the vendor, unless proceedings are taken within such time for review thereof as provided in this article. 
(b)  Review by state courts—Generally. Should the applicant for refund be aggrieved at the final decision of the director of finance, he may proceed to have such decision reviewed by the courts in the manner provided for review of other decisions of the director of finance under this article, such review to be in the district court of the twenty-second judicial district of the state. 
(c)  Same—Bond required. Within fifteen days after filing a notice of appeal as provided in section 9-46, the taxpayer shall file with the district court a surety bond in twice the amount of the taxes, interest, and other charges stated in the final decision by the director of finance as per subsection (a) of this section which are contested on appeal. The taxpayer may, at his option, satisfy the surety bond requirement by a savings account or deposit in or a certificate of deposit issued by a state or national bank or by a state or federal savings and loan association, in accordance with the provisions of section 11-35-101(1), C.R.S., equal to twice the amount of the taxes, interest, and other charges stated in the final decision by the director of finance. 
(d)  Same—Option to posting bond. The taxpayer may, at his option, deposit the disputed amount with the director of finance in lieu of posting a surety bond. If such amount is so deposited, no further interest shall accrue on the deficiency contested during the pendency of the action. At the conclusion of the action, after appeal to the supreme court or the courts of appeals or after the time for such appeal has expired, the funds deposited shall be, at the direction of the court, either retained by director of finance and applied against the deficiency or returned in whole or in part to the taxpayer with interest at the rate imposed by subsection (c) of this section. No claim for refund of amounts deposited with the director of finance need be made by the taxpayer in order for such amounts to be repaid in accordance with the direction of the court. 
(e)  Same—Court of original jurisdiction. The district court of the twenty-second judicial district of the state shall have original jurisdiction in proceedings to review all questions of law and fact determined by the director of finance in administering the provisions of this article by writ under Rule 106 (a)(4), C.R.S. 
(f)  Same—Issuance of writs. Such writs shall be issued by the clerk of the court upon a verified petition of the taxpayer, filed within twenty days after notice of the decision of the director of finance in any such matter. 
(g)  Same—Service of writs. The writ shall be served within five days after its issuance and shall be returnable at such time as the court may determine, not less than ten days nor more than twenty days after the date when writ was issued. The director of finance shall certify the record of his proceedings to such court. 
(h)  Same—Procedures. The procedure in the district court shall be in conformity with the rules of civil procedure of the state. 
(i)  Same—Review by supreme court. The decision of the district court may be reviewed in the supreme court upon writ of error by any party. 
(j)  Alternative dispute resolution procedure—Deficiency notice or claim for refund. For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, in lieu of the procedure provided for in section 9-46, the taxpayer may elect a hearing on the director of finance's final decision on a deficiency notice or claim for refund pursuant to procedure set forth in this section. 
(1)  As used in this section, "state hearing" means a hearing before the executive director of the department of revenue or delegate thereof as provided in section 29-2-106.1, C.R.S. 
(2)  When the city asserts that sales or use taxes are due in an amount greater than the amount paid by a taxpayer, the city shall mail a deficiency notice to the taxpayer by certified mail. The deficiency notice shall state the additional sales and use taxes due. The deficiency notice shall contain notification, in clear and conspicuous type, that the taxpayer has the right to elect a state hearing on the city's denial of such taxpayer's claim for a refund of sales or use tax paid. 
(3)  The taxpayer shall request the state hearing within thirty days after the taxpayer's exhaustion of local remedies. The taxpayer shall have no right to such hearing if he has not exhausted local remedies or if he fails to request such hearing within the time period provided for in this subdivision. For purposes of this subdivision, "exhaustion of local remedies" means: 
(A)  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the city and such city has held such hearing and issued a final decision thereon. Such hearing shall be informal and no transcript, rules of evidence, or filing of briefs shall be required; but the taxpayer may elect to submit a brief, in which case the city may submit a brief. The city shall hold such hearing and issue the final decision thereon within ninety days after the city's receipt of the taxpayer's written request therefor, except the city may extend such period if the delay in holding the hearing or issuing the decision thereon was occasioned by the taxpayer, but, in any such event, the city shall hold such hearing and issue the decision thereon within one hundred eighty days of the taxpayer's request in writing therefor; or 
(B)  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the city and the city has failed to hold such hearing or has failed to issue a final decision thereon within the time periods prescribed in paragraph (A) of this subdivision. 
(4)  If a taxpayer has exhausted his local remedies as provided in subdivision (3) of this subsection, the taxpayer may request a state hearing on such deficiency notice or claim for refund, and such request shall be made and such hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as set forth in section 29-2-106.1 (3) through (7), C.R.S. 
(5)  If the deficiency notice or claim for refund involves only the city in lieu of requesting a state hearing, the taxpayer may appeal such deficiency or denial of a claim for refund to the district court of the county as provided in section 29-2-106.1 (8), C.R.S., provided the taxpayer complies with the procedures set forth in subdivision (3) of this subsection. 
(6)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the taxpayer from pursuing judicial review of a final decision of the city as otherwise provided in this section. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1-25; Ord. No. 645, Art. 2 § 9.)  
Article III. - Use Tax. 
 For charter provision as to taxation, see Char., art. VII, §§ 12, 13, 15, 19. 
 For state law authorizing city to levy taxes, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 31-12-101(5), 31-20-101 to 31-20-107. 
 
Sec. 9-49. - "Storage" or "storing" defined. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "storage" or "storing" shall mean any keeping or retention of, or exercise of dominion or control over, tangible personal property in this city. 
(Code 1968, § 4-2-7.)  
Sec. 9-50. - Levy schedule. 
There is hereby levied and there shall be collected from every person in this city a tax or excise for the privilege of storing, using or consuming in this city any articles of tangible personal property purchased at retail. Such tax shall be payable to and shall be collected by the director of finance in accordance with the following schedule: 
(a)  On storage or acquisition charges or costs from twenty cents to and including fifty-nine cents, a tax of two cents. 
(b)  On storage or acquisition charges or costs from sixty cents to and including ninety-nine cents, a tax of three cents. 
(c)  On storage or acquisition charges or costs from one dollar to and including one dollar and thirty-nine cents, a tax of four cents. 
(d)  On storage or acquisition charges or costs from one dollar and forty cents to and including one dollar and seventy-nine cents, a tax of six cents. 
(e)  On storage or acquisition charges or costs from one dollar and eighty cents to and including two dollars and nineteen cents, a tax of seven cents. 
(f)  On storage or acquisition charges or costs from two dollars and twenty cents to and including two dollars and fifty-nine cents, a tax of nine cents. 
(g)  On storage or acquisition charges or costs from two dollars and sixty cents to and including two dollars and ninety-nine cents, a tax of ten cents. 
(h)  On all higher storage or acquisition charges or costs three and one-half cents shall be added in each bracket of one dollar of additional storage or acquisition charge or cost. 
(Ord. No. 641, § 7.)  
Sec. 9-51. - Schedule of exemptions. 
The use tax imposed by this article shall not apply: 
(a)  To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property the sale of which is subject to the retail sales tax imposed under the terms of article II of this chapter. 
(b)  To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property purchased for resale in this city, either in its original form or as an ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product in the regular course of a business. 
(c)  To the storage, use or consumption of motor fuel upon which there has accrued or has been paid the motor fuel tax prescribed under the laws of the state. 
(d)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into this city by a nonresident thereof for his own storage, use or consumption while temporarily within this city. 
(e)  To the storage, use or consumption of such property by the United States, by the state, its institutions or its political subdivisions or by religious or charitable corporations in the conduct of their regular religious or charitable functions. 
(f)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing or compounding for sale, profit or use any article, substance or commodity, which enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the production or service which is manufactured, compounded or furnished and the container label, or the furnished shipping case thereof. 
(g)  To the storage, use or consumption of electricity, coal, coke, fuel oil or gas for use in processing, manufacturing, mining, refining, irrigation, building construction, telegraph, telephone and radio communication, street and railroad transportation service and all industrial use. 
(h)  To the storage, use or consumption of printers ink and newsprint. 
(i)  To the storage, use or consumption of cigarettes, fermented malt beverages, and malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
(j)  To the storage and use of meat cattle, sheep, lambs, swine and goats within this city; or to the storage and use within this city of mares and stallions kept, held, and used for breeding purposes only. 
(k)  To the storage, use, or consumption of tangible personal property and household effects acquired outside the city and brought into it by a nonresident acquiring residency. 
(l)  To the storage or use of a motor vehicle if the owner is or was, at the time of purchase, a nonresident and he purchased the vehicle outside of the city and actually so used it for a substantial and primary purpose for which it was acquired and he registered, titled, and licensed said motor vehicle outside of the city. 
(m)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property purchased by a resident of the city while outside the city in amounts of one thousand dollars or less. 
(n)  To the storage, use or consumption of a mobile home after such mobile home has been once subject to the payment of use tax. 
(o)  To the storage, use or consumption of food or meals which are provided to employees of a restaurant, eating house, hotel, drugstore, club, resort or other such place at which food or meals are regularly sold to the public if such are provided to such employees at no charge or at a reduced charge and are considered as part of their salary, wages or income. 
(p)  To the storage, use, or consumption by a contractor or subcontractor of construction and building materials for use in the building, erection, alteration or repair of structures, highways, roads, streets and other public works owned and used by: 
(1)  The United States government, the state, its departments and institutions, and the city in their governmental capacities only; 
(2)  Charitable organizations in the conduct of their regular charitable functions and activities; 
(3)  Schools, other than school held or conducted for private or corporate profit. 
(q)  To the storage of construction and building materials. 
(Code 1968, § 4-2-2; Ord. No. 572, § 10; Ord. No. 645, Art. 3 § 1.)  
Sec. 9-52. - Monthly returns; remittance of tax due. 
Every person subject to the provisions of this article who has not paid the tax imposed hereby to a retailer, on or before the fifteenth day of each month, shall make, to the director of finance on forms prescribed by him, a return showing in detail the tangible personal property stored, used or consumed by him within the city in the preceding calendar month which is subject to the tax imposed by this article and on which the tax has not been paid to a retailer. Such return shall be verified by oath or affirmation of the taxpayer or his agent and shall be accompanied by a remittance of the tax shown thereon to be due. 
(Code 1968, § 4-2-3.)  
Sec. 9-53. - Retail merchants—To collect tax and issue receipts. 
Every retailer maintaining an office or place of business in this city and every agent within this city of any retailer not maintaining an office or place of business in this city and making sales of tangible personal property for storage, use or consumption in the city, not exempted by section 9-51, at the time of making such sale or taking the orders therefor, or, if the storage, use or consumption of such tangible personal property is not then taxable under this article, then at the time such storage, use or consumption becomes taxable under this article, shall collect the tax imposed by section 9-50 from the purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor. Such receipt shall identify the property, the date sold or the date ordered and the tax collected by such retailer or agent from such purchaser. Such tax shall be displayed separately from the advertised price listed on the forms or advertising matter on all sales checks, orders, sales slips or other proof of sales. 
(Code 1968, § 4-2-3.)  
Sec. 9-54. - Same—Procedure for remittance to city. 
It shall be unlawful for any retailer or agent enumerated in section 9-53, to advertise, hold out or state to the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly , that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by such retailer or agent, or that it will not be added to the selling price of the property sold, or if added, that it or any part thereof will be refunded. The tax required to be collected by such retailer or agent shall be remitted to the city in such manner as otherwise provided in this chapter for the remittance of sales tax collected by retailers. All such retailers or agents collecting the tax imposed by section 9-50, shall make returns on forms provided by the director of finance at such times and in such manner as is provided for the making of returns in the payment of sales taxes. The procedure for assessing and collecting such taxes from such retailers or agents, or from the user when not paid to a retailer or agent, shall be the same as provided in this chapter for the collection of sales tax, including collection by distraint warrant. Any such taxes which are due and owing from any retailer or agent for the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property shall bear interest and be subject to the same penalties as for nonpayment or delinquencies of sales taxes. 
(Code 1968, § 4-2-3.)  
Sec. 9-55. - Tax to constitute lien on property; collection by writ of attachment on levy. 
The use tax imposed by this article shall be a first and prior lien on the tangible personal property stored, used or consumed, subject only to valid mortgage or other liens of record on and prior to the recording of notice as required in subsection (c) of section 9-45 and shall be a first and prior lien, the same as is provided for sales taxes in section 9-44 (a). Upon default of payment thereof the director of finance, after demand upon the person owing such tax, may bring an action in his name as director of finance in attachment and seize any property to secure the payment of such tax, interest and penalties. In any such proceeding, no bond shall be required of the director of finance, nor shall any constable or sheriff require from the director of finance an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of levy and no constable or sheriff shall be liable in damages when acting in accordance with such writs. The remedies provided in this section shall be in addition to all other remedies. 
(Code 1968, § 4-2-4.)  
Sec. 9-56. - Failure to make return; false return; failure to pay tax. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to make the return required by section 9-52, to make a false or fraudulent return or to willfully fail to pay any tax owed by him. It shall also be unlawful for any person to aid or abet another in an attempt to evade such tax. 
Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a violation of this article and subject to a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars for each such offense. 
(Code 1968, § 4-2-5.)  
Sec. 9-57. - Use tax—Credit for sales or use tax previously paid to another municipality. 
For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city's use tax shall not apply to the storage, use, or consumption of any article of tangible personal property the sale or use of which has already been subjected to a sales or use tax of another statutory or home rule municipality within the state legally imposed on the purchaser or user equal to or in excess of the current use tax. A credit shall be granted against the city's use tax with respect to the person's storage, use, or consumption in the city of tangible personal property, the amount of the credit to equal the tax paid by him by reason of the imposition of a sale or use tax of the previous statutory or home rule municipality on his purchase or use of the property. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the current use tax rate. 
(Ord. No. 645, Art. 3 § 2.)  
Sec. 9-57A. - Intercity claims for recovery. 
The intent of this section is to streamline and standardize procedures related to situations where tax has been remitted to the incorrect municipality. It is not intended to reduce or eliminate the responsibilities of the taxpayer or vendor to correctly pay, collect, and remit sales and use taxes to the city. 
(a)  As used herein, "claim for recovery" means a claim for reimbursement of sales and use taxes paid to the wrong taxing jurisdiction. 
(b)  When it is determined by the director of finance of the city that sales and use tax owed to the city has been reported and paid to another municipality, the city shall promptly notify the vendor that taxes are being improperly collected and remitted, and that as of the date of the notice the vendor must cease improper tax collections and remittances. 
(c)  The city may make a written claim for recovery directly to the municipality that received tax and/or penalty and interest owed to the city, or, in the alternative, may institute procedures for collection of the tax from the taxpayer or vendor. The decision to make a claim for a recovery lies in the sole discretion of the city. Any claim for recovery shall include a properly executed release of claim from the taxpayer and/or vendor releasing its claim to the taxes paid to the wrong municipality, evidence to substantiate the claim, and a request that the municipality approve or deny in whole or in part, the claim within ninety days of its receipt. The municipality to which the city submits a claim for recovery may, for good cause, request an extension of time to investigate the claim, and approval of such extension by the city shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(d)  Within ninety days after receipt of a claim for recovery, the city shall verify to its satisfaction whether or not all or a portion of the tax claimed was improperly received, and shall notify the municipality submitting the claim in writing that the claim is either approved or denied in whole or in part, including the reason for the decision. If the claim is approved in whole or in part, the city shall remit the undisputed amount to the municipality submitting the claim within thirty days of approval. If a claim is submitted jointly by a municipality and a vendor or taxpayer, the check shall be made to the parties jointly. Denial of a claim for recovery may only be made for good cause. 
(e)  The city may deny a claim on the grounds that it has previously paid a claim for recovery arising out of an audit of the same taxpayer. 
(f)  The period subject to a claim for recovery shall be limited to the thirty-six month period prior to the date the municipality that was wrongly paid the tax receives the claim for recovery. 
(Ord. No. 752, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 9-58. - Payment of tax on motor vehicles or trailers. 
Any resident who purchases any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, whether new or used, outside the corporate limits of the city for use within this city, shall immediately and prior to registering and obtaining a license therefor make a return showing such transaction to the director of finance and thereupon pay to him the use tax applicable thereto as provided in this article. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this article. All such motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers purchased outside the corporate limits of the city for use in this city shall be registered with the county clerk and recorder of the county. Any person who registers any such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer in any other country, in this state or elsewhere shall be deemed in violation of this article and any such registration shall constitute prima facie evidence of an attempt to evade payment of such tax. 
(Code 1968, § 4-2-8.)  
Sec. 9-58A. - Building materials and supplies. 
Any person who shall build, construct, reconstruct, alter, expand, modify or improve any building, dwelling or other structure or improvement to real property within the city shall, in conjunction with the acquisition of a building permit, pay an amount to the city equal to 4.05 percent of fifty percent of the building permit value. The payment of the tax herein required and the acquisition of a building permit will entitle the applicant to a certificate of exemption from payment of any further sales or use tax for the materials to be used, stored or consumed pursuant to such building permit. The certificate of exemption shall contain the number of the building permit to which it applies. The applicant shall be required to retain all statements and invoices for building materials and supplies used, stored or consumed in conjunction with the construction for which the permit has been issued for a period of three years and such statements and invoices shall be subject to audit for adjustment or verification of remittance. The full amount of any tax due and not paid for lumber, fixtures or any other building materials or supplies, together with penalties and interest thereon as herein provided, shall be and constitute a lien upon the real property benefited by such work and the city finance director is hereby authorized to file a notice of such lien with the county clerk and recorder of Montezuma County. No final inspection shall be made by the building inspector and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all taxes due as provided in this section on all lumber, fixtures and any other building materials or supplies used in or connected with the construction, reconstruction, alteration, expansion, modification or improvement of any building, dwelling or other structure or improvement to real property within the city have been paid or arrangements therefor made with the city finance department. 
The ordinance codified in this section shall not apply to any building permit issued in an amount less than ten thousand dollars. 
The department of finance shall issue the certificate of exemption and resolve any issues with such exemption. 
(Ord. No. 1054.)  
Sec. 9-59. - Administration and enforcement of article. 
The administration of this article is vested in the director of finance and he shall prescribe forms, rules and regulations for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1968, § 4-2-9.)  
Article IV. - Utilities. 
 For charter provision as to franchises and public utilities, see Char., art. X. 
 For state law as to authority of city to regulate gas and electric utilities generally, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 31-15-702, 31-15-707, 31-32-101 et seq.  
Division 1. - Generally. 
 
Sec. 9-60. - Use tax—Nonapplicability to use or consumption occurring more than three years after most recent sale. 
For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city's use tax shall not be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of tangible personal property within the city which occurs more than three years after the most recent sale of the property if, within the three years following such sale, the property has been significantly used within the state for the principal purpose for which it was purchased. 
(Ord. No. 645, Art. 3 § 3.)  
Sec. 9-61. - Use tax—Proration as applied to certain construction equipment. 
(a)  Construction equipment which is located within the boundaries of the city for a period of more than thirty consecutive days shall be subject to the full applicable use tax of the city. 
(b)  With respect to transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, construction equipment which is located within the boundaries of the city for a period of thirty consecutive days or less shall be subjected to the city's use tax in an amount which does not exceed the amount calculated as follows: The purchase price of the equipment shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is one and the denominator of which is twelve, and the result shall be multiplied by the current use tax rate. 
(c)  Where the provisions of subsection (b) of this section are utilized, the credit provisions of section 9-57 shall apply at such time as the aggregate sales and use taxes legally imposed by and paid to other statutory and home rule municipalities on any such equipment equal the current use tax rate. 
(d)  In order to avail himself of the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, the taxpayer shall comply with the following procedure: 
(1)  Prior to or on the date the equipment is located within the boundaries of the city, the taxpayer shall file with the city finance director an equipment declaration on a form provided by the city. Such declaration shall state the dates on which the taxpayer anticipates the equipment will be located within and removed from the boundaries of the city, shall include a description of each such anticipated piece of equipment, and shall include such other information as is reasonably deemed necessary by the city. 
(2)  The taxpayer shall file with the city an amended equipment declaration reflecting any changes in the information contained in any previous equipment declaration no less than once every ninety days after the equipment is brought into the boundaries of the city or, for equipment which is brought into the boundaries of the city for a project of less than ninety days duration, no later than ten days after substantial completion of the project. 
(3)  The taxpayer need not report on any equipment declaration any equipment for which the purchase price was under two thousand five hundred dollars. 
(e)  If the equipment declaration is given as provided in subsection (d) of this section, then as to any item of construction equipment for which the customary purchase price is under two thousand five hundred dollars which was brought into the boundaries of the city temporarily for use on a construction project, it shall be presumed that the item was purchased in a jurisdiction having a local sales or use tax as high as the current use tax rate and that such local sales or use tax was previously paid. In such case the burden of proof in any proceeding before the city, the executive director of the department of revenue, or the district court, shall be on the city to prove such local sales or use tax was not paid. 
(f)  If the taxpayer fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (d) of this section, the taxpayer may not avail himself of the provisions of subsection (b) of this section and shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. However, substantial compliance with the provisions of subsection (d) of this section shall allow the taxpayer to avail himself of the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(g)  If the city reasonably finds that the collection of sales or use tax will be jeopardized by delay, the city may utilize the procedure set forth in section 39-21-111, C.R.S. 
(Ord. No. 645, Art. 3 § 3.)  
Secs. 9-62 to 9-67. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 488, § 8. 
  Editor's note: §§ 9-62 to 9-67 were repealed by Ordinance No. 488, § 8, subject to the provisions of § 9-74 of this Code.  
Division 2. - Telephone Utilities. 
 
Sec. 9-68. - Tax—Levied; amount. 
There is hereby levied against every telephone utility which is engaged in the business of furnishing local exchange telephone service within the city a tax on the privilege of engaging in such business. The amount of such tax shall be four thousand dollars for the portion of 1976 subsequent to July 27, 1976, and twelve thousand dollars annually for each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 488, § 1.)  
Sec. 9-69. - Same—Monthly payment. 
The tax levied by this article shall be due on the fifteenth of each month hereafter beginning September 15, 1976, and monthly thereafter on the fifteenth of each succeeding month at the rate of one thousand dollars each month; if the fifteenth of any month falls on Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, the tax shall be due upon the next succeeding business day. 
(Ord. No. 488, § 2.)  
Sec. 9-70. - Same—Purpose. 
The tax provided herein is upon the affected occupations and businesses in their performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those functions relating to interstate commerce. 
(Ord. No. 488, § 4.)  
Sec. 9-71. - Same—Procedure upon failure to pay. 
If any telephone utility subject to the provisions of this article fails to pay the taxes as provided herein, the full amount thereof shall be due and collectible from such company, and the same, together with an addition of ten percent of the amount of taxes due, shall be and is hereby declared to be a debt due and owing from such utility to the city. 
(Ord. No. 488, § 5.)  
Sec. 9-72. - Same—In lieu of other occupation taxes. 
The tax herein provided shall be in lieu of all other occupation taxes, or taxes on the privilege of doing business within the city, on any telephone utility subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 488, § 7.)  
Sec. 9-73. - Access to records. 
The city, its officers, agents or representatives shall have the right at any reasonable time, to examine the books and records of any telephone utility which is subject to the tax imposed by this article, and to make copies of the entries or contents thereof. 
(Ord. No. 488, § 3.)  
Sec. 9-74. - Offenses and liabilities under previous ordinances. 
All offenses committed and all liabilities incurred prior to July 27, 1976 shall be treated as though all prior applicable ordinances and amendments thereto were in full force and effect for the purpose of sustaining any proper suit, action or prosecution with respect to such offenses and liabilities. All taxes, the liability for which has been accrued under the terms of article IV, sections 9-60 to 9-67, on or before July 27, 1976, shall be and remain unconditionally due and payable, and shall constitute a debt to the city, payable in conformity with the terms and provisions of article IV, sections 9-60 to 9-67, prior to the adoption of this article; and all of such terms and provisions of article IV of this chapter shall be and remain in full force and effect for the purpose of the collection and payment of any and all such taxes due and payable thereunder, notwithstanding the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 488, § 6.)  
CHAPTER 10. - FIRE PROTECTION. 
 As to description of fire limits of the city, see § 6-6 of this Code. As to civil defense and emergencies generally, see Ch. 7. As to false alarms generally, see § 18-13. As to plumbing generally, see Ch. 21. As to the use of water during fire generally, see § 27-14.  
Article I. - In General. 
 For state law as to authority of city relating to fire protection generally, see CRSA § 31-15-601. 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Fire Code—Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by reference, as though the same were fully printed and set forth herein, the International Fire Code (IFC), 2009 Edition, Copyright 2009, 1st Printing, prepared by the International Code Council (ICC), 5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, and containing a total of five hundred and three pages. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2: Ord. No. 1087, § 2 (part).) 
(Ord. No. 1137, § II (part))  
Sec. 10-1.1. - Same—Official copies. 
Three true and exact official copies of the above-described 2009 Edition of the International Fire Code (IFC) are on file in the municipal offices of the City of Cortez, Colorado, duly certified by the mayor and attested by the city clerk, and may be examined, duplicated, or copied by any interested person during the regular business hours of said offices, all such reproduction or copying to be at the expense of the person requesting the same. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 3: Ord. No. 1087, § 3 (part).) 
(Ord. No. 1137, § III (part))  
Sec. 10-1.2. - Same—Section 10.513(e) amended. 
Section 10.513(e) of the Uniform Fire Code, 1991 Edition, is amended to read: 
 (e)  Operation and Maintenance. The ventilation system in connection with hoods shall be operated at the required level and grease filters shall be in place when equipment under a kitchen grease hood is used. If grease extractors are installed, they shall be operated when the food heat-processing equipment is used. 
 Extinguishing systems shall be serviced at least annually or after activation of the system. Inspection shall be by qualified individuals, and a certificate of inspection shall be forwarded to the chief upon completion. 
 Fusible links and automatic sprinkler heads shall be replaced at least annually, and other protection devices shall be serviced or placed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
 EXCEPTION: Frangible bulbs need not be replaced annually. 
 Hoods, grease-removal devices, fans, ducts, and other appurtenances shall be cleaned at frequent intervals. 
(Ord. No. 722, § 2; Ord. No. 739, § 2.)  
Sec. 10-2. - Same—Fireworks. 
The provisions of chapter 11 of this Code shall take precedence over any provisions of the Fire Code adopted by section 10-1.  
Sec. 10-2.1. - Repealed by Ord. No. 586.  
Sec. 10-3. - Department of fire marshal established. 
A department of city fire marshal is hereby established and shall be operated under the supervision of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 2 (part).)  
Sec. 10-4. - Duties generally. 
It shall be the duty of the fire marshal or his duly appointed deputy to educate the public in fire prevention; to enforce a Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the city; to make inspection of buildings and other premises within the corporate limits of the city in respect to fire safety and to perform such other duties as may be assigned. The fire marshal or duly appointed deputy is authorized to charge violators of a Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the city with uniform summons and complaint into the Cortez municipal court for violations of a Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the city when enforcement of a Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the city is deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 1106.)  
Sec. 10-5. - Access to buildings; inspections, compliance with orders. 
The city fire marshal or his duly appointed deputy is hereby designated as fire inspector within the corporate limits of the city and as such shall have the right at any time to enter and inspect any buildings or any other premises within the corporate limits of the city in the performance of his duties. The fire inspector may order any condition which violates any of the regulations of the city as listed in section 10-4 which he considers to be dangerous to lives or property to be removed or remedied within twenty-four hours, or within other specified time periods. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 2 (part).)  
Sec. 10-6. - Interference with performance of duties prohibited. 
No person shall interfere with the fire inspector or his deputy in the performance of any duty authorized under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 2 (part).)  
Sec. 10-7. - Penalties. 
Any person who is convicted of the violations of the provisions of Section 10-5 or 10-6 of this code is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 2 (part); amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 9, 9-25-12)  
Article II. - Fire Zones. 
 
Sec. 10-8. - Reserved.  
Article III. - Fire Department. 
 
Sec. 10-9. - Repealed by Ord. No. 686.  
Sec. 10-10. - Repealed by Ord. No. 686.  
Sec. 10-11. - Repealed by Ord. No. 686.  
Sec. 10-12. - Repealed by Ord. No. 686.  
Sec. 10-13. - Repealed by Ord. No. 686.  
Sec. 10-14. - Repealed by Ord. No. 686.  
Sec. 10-15. - Repealed by Ord. No. 686.  
Sec. 10-16. - Repealed by Ord. No. 686.  
Sec. 10-17. - Repealed by Ord. No. 686.  
Sec. 10-18. - Repealed by Ord. No. 686.  
CHAPTER 11. - FIREWORKS. 
 For state law as to authority of city to regulate the use of fireworks, see C.R.S. 1973, § 12-28-107. As to fireworks generally, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 12-28-101 to 12-28-109. As to fire protection generally, see Ch. 10 of this Code. As to applicability of the Fire Prevention Code to fireworks, see § 10-2. 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Definitions. 
Fireworks. Any article, device or substance prepared for the primary purpose of producing a visual or auditory sensation by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, which meets the description of fireworks as set forth in the United States Department of Transportation Hazardous Materials Regulations at title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, parts 173.88 and 173.100. 
Fireworks do not include: 
(a)  Toy caps which do not include more than 0.25 of a grain of explosive compound per cap; 
(b)  Highway flares, railroad fuses, ship distress signals, smoke candles and other emergency signaling devices; 
(c)  Education rockets and toy propellant device-type engines used in such rockets when such rockets are of nonmetallic construction and utilize replaceable engines or model cartridges containing less than two ounces of propellant and when such engines or model cartridges are designed to be ignited by electrical means; 
(d)  Explosive auto alarms as described in title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, part 173.100; 
(e)  Matches, consisting of book matches, strike-anywhere matches, or strike-on box matches as described in title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, part 173.100. 
(Ord. No. 1057 (part).)  
Sec. 11-2. - Lawful display of fireworks. 
The city manager, or his designated representative, may grant nontransferable and non-assignable permits to allow displays of fireworks for general public display. The discharge of such public fireworks displays shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the National Fire Protection Association as stated in FPA-1123, Code for Outdoor Display of Fireworks. 
No other display of fireworks is legal within the city of Cortez. 
(Ord. No. 1057 (part).)  
Sec. 11-3. - Selling of fireworks. 
The sale of fireworks within the municipality of the city of Cortez shall be strictly prohibited. There shall be no exception to this prohibition of selling fireworks within the Cortez city limits. 
Anyone who violates any portion of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be subject to a fine in the amount of up to five hundred dollars and a jail sentence of up to six months, or both such fine and jail sentence. 
(Ord. No. 1057 (part).)  
Sec. 11-4. - Public display—Permit required. 
The chief of the fire department or his authorized agent shall have the power to grant permits within the city for supervised public displays of fireworks by the city, fair associations and other organizations and groups, and to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of such permits. Application for a permit shall be made in writing at least fifteen days in advance of the date of display. Every display shall be handled by a competent operator and shall be of such character and so located, discharged and fired as not to be hazardous to property or endanger any person. Before a permit is granted, the operator and the location and handling of the display shall be approved after investigation by the chief of the fire department of Cortez, or his authorized agent. No permit shall be transferable or assignable.  
Sec. 11-5. - Same—Disposal of unfired fireworks. 
Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of by the fire department in a method which is safe for the discharge of that or those particular type of fireworks.  
Sec. 11-6. - Same—Insurance requirements. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit for the displaying of fireworks, the applicant shall file with the city a liability insurance policy which shall provide insurance coverage against any and all property damages in an amount established by city council resolution, and further shall provide insurance coverage for bodily injury including death in an amount established by city council by resolution. This policy as so required shall designate the city as a named insured.  
Sec. 11-7. - Repealed by Ord. No. 717.  
Sec. 11-8. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit: 
(a)  Any person from offering for sale, exposing for sale, selling or having in his possession with intent to offer for sale or sell fireworks to any municipality, fair association, amusement park or other organization or group holding a permit issued as provided in this chapter or to the governing body of any county or district fair organized under the laws of the state; 
(b)  Any person from using or exploding fireworks in accordance with the provisions of any permit issued as provided in this chapter or as a part of a supervised public display at any county or district fair organized under the laws of the state; 
(c)  Any person from offering for sale, exposing for sale, selling or having in his possession with intent to offer for sale or sell any fireworks which are to be shipped directly out of the state; 
(d)  Any person from using, possessing, selling, displaying or launching model rockets. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 2.)  
Sec. 11-9. - Seizure by police. 
The police department shall seize, take and remove, at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks or combustibles offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this chapter.  
Sec. 11-10. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time or by revocation of the license or permit, if a license or permit has been issued to such person, in addition to penalties prescribed in section 17-16A of this Code. Each day of sale prohibited under this article shall be deemed a separate offense. Penalties under this section may be imposed consecutively. The local authorities in behalf of the secretary of state shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks or combustibles offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this article. 
(Amended by memo 3519; amended at city request, 3-07.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 10, 9-25-12)  
CHAPTER 12. - GARBAGE, REFUSE AND WEEDS. 
 As to health and sanitation generally, see Ch. 14 of this Code. As to plumbing generally, see Ch. 21. As to sewers generally, see Ch. 23.  
Article I. - In General. 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. 
Garbage. All offal, waste matter or vegetable matter from a kitchen, market or store and other worthless, offensive or filthy material and every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that attends to the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Junk is defined to be any old, used or secondhand materials of any kind including without limitation cloth, rags, clothing, paper, rubbish, bottles, rubber, iron, tires, brass, copper, or other metal furniture, refrigerators, freezers, all other appliances, parts of used motor vehicles, machines, apparatuses, contrivances and parts thereof, any used building materials, boards or other lumber, cement blocks, bricks or brick bats or other secondhand building materials or any discarded, abandoned or inoperable machinery, tractors, trucks or automobiles or any other article or thing commonly known and classified as junk. 
Rubbish. House dirt, ashes, rags, abandoned articles of clothing or similar substances. 
Trash. All bottles, tin cans, refuse, paper, fallen tree limbs and all other forms of discarded refuse. 
Weed. Any unsightly, useless, troublesome or injurious herbaceous plant, including any rank vegetable growth. 
(Ord. No. 493; Ord. No. 838.)  
Sec. 12-3. - Accumulation of weeds, trash, etc., prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant or person in possession or their agents of any lot, block or parcel of ground within the city to allow or permit weeds to grow or remain when grown, on such lot, block or parcel of ground or along any street adjoining the same and to the middle of the alley behind the same, or to allow or permit any trash, junk, rubbish or garbage upon such private property, to the middle of the alley abutting such property or along or upon any street adjoining the same. 
(Ord. No. 493.)  
Sec. 12-4. - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to garbage or waste material properly deposited in containers for removal as provided by the regulations of the city sanitation district. Nor shall it apply to any junk, as that term is herein defined, which is properly stored by the property owner in a shed or garage or other building suitable for that purpose and not exposed to public view. 
(Ord. No. 493.)  
Article II. - Removal of Garbage, Refuse and Weeds. 
 
Sec. 12-5. - Abatement—Issuance of notice—Municipal complaint. 
Whenever an informal complaint is made to the police or to any other appropriate city official or member of the city council regarding an alleged violation of this chapter or whenever any police officer or city employee observes an apparent violation of this chapter, written notice shall be served upon the person in possession or the owner of the real property upon which such violation is located. Such notice shall inform such person of the violation and direct that he take action within ten days after receipt of such notice to comply with this section or prosecution will be commenced for the violation in the municipal court. Subsequent filing in the municipal court shall not require ten days notice if the person in possession or owner has received prior notice during the calendar year. Filing in the municipal court does not preclude the city from taking such action as set forth in section 12-6 and subsequent sections of this code to collect any and all costs that it may have for abating the violation. 
The city manager or his designated city employee is authorized to give notice to any property owner, or if the same cannot be found, to any tenant in possession or any agent of the tenant or owner, if known, whose property is being kept or maintained contrary to this chapter, and such notice may be deposited by mail in the city post office, addressed to the record owner or owners, or tenant or agent, as the case may be, and if such owner cannot be found, the notice may be given by posting the property and the notice shall state that if the weeds, rubbish, trash, junk or garbage are not removed from such premises on or before ten days from the date of such notice, the same may be done by the city, and the cost thereof, including the cost of inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith, will be assessed against such real property. The notice shall also state that the owner's failure to comply will result in misdemeanor charges being filed against the owner in the municipal court and the possible penalties therefor. 
(Ord. No. 493; Ord. No. 788; Ord. No. 1088.)  
Sec. 12-6. - Same—By city upon failure of owner. 
If the weeds, junk, trash, refuse, rubbish or garbage shall not be removed by the property owner, or the tenant, or agent in charge within ten days following notice by the city manager, such removal may be performed by the city and the cost thereof, including inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith shall be assessed against the lot or lots or tracts of land from or abutting upon which such weeds, rubbish, trash, junk, garbage or refuse are removed, and upon the owners thereof. 
(Ord. No. 493.)  
Sec. 12-7. - Same—Assessment of costs by city. 
The cost of the removal of such weeds, trash, rubbish, refuse, junk or garbage from any lot or lots, tracts of land, or from the alley from behind or from the street and parking area adjoining any such lot or tracts of land within the corporate limits of the city shall be assessed upon the lot or lots or tracts of land from which such weeds as well as rubbish, trash, refuse or junk are removed, as well as upon the owners thereof, and such assessment shall be a lien in the several amounts assessed against each lot or tract of land until paid and shall have priority over all other liens except general taxes and prior special assessments. In case any such assessment is not paid within thirty days after the same has been certified to the director of finance by the city manager, the director of finance shall then be and is hereby authorized to certify to the county treasurer the list of all delinquent assessments, giving the name of the owner as appears of record, the number of the lot and block and the amount of assessment, the same to be properly certified by the director of finance. The county treasurer, upon the receipt of such certified list, is hereby authorized to place the same upon the tax list for the current year and collect a special assessment in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with ten percent penalty thereon; and all the laws of the state for the assessment and collection of the general taxes, including the laws for the sale of property for taxes and the redemption thereof, shall apply to and have full force and effect for the collection of all such assessments. 
(Ord. No. 630, § 2.)  
Sec. 12-8. - Same—Payment of assessment. 
The amount of such assessment may be paid to the director of finance at any time before the tax list is placed in the hands of the county treasurer, but thereafter, only to the county treasurer or his deputy. 
In the event any owner or owners desire to object to such assessment either before or after the same is certified to the county treasurer, he may, within thirty days after the receipt of such assessment notice, file a written objection thereto with the city clerk, who shall thereupon designate the next regular meeting of the city council as the date when such objection may be heard. The objector may appear in person and with counsel, if he so desires, and such hearing shall be duly recorded. The city council shall have the power to either modify, affirm or reverse such assessment after such hearing. Any owner of real estate dissatisfied with the decision of the city council shall have the right to have the decision reviewed by the county district court under Rule 106, subsection (a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure; provided, that such petition to review is filed within the time and in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 630, § 2.)  
Sec. 12-9. - City not obligated to remove weeds, etc. 
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as placing any duty upon the city to remove weeds, trash, junk, rubbish or garbage from private property and the city, acting through its city manager or police department, may, at its option, charge an offender in the municipal court with violation of this chapter under the penalties set out in section 12-10. 
(Ord. No. 493.)  
Sec. 12-9A. - Undesirable plants. 
(a)  Undesirable plants. Russian, spotted and diffuse knapweed and leafy spurge are declared to be undesirable plants to be controlled in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Declaration of nuisance. Leafy spurge, Russian knapweed, and diffuse knapweed, spotted knapweed and diffuse knapweed, and all other plants designated "undesirable plants" by the city are declared to be a public nuisance. Such action may be taken as is available for nuisance abatement under the laws of this state and the city, and as the city council, in their sole discretion deem necessary. 
(c)  Removal of undesirable plants required by property owner. Property owners within the city shall be responsible for the elimination of undesirable plants from their property within thirty days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Such removal shall be accomplished in an ecologically feasible and environmentally safe manner in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(d)  Enforcement. The city shall have the right to enter upon any premises, lands, or places, whether public or private, during reasonable business hours or upon proper notice, for the purpose of inspecting for the existence of undesirable plants, and shall have the right to propose, implement or enforce the management of undesirable plants upon such lands in accordance with the provisions of Colorado Revised Statutes section 35-5.5-109. 
(e)  Penalty. Violation of this section shall be subject to a penalty of up to ninety days in jail or a fine up to three hundred dollars, or both such fine and imprisonment in addition to any other remedies, provided herein or allowed by ordinance, law, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 754, §§ 1—5)  
Sec. 12-10. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person, whether as owner, tenant or agent in charge of private premises within the city who suffers or permits the growth of weeds, as the term is defined in section 12-1, upon the premises described in section 12-3 or along the streets adjoining such premises and to the middle of the alley in the rear thereof, or who fails to remove any trash, junk, rubbish or garbage from the same, after being notified to remove the same, as herein provided, and who fails, after such notice, to remove the same may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. Each day that failure to remove the same continues, shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense and punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 493; amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 11, 9-25-12)  
CHAPTER 13. - GAS. 
 As to plumbing generally, see ch. 21 of this Code. 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Gas Code adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by reference, as though the same were fully printed and set forth herein, the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2009 Edition, Copyright 2009, 1st; Printing, prepared by said International Code Council, and containing a total of one hundred seventy-seven pages. 
(b)  Three true and exact official copies of the above-described 2009 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC) are on file in the municipal offices of the City of Cortez, Colorado, duly certified by the mayor and attested by the city clerk, and may be examined, duplicated, or copied by any interested person during the regular business hours of said offices, all such reproduction or copying to be at the expense of the person requesting the same. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 2; Ord. No. 738, § 2; Ord. No. 962 (part).) 
(Ord. No. 1137, §§ II, III (part)) 
 Prior history: Code 1968, § 13-3-5. 
 For state law as to authority of city to adopt by reference, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 31-16-202 to 31-16-204.  
Sec. 13-2. - Gas inspector—Appointment. 
The city manager shall appoint a competent person as the gas inspector. 
(Code 1968, § 13-3-1.)  
Sec. 13-3. - Same—Powers and duties enumerated. 
The gas inspector and his assistants are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to: 
(a)  Inspect and supervise the installation, construction, reconstruction and repair of all house gas piping, gas appliances, fixtures and apparatus now or hereafter to be placed in or in any manner directly attached to any building or structure within the city. The gas inspector and his assistants shall be subject to the orders and directions of the city council and they are hereby vested with full authority to enter any building or premises at any reasonable time in the discharge of their duties herein imposed. 
(b)  Receive all applications for connection, to pass on and approve or reject plans submitted, to issue permits for all plumbing work, extensions or change in location of fixtures, to sign and issue all notices, to keep a daily record of all applications received, plans approved and all other matters which may pertain thereto and to make a monthly report of such operations to the city council. 
(c)  Inspect as often as necessary all houses in the course of erection, alteration or repair and to inspect any plumbing of any character already in use which he may have reason to believe is out of repair or is imperfect. 
(d)  Give the owner or agent in charge of any building written notice of any defects in his plumbing or fixtures or of changes or repairs necessary and such owner or agent shall immediately, after such notice, make the necessary changes or repairs. If the owner or agent fails to comply with this notice, the gas inspector may order the gas franchise holder to turn off the gas and it shall not thereafter turn the gas on again until the gas inspector has certified that such defects have been repaired or removed. 
(e)  Furnish the gas franchise holder with a copy of each certificate of inspection. Such department shall not turn gas into any new, altered or repaired system of gas until such certificate has been received. 
(f)  Investigate all alleged violations of the provisions of this chapter and to file complaints when necessary. No one except an authorized representative of the gas franchise holder shall at any time turn on any valve or cock or in any way tamper or make any connection with any gas main, meter, meter connection or gas service pipe between the main and the meter. Any user, however, may turn off service in case of an emergency. 
(g)  A gas inspection charge will be established by the city council by resolution. This fee will be collected and retained by the city as compensation for services rendered by such inspector. 
(h)  Decide all controversies which may arise under this chapter, and in so doing, shall be subject to the control and direction of the city council. 
(Code 1968, §§ 13-3-1, 13-3-7.)  
Sec. 13-4. - Installation, construction, etc., license—Required; application; fee; insurance; issuance and renewal. 
Every person, before entering upon the installation, construction, reconstruction or repair of any house piping within the service area of the city natural gas system, shall be required to take out a gas plumbing license, the cost of which shall be determined by the city council by resolution. Before such license is issued, the party applying for such license shall meet the requirements set by the city council as to his knowledge of gas fittings and shall deposit with the city clerk a policy of public liability and property damage insurance, in a sum to be deter-mined by the city council by resolution, executed by a reliable insurance company to protect the franchise holder's householders and building owners against loss of life, injury or damage to property occasioned by the negligence of such contractor and all persons interested, against all costs, expenses, damages and injuries sustained by the negligence of such contractor, his agents, servants and employees, or his failure to comply ethically with the terms of this chapter in doing work made the subject matter hereof and otherwise to be in the form and executed as required by the city council. Upon approval of such insurance by the city council, the clerk shall issue to such contractor a license, which shall remain in force only so long as such contractor's insurance is in force and effect. Such insurance shall be renewed annually on the first day of January of each year as a prerequisite to the issuance of a license for such year. Such license shall be conspicuously displayed at the place of business. Applicants for a gasfitter's license who are duly licensed plumbers under the requirements of section 21-3 of this Code, are not required to pay an additional license fee for a gasfitter's license. However, proof of public liability and property damage insurance, as set forth in this section, shall be required in addition to the $1,000 bond required for plumbers' licenses as set forth in section 21-4 of this Code. 
(Code 1968, § 13-3-2; Ord. No. 596, § 2.)  
Sec. 13-5. - Same—Revocation. 
The license pursuant to section 13-4 may at any time be suspended or revoked by the city council upon the recommendation of the city manager for any violation of the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 13-3-2.)  
Sec. 13-6. - Plans and specifications required—Submission; information to be specified. 
Before the construction, reconstruction, installation or repair of any gas house piping, suitable plans and specifications of all the work proposed to be done, showing clearly the sizes of pipe, kind of fittings, locations and measurements shall be made out on blanks furnished by the inspector and properly signed by the owner, his agent or other authorized representative and filed at the office of the inspector. All connections and fixtures shall be neatly drawn in the following manner. In case of new work or extension of old work, black ink shall be used. In case of old work, red ink shall be used. 
(Code 1968, § 13-3-4.)  
Sec. 13-7. - Same—Approval; issuance of permit; modification; rectification of errors. 
If the plans as required by section 13-6 are approved by the inspector, he shall issue a written permit within two days after the application is filed. No change or modification of approved plans shall be permitted unless such change or modification is authorized by the owner or agent, submitted to and approved by the inspector and placed on file as in the case of original work. No infraction of rules, not specially authorized in writing by the inspector, although it may be shown on plans and has passed inspection, shall be permitted. The inspector always reserves the right to compel the gas fitter to rectify any infraction of the rules, although the work has passed inspection and a final inspection certificate issued, and the plumbers' insurance will be held for such rectification. 
(Code 1968, § 13-3-4.)  
Sec. 13-8. - Permits—Issuance only to licensed plumber. 
No permit to install, construct, reconstruct or repair any gas house piping shall be issued, except to a licensed plumber or a person licensed to do such work in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 13-3-4.)  
Sec. 13-9. - Same—Property owner's responsibility. 
No property owner shall cause or permit any installation, construction, reconstruction or repair of any gas house piping in the city and its gas service territory before the person doing the work has first obtained a permit from the inspector to do so. The mere fact that such work has been done will be considered sufficient to hold and render such property owner amenable to this rule. 
(Code 1968, § 13-3-3.)  
Sec. 13-10. - Certificate of inspection—Issuance upon test. 
When the system of piping and all extensions thereto has been completed and all openings firmly closed, the person installing the piping shall make the test provided above and if the piping is found tight, shall make an application for a test to the gas inspector. Upon such application the inspector or one of his assistants will inspect the piping and shall witness the test. If the piping is found tight and the work done in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, such inspector or assistant shall issue and deliver a certificate of inspection. 
(Code 1968, § 13-3-6.)  
Sec. 13-11. - Same—Form. 
The certificate of inspection, as required by the preceding section, shall be substantially in a form to be prescribed by the city council. 
(Code 1968, § 13-3-6.)  
Sec. 13-12. - Same—Additional installations. 
Any additional gas piping or outlets installed, after the required certificate has been issued, must be reported for inspection and tested in the same manner as pipe originally installed. 
(Code 1968, § 13-3-6.)  
CHAPTER 14. - HEALTH AND SANITATION. 
 For state law as to authority of city to make regulations and do acts necessary for the promotion of health and suppression of disease, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-15-401(b). 
 As to animals and fowl generally, see ch. 5 of this Code. As to rabies control among dogs, see §§ 5-35 to 5-44. As to the Uniform Housing Code, see §§ 6-3, 6-4. As to civil defense and emergencies generally, see ch. 7. As to garbage, refuse and weeds generally, see ch. 12. As to plumbing generally, see ch. 21. As to public improvements generally, see ch. 22. As to water generally, see ch. 27.  
Article I. - Administration. 
 
Sec. 14-4. - Repealed September 14, 2004. 
 For charter provision as to creation of a department of health generally, see Char., art. XVIII.  
Sec. 14-5. - Duties of health officers generally. 
It shall be the duty of the health officer or officers to carry out and enforce all existing laws, codes and ordinances having for their object the preservation of life, the prevention of disease and the abatement and removal of nuisances, except as otherwise provided by ordinance or code. He shall attend to complaints of nuisances and orders relating thereto and shall perform such other services as the council may impose by ordinance, or the board of health lawfully requires of him. 
(Code 1968, § 2-4-4.)  
Article II. - Nuisances. 
 
Sec. 14-6. - Public nuisance—Defined. 
In addition to those things which are elsewhere by ordinance of the city declared to be and constitute public nuisances, it is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, or an act in the nature of a public nuisance, for any person, including, but not limited to, landlords and their agents and employees, who knowingly permits or encourages or knowingly and unreasonably fails to prevent tenants from committing the acts proscribed below within the limits of the city or to knowingly participate in, permit, abet or otherwise allow the following to occur on or within any property or structure. For purposes of this section, where an illegal activity references a section contained within the Colorado Revised Statutes (C.R.S.), the illegal activities shall have the same definition as contained within the C.R.S. 
(Ord. No. 775, (part), 1993.)  
Sec. 14-7. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
Abatement. The removal, prostration, or destruction of that which causes a nuisance, whether by breaking or pulling it down, or otherwise removing, disintegrating, or effacing it. 
Board of health. Consists of a committee of three council members, with four alternates who shall also be council members, and whose duties are set out in section 14-11(c). 
Health officer. A physician who is retained by the city of Cortez on an "as needed" basis to deal with sanitation and health problems. 
Public health nuisance shall be defined as: 
1.  A situation creating infectious, contagious and pestilent disease, unsanitary toilet facilities, matters relating to sewage, drainage and surface water flow, stagnant water, existence of privy vaults, sinks, cesspools and septic tanks that may not be operating properly by reason of location, defective construction, inadequate maintenance, wear and want of repair, and improper or inadequate installation of private sewage lines from houses, buildings and other structures at the point where the same is connected to the lines of the Cortez sanitation district; 
2.  To deposit any animal or human fecal material, dead animal, or other filthy or offensive, substance upon any public street, alley, highway, park or other public place; 
3.  To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water of any drinking fountain, spring, stream, pond or lake, to the injury or prejudice of others, or any part of the city water supply system; 
4.  To permit or suffer any slops, swill, garbage, stable droppings, feces, offal, filth, refuse, animal or vegetable matter, which are liable to become putrid or offensive or injurious to health, to remain on any premises. 
(Ord. No. 775, (part), 1993; Ord. No. 1027, §§ 2, 3.)  
Sec. 14-8. - Nuisance prohibited. 
From and after the date of the ordinance codified in this section, the owners of all lots or tracts or any addition thereto shall be, and are required to correct and abate and keep corrected and abated all those matters declared a nuisance, or a threat to public health and safety as defined in this chapter. A public nuisance as defined, or any other violation of this chapter which adversely affects the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city is strictly prohibited within the city. 
(Ord. No. 775, (part), 1993.)  
Sec. 14-9. - Authority to enter on property. 
The health officials, city manager, his designated representative or any police officer may, where reasonable cause exists with or without a warrant issued by any court or competent jurisdiction, including the municipal court of the city, enter upon any land for examination of the same to ascertain whether any such nuisance exists, and shall be free from any action or liability on account thereof. 
(Ord. No. 775, (part), 1993.)  
Sec. 14-10. - Interpretation; effect on other ordinances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of any zoning ordinance or other ordinances now or hereafter enacted authorizing certain uses or location of property, it is the intention of the city council, and it is hereby so declared that any use, location or activity otherwise authorized by zoning ordinances or any other ordinance shall be subject to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 775, (part), 1993.)  
Sec. 14-11. - Complaints generally. 
(a)  In the event that it is determined by any individual that a nuisance within the city as described in this chapter may exist, it shall be the duty of such individual to register a complaint with the city manager of the city and the Cortez sanitation district. Upon the registering of such complaint, it shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee to investigate the subject of the complaint and determine whether it shall be necessary to issue a cease and desist order to prevent disease and cause the abatement of the nuisance described in this chapter. The city manager may direct the health officer or officers to determine if such a serious health hazard exists that a twenty-four hour notice to cease and desist order to abate or remove the determined public health nuisance should be issued. If the hazard is not considered to be of such magnitude that the abatement doesn't require a twenty-four hour cease and desist then the city manager, with the advise of the health officer, shall establish in the notice the date which the nuisance must be abated. A notice shall be addressed to the landowners of the property and shall be personally served upon them if possible and if not possible, shall be mailed to them certified mail, return receipt requested and posted upon the premises. In the event that it is determined there are tenants residing on the premises, the city shall post the premises and make reasonable efforts to personally notify the tenants. The cease and desist or abatement order shall clearly state the problem complained of, the reason why the problem must be immediately corrected, the name and address and telephone number of the person issuing the order and a notice that the order constitutes a summons to appear and give testimony before the city manager and city health officer in the event that the condition is not rectified within the time required. The notice shall also state that if the situation is not corrected in the time required the city will undertake the correction at the landowner's expense. The notice shall also advise the landowner that city water service may be terminated if deemed necessary by the city to abate the situation. Normal and customary water charges for termination and reconnection shall apply in such an event. 
(b)  If the condition is not rectified within twenty-four hours, it is the duty of the city manager with the recommendation of the health officer to make a determination whether the nuisance shall be immediately abated. If the city manager and city health officer determine that while there is a health problem that does not require twenty-four hour abatement, they will issue an order with a date certain in which the problem will be abated before the cease and desist order is issued. 
(c)  Once there has been a cease and desist order issued by the city manager, the landowner shall be given the right to appeal the same through the public health board which shall consist of three permanently appointed city council members and with the other four city council members being alternates. The affected landowner shall have twenty days from the cease and desist order to file an appeal to the board of health. The twenty-day time to appeal has no effect on the city manager and the health officer's ability to rectify the offending condition so that the health and safety of the citizens of Cortez is protected. The appeal to the board of health shall review whether the determination of the city manager and the health officer that a health hazard existed was correct and that the actions of the city manager and the health officer were reasonable and necessary. Upon the completion of the appeal the board shall make such finding of fact and law as are necessary to support their decision and the same shall become an immediate order of the board. Any person aggrieved by the action of the board may appeal to the district court under the terms and within the same time limitations of Rule 106(a)(4), Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. Any such appeal or other civil action shall not stay any proceedings being conducted by the city to mitigate the health problem being acted on. 
(d)  The inquiry of the board shall relate directly to the determination of whether or not a health hazard exists, and the action which shall be taken to ratify the decision of the city manager or health officer, directed to whether such action was reasonable and necessary. Upon the completion of the hearing, the board shall make such findings of fact and law as are necessary to support their decision and the same shall become an immediate order of the board. Any person aggrieved by the action of the board may appeal to the district court under the terms and within the time limitations of Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. Any such appeal or other civil action shall not stay the proceedings or orders of the board unless a bond in an amount to be determined adequate by the court shall be posted and such other stipulations as the court deems reasonable to protect the health, safety and welfare of the population of the city are put in place. 
(Ord. No. 775, (part), 1993; Ord. No. 1027, §§ 4—6.)  
Sec. 14-12. - No election of remedies. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the city may take such other action, including the filing of a civil complaint to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and the surrounding area as it deems necessary. The remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative. 
(Ord. No. 775, (part), 1993.)  
Sec. 14-13. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person or persons guilty of violating any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor for each day that a violation continues. 
(b)  Whenever in this chapter or any other ordinance of the city or any section or an order, rule or regulation promulgated under the provisions of this chapter or other ordinance of the city any act is prohibited, made or declared to be unlawful, an offense, nuisance or misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, any person who shall be convicted of the violation of any such provision of this chapter or other ordinance of the city or of such orders, rules or regulations shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. For purposes of this chapter, each day of violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 775, (part), 1993; amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 12, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 14-14. - Authority of the city to correct and abate, assess costs and notify owner. 
The city shall have the power and authority to correct, abate and/or remove any public health nuisance herein described and to assess the whole cost thereof against the lot or lots or tracts of land or personal property upon which said nuisance is located upon the failure or refusal of any landowners to fully comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 775, (part), 1993.)  
Sec. 14-15. - Collection/lien. 
All costs assessed under this section shall constitute a lien in the several amounts against each offending lot or tract of land or personal property until paid. In the event that such assessment shall not be paid within thirty days after assessment notice to the landowner at his last known address, certified mail, return receipt requested, the city may certify said assessment to the county treasurer or to the officer of the county and in which the custody of the tax list remains at the time of said certification, to be by him, placed upon the tax rolls for the current year as provided by state law, and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with ten percent penalty thereon to defray the cost of collection and with all other remedies available to him by law for the assessment and collection of general taxes. 
(Ord. No. 775, (part), 1993.)  
CHAPTER 14A. - LODGERS' TAX. 
 
Sec. 14A-1. - Citation. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as and may be cited as "The Lodgers' Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1.)  
Sec. 14A-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to impose a tax which will be borne by transient persons using commercial lodging accommodations in the city including users of commercial campground facilities, which tax will provide revenues for advertising the community, improving its services, financing new facilities, attracting conferences, conventions and meetings of a commercial, cultural, educational, and social nature to the city, to provide for the beautification of the city, and to allocate a part thereof for administrative and clerical expenses. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 2; Ord. No. 601, § 1.)  
Sec. 14A-3. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
City manager. The city manager of Cortez, or his designated representative. 
Gross taxable rent. The total amount of rent paid for lodging. 
Lodgers' tax. The tax on lodging, authorized by this chapter. 
Lodging. The transaction of furnishing rooms or other accommodations including commercial campground units by a vendor to a vendee who for rent uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room or rooms or other units of accommodation including trailer space units in or at a taxable premises, provided that the tax shall not be imposed on food, service, beverage, telephone, laundry or like services incidental to the furnishing of lodging or shelter and for which a separate charge is customarily made. 
Person. A corporation, firm or other body corporate, partnership, association or individual, including an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law and acting in a representative capacity, and as herein limited includes the United States of America, the state of Colorado, any corporation, department, instrumentality or agency of the federal government or the state government, or any political subdivision of the state. 
Taxable premises. A hotel, motel or commercial campground. 
Vendee. A natural person to whom lodgings are furnished in the exercise of the taxable service of lodging. 
Vendor. A person furnishing lodgings in the exercise of the taxable service of lodging. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 3; Ord. No. 601, § 2.)  
Sec. 14A-4. - Imposition of tax. 
There is imposed an occupancy tax of revenues of two percent of gross taxable rent for lodging paid vendors beginning November 1, l98l. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 4; Ord. No. 563, § 1.)  
Sec. 14A-5. - Exemptions. 
The tax imposed in section 14A-4 shall not apply: 
(a)  As to vendees: 
(1)  Is a resident of the taxable premises for a period of at least thirty consecutive days; or 
(2)  Enters into or has entered into a written agreement for lodgings at the taxable premises for a period of at least thirty consecutive days. 
(b)  Political subdivisions, others: 
(1)  The federal government, state of Colorado and its subdivisions, departments and institutions and the political subdivisions thereof, but only in their governmental functions and activities; 
(2)  Religious, charitable and quasi-governmental organizations only in the conduct of their regular religious, charitable and quasi-governmental capacities; provided such organization, corporation or governmental entity furnishes to the person who performs or causes to be performed the taxable service or labor sufficient evidence to demonstrate that they are entitled to said exemption. 
(c)  As to vendor: 
(1)  To clinics, hospitals or other medical facilities; 
(2)  To privately owned and operated convalescent homes of the aged, infirm, indigent or chronically ill; or 
(3)  If the taxable premises does not have at least three rooms or three other units of accommodations for lodging. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 5.)  
Sec. 14A-6. - Taxable transactions. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any lessee of a hotel room or motel room located in the city as defined in section 14A-3 to fail to pay, or for any lessor of such accommodation to fail to collect the tax levied by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 6.)  
Sec. 14A-7. - Licensing. 
(a)  No vendor shall engage in the business of providing lodging in the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter who has not first obtained a license as provided in this section. 
(b)  Applicants for a vendor's license shall submit an application to the city manager upon forms to be furnished by him prior to January 1, 1980, which forms shall at least show the name and address of the vendor together with a correct mailing address of the vendor. 
(c)  The city manager shall issue upon a form to be prescribed by him a license bearing an identifying number together with the name and address of the vendor and the manager, owner or proprietor. For each license issued a fee of ten dollars shall be paid. Such license will be invalidated and must be reissued and repurchased if there is (1) change in business name; or (2) change in business address; or (3) change in business ownership. All forms thereafter filed by the vendor with the city upon reporting and paying the tax shall bear the number of the vendor's license. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 7.)  
Sec. 14A-8. - Collection of tax—Reporting. 
Every vendor providing lodgings as provided in this chapter shall collect the tax thereon on behalf of the city and shall act as a trustee therefor. The tax shall be collected from vendees in accordance with this chapter and shall be remitted to the city on or before the twentieth day of the month succeeding the month in which the tax has been paid and collected. Each vendor shall make a report upon payment of the tax upon such form as shall be provided by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 8.)  
Sec. 14A-9. - Duty of vendor—Books and records. 
The vendor shall maintain adequate records to be maintained at vendor's offices in the city and shall be opened to the inspection of the city during reasonable hours, the same to be retained for no less than three years. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 9.)  
Sec. 14A-10. - Failure to pay tax; failure to make return; computation; penalty; notice. 
(a)  If any vendor makes a return as required by this chapter without paying the tax then due, he shall be liable for the tax and a penalty equal to ten percent thereof but not less than ten dollars penalty in addition to the tax, without notice from the city with regard thereto. Promptly thereafter, the city shall give the delinquent vendor written notice of such estimated tax penalty and interest, which notice shall be served personally or by certified mail. 
(b)  If any vendor neglects or refuses to make a return and pay the tax as required by this chapter, the city manager shall make an estimate based upon an examination of the vendor's books and records, or upon any information in its possession, of the amount of the gross taxable rents of the delinquent vendor for the period in respect to which he has failed to make return, and upon the basis of the estimated amount shall compute and assess the tax payable by the delinquent vendor, adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to ten percent thereof, but not less than ten dollars. Promptly thereafter the city shall give the delinquent vendor written notice of such estimated tax, penalty and interest, which notice shall be served personally or by certified mail. 
(c)  If payments are not made by the vendor within fifteen days of such notice, the city manager shall bring an action in law or equity in court for the collection of any amounts due, including without limitation penalties thereon, interest on the unpaid principal at a rate of not exceeding one percent per month, the cost of collection and reasonable attorney's fees incurred in connection there with. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 10.)  
Sec. 14A-11. - Administration. 
Administrative duties are assigned to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 11.)  
Sec. 14A-13. - Budget and expenditures. 
(a)  There is created an advisory board of trustees whose duty it shall be to advise with the city manager and the city council concerning the preparation of a budget for the fund so collected and whose duties it shall be to recommend to the city manager and the city council allocation of moneys from the funds for the stated purposes hereinabove set forth. 
(b)  The advisory board of trustees shall be appointed by the city council to serve at the will of the council and shall consist of at least the following: 
(1)  One member of the city's lodgers association, one member of the county's lodgers association, and three members of the city council. 
(c)  There shall be budgeted from the moneys received from the imposition of the tax fifteen percent thereof for beautification projects within the city and five percent shall be allocated to reimburse the city for administrative and clerical expenses in administering the fund. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 13; Ord. No. 563, §§ 2—4; Ord. No. 1083.)  
CHAPTER 15. - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS GENERALLY. 
 For state law as to authority of city to license, regulate and tax businesses and occupations generally, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 31-15-301, 31-15-501. 
 As to alcoholic beverages generally, see Ch. 4 of this Code. As to the licensing of dogs, see §§ 5-31 to 5-34. As to finance and taxation generally, see Ch. 9. As to licenses required for sale of fireworks, see § 11-7. As to gas insulation, construction, etc., license, see §§ 13-4, 13-5. As to licensing of bicycles, see §§ 16-9 to 16-12. As to licensing of plumbers, see §§ 21-3 to 21-5.  
Article I. - In General. 
 
Secs. - 15-1 to 15-5. Reserved.  
Article II. - Licenses Generally. 
 
Sec. 15-6. - Required. 
The various objects, subjects, persons, corporations, trades, vocations, professions and occupations mentioned in this chapter, within the city, shall be licensed generally in accordance with this chapter and any and all persons are hereby prohibited from engaging in or carrying on any of the occupations, professions or trades in this chapter, within the city, without first having been granted therefor a license from the city as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 12-1-1.)  
Sec. 15-7. - Issuance; fee; terms and conditions. 
Licenses shall be granted to persons to engage in or carry on the occupations, professions, trades or business callings set forth by this chapter upon payment to the director of finance for the use of the city the sums set forth and established by this chapter. Any and all persons receiving any license from the city shall be subject to the Code, ordinances and regulations of the city which may be in force at the time of the issuance thereof, or which may be subsequently made and ordained by the city manager, and if any person so licensed violates any of the provisions thereof, he shall be liable to be proceeded against for any fine, forfeiture or penalty imposed thereby. In addition, such license may be revoked by the city manager and any and all license fees paid by him shall in such case by forfeited to the city. 
(Code 1968, § 12-1-2.)  
Sec. 15-8. - Signing and attestation. 
All licenses named under this chapter shall be signed by the city clerk or the duly appointed deputy city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 632, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-9. - Revocation. 
Any license may be revoked by the city manager when it appears that the licensee has not complied with the Code or ordinances regulating his business, trade, profession or calling, when he has practiced fraud, misrepresentation or deceit in obtaining such license or whenever it appears that such business, trade, profession or calling so licensed is against good morals or contrary to the general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. Any and all license fees paid by such licensee shall in such case be forfeited to the city. 
(Code 1968, § 12-1-3.)  
Sec. 15-10. - Register to be kept by city clerk. 
The city clerk shall keep a register in which shall be entered the name of each and every person licensed under this chapter, the date of the license, the purpose and place for which the license is granted, the amount paid therefor and the time such will expire or continue in force. 
(Ord. No. 632, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-11. - One year to be maximum term. 
No license shall be issued at any time for a longer period than one year and in all cases the period or term covered by the license shall be expressed therein. 
(Code 1968, § 12-1-5.)  
Sec. 15-12. - Applications generally. 
All applicants for licenses under this chapter shall file an application as required by this chapter, and shall pay an application fee, if any shall be required. Application fees shall be set by resolution of the council. 
All continuously annually licensed individuals, partnerships or corporations under this chapter shall file an updated application with the city clerk every third year of renewal of license. If an annual license is not renewed within thirty days of the expiration date of the license, a new application plus all applicable fees shall be required. Licenses for terms of less than one year shall require a new application for each license. 
(Ord. No. 632, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-13. - Partial payment prohibited. 
The director of finance is hereby prohibited from receiving any less sum at any one time than the amount required by the Code, ordinances and resolutions of the city to take out a license for the period fixed thereby. No partial payments shall be received upon any license fee or license. 
(Ord. No. 632, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-14. - Display. 
It shall be the duty of each and every person to whom a license has been issued to show such at any time during the business hours of any day to the chief of police or to any officer of the city upon request. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to show such license when requested by such authority. 
(Code 1968, § 12-1-8.)  
Sec. 15-15. - Assignability. 
No license granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be assignable without the written permission of the city manager or city council. 
(Code 1968, § 12-1-9.)  
Article III. - Coin-Operated Amusement Devices. 
 
Secs. 15-16 to 15-18. - Repealed by Ord. No. 561.  
Article IV. - Billiard and Pool Tables. 
 
Secs. - 15-19 to 5-21. Repealed by Ord. No. 561.  
Secs. - 15-22 to 15-30. Reserved.  
Article V. - Reserved. 
 
Secs. - 15-31 to 15-37. Reserved.  
Article VI. - Shows, Exhibitions, Etc. 
 For state law as to authority of city to license and regulate shows, exhibitions, etc., see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-15-501(g). 
 
Sec. 15-38. - License—Required. 
No person shall exhibit, conduct or manage for gain within the city any performance, entertainment, amusement or transient business as set forth in this article or any other amusement or transient business for gain without first having obtained a license therefor. 
(Code 1968, § 12-5-4.)  
Sec. 15-39. - Same—Schedule of fees. 
The license fee or charge shall be as follows: 
Circus, menagerie or carnival, one hundred and fifty dollars per day. 
(Code 1968, §§ 12-5-1 to 12-5-3.)  
Sec. 15-40. - Same—To indicate period of validity and place of exhibition, etc. 
The city clerk in issuing any license granted under the provisions of this article shall specify therein the objects and length of time for which such is granted and the place where the circus, menagerie or carnival is to be rendered or located. 
(Ord. No. 632, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-41. - Reserved.  
Article VII. - Junk and Secondhand Dealers. 
 For state law as to authority of city to license and regulate junk and secondhand dealers, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 31-12-101(74), 31-15-301(b). 
 
Sec. 15-42. - License—Required. 
No person in the city shall engage in the business of keeping a secondhand store or a place for buying and selling secondhand goods or engage in the business of a junk dealer or collector without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Code 1968, § 12-9-1.)  
Sec. 15-43. - Same—Application; fee; term. 
Any person desiring a license under this article shall apply to the city clerk or his agent therefor. The application shall be in writing, shall set forth the full name of the applicant and the location at which such business is to be carried on and shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council. Such license shall, unless sooner suspended or revoked, continue in force for one year from the issuance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 632, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-44. - Same—Change of address to be noted. 
In the event that any person licensed under this article removes his place of business from the location designated in such license, such person shall immediately give notice to the city clerk and have the change noted upon such license. 
(Ord. No. 632, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-45. - Record of purchases required; access to records. 
Every person licensed under this article shall keep a book in which shall be written in ink the time of each purchase, an accurate description in English of the goods, article or thing purchased, the time of the receipt of same, the name, residence and description of the person selling the same and such book, as well as the article or articles purchased, shall, at all reasonable times, be open to the inspection of any member of the police department. 
(Code 1968, § 12-9-3.)  
Sec. 15-46. - Examination of articles and premises by police. 
The chief of police or any police officer of the city shall have the right to examine any article purchased by the licensee and may demand that any article so purchased be exhibited. Such officer shall have the right to inspect the place of business of the licensee and all articles being kept therein whenever he deems it necessary so to do. 
(Code 1968, § 12-9-8.)  
Sec. 15-47. - Purchased goods to be kept seventy-two hours. 
No person licensed under this article shall sell or remove from his place of business any goods or articles purchased by him for at least seventy-two hours. 
(Code 1968, § 12-9-4.)  
Sec. 15-48. - Prohibited purchases; hours of business. 
No person licensed under this article shall purchase any secondhand goods, articles or thing from any person who at the time is intoxicated, from any person known by him to be a thief or a receiver of stolen property or from any person whom he has reason to suspect of being such. 
No purchases shall be made between the hours of 6 o'clock P.M. and 6 o'clock A.M. 
(Code 1968, § 12-9-5.)  
Sec. 15-49. - Purchases from minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed as a secondhand dealer, junkshop keeper or house-to-house secondhand buyer to purchase from, sell to or in any manner deal with any minor under the age of eighteen years; except, that such licensees may purchase old rags and waste paper from minors under the age of eighteen years. This section shall apply to employees, agents, or servants of such licensees. 
(Code 1968, § 11-1-4.)  
Sec. 15-50. - Daily reports. 
Every person licensed under this article shall make out and deliver to the chief of police of the city, every day, before the hour of 12:00 Noon, a report on forms provided by the chief of police giving an accurate account and description of each and all of the articles purchased during the preceding day, the price paid therefor, the time of purchase and the names and residences of the persons from whom such purchases were made. 
(Code 1968, § 12-9-6.)  
Article VIII. - Pawnbrokers. 
 For state law as to authority of city to license and regulate pawnbrokers, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 31-12-101(63), 31-15-301(b), 12-56-102. As to pawnbrokers generally, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 12-56-102 to 12-56-119. 
 
Sec. 15-51. - Requirements generally. 
Pursuant to C.R.S. 12-56-102, any corporation, partnership or individual wishing to operate a pawnbrokering establishment within the city shall be licensed and bonded according to the regulations set forth in this article. 
The pawnbrokering establishment shall comply with the rules and regulations as established by C.R.S. 12-56-101 et seq., as amended, in the conduct and operation of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-52. - License—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of pawnbrokering, whether as an individual, business or in connection with any other lawful business, except as provided in and authorized by this article and without first obtaining a license from the city clerk. 
(Code 1968, § 12-7-2.)  
Sec. 15-53. - Same—Application; fee. 
All applicants for a license under this article shall apply to the city clerk and such application shall contain such pertinent information as may be required by the city clerk and upon such forms as the city clerk may prescribe. 
An application fee shall be assessed each applicant for license in an amount that shall be set by resolution of the city council. In the event that a license is denied the applicant, the applicant shall not be entitled to a refund of all or any part of the application fee. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-54. - Same—Fee; display. 
The annual license fee for carrying on the business of pawnbrokering shall be established by the city council by resolution. 
The license shall be prominently displayed at the location in which such pawnbrokering activities are being conducted. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-55. - Same—Bond required. 
The licensee or applicant shall furnish good and sufficient bond, with sureties to be approved by the city clerk, in the sum of one thousand dollars conditioned upon the faithful observance of this article and upon the safekeeping, or return, of all articles held in pledge by such pawnbroker. 
(Code 1968, § 12-7-5.)  
Sec. 15-56. - Same—Requirements generally; issuance or denial; transferability. 
All applicants for a license under this article shall satisfy the city clerk of his financial responsibility, experience, character and general fitness and if the applicant is a firm or corporation, of the officers and directors thereof. If the city clerk should find that any applicant is not of proper character, has been convicted of a felony or does not have a reputation for truth or fair dealing, then the city clerk shall have the right, upon the approval of the mayor and city council, to refuse to issue such license to such applicant. Such license shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1968, § 12-7-6.)  
Sec. 15-57. - Same—Forfeiture, revocation, suspension. 
Any person who does not comply with the rules and regulations as established by C.R.S. 12-56-101 et seq., as amended, shall forfeit the license. All penalty and penal regulations of the state as found in C.R.S. 12-56-104 shall be applicable and are in no way affected by the ordinance codified in this section. 
The city shall revoke or suspend any license issued for any violation of the requirements of application, bonding or licensing as provided by this article. Such revocation or suspension shall be for a period of time and upon such terms as the city council may determine. 
Forfeiture, revocation or suspension of any license under this article shall not entitle a pawnbroker to a refund of all or any part of the license fee. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 2.)  
Secs. 15-58 to 15-65. - Repealed by Ord. No. 629.  
Article IX. - Mobile Food Vendors.[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1220 , §§ 1—11, adopted March 28, 2017, amended article IX, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article IX, §§ 15-66—15-68.9, pertained to similar material, and derived from Ord. No. 1191 , adopted September 9, 2014. 
 
Sec. 15-66. - Definition. 
As used in this article only, "mobile food vendor" shall mean a retail food establishment that is not intended to be permanent and is a motorized wheeled vehicle or trailer attached to a motor vehicle designed and equipped to serve food and beverages, operating in either a static or transitory location and serving the public during the hours of operation authorized by this article. The sale and distribution of frozen milk, frozen dairy or ice confection products, candy, gum or other confection products shall be permitted for mobile food vendors. 
Temporary buildings for the purpose of mobile vending are not allowed in the City of Cortez. 
( Ord. No. 1220 , § 1, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 15-67. - Operations. 
The operation of a mobile food vendor is allowed provided that such operation is in compliance with all requirements and limitations contained in this article. In the event that a food vender is authorized to operate within the city pursuant to authority granted and limits found elsewhere in the code, this article shall not apply. This program may be expanded to include other types of non-food items at the discretion of city council. 
( Ord. No. 1220 , § 2, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 15-68. - Licenses. 
A Cortez business or sales tax license or transient vendor license, if applicable, proof of inspection by the Montezuma County Health Department are required as well as any land owner written permission required in section 15-68.4 and must be conspicuously displayed at all times during the operation of a mobile food vendor. Failure to display received licenses shall be a violation and punishable as set forth in section 15-68.8. 
( Ord. No. 1220 , § 3, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 15-68.1. - Hours of operation. 
Mobile food vendors may operate only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. The mobile food vendor operation and equipment must be removed from the location described in sections 15-68.4 and 15.68.5 when not open for business. 
( Ord. No. 1220 , § 4, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 15-68.2. - Zone districts. 
Mobile food vendors shall not operate in the following zone districts: CBD, central business district. 
( Ord. No. 1220 , § 5, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 15-68.3. - Operating within public right-of-way. 
Mobile food vendors may operate within the public right-of way provided they meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Mobile food vendor must be parked in a legal parking space and comply with all city and state parking restrictions; 
(b)  When operating within the public right-of-way mobile food vendor may only serve customers from an adjacent sidewalk or from the curbside of the vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 1220 , § 6, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 15-68.4. - Operating on private property. 
Mobile food vendors may operate on private property provided they meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Mobile food vendor operator must obtain prior written permission from the private property owner and must have available an original copy of such permission for inspection purposes at all times; 
(b)  Mobile food vendor must be parked on a paved surface or weather proof surface outside any designated fire lane and outside the corner visibility triangle, as that term is defined in section 5.02(j)(3) City of Cortez Land Use Code. 
( Ord. No. 1220 , § 7, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 15-68.5. - City-owned property. 
Mobile food vendors shall not operate on city property including city parking lots regardless of the zone district unless such authority to operate is provided for elsewhere in this Code or otherwise authorized by the city manager. This prohibition shall not apply to city-owned public right-of-way as provided for in section 15-68.3 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 1220 , § 8, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 15-68.6. - Littering and trash removal. 
Mobile food vendor operators must keep the sidewalks, roadways and other spaces adjacent to their business site or location clean and free of paper, peelings, trash, debris and other refuse of any kind generated from the operation of their business. All trash or debris accumulating within twenty-five feet of any mobile food vendor shall be collected by the operator and deposited in a trash container maintained by the operator in good condition and constructed of a non-corrodible and watertight material, sufficient to hold the refuse generated by the business. Such container and its contents shall be removed from the site by the operator whenever the mobile food vendor moves to another location or at the close of business. 
( Ord. No. 1220 , § 9, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 15-68.7. - Noise. 
Mobile food vendors must adhere to the provisions of Cortez City Code and Cortez Land Use Code now in effect or as may be amended from time to time regarding noisemaking devices. 
( Ord. No. 1220 , § 10, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 15-68.8. - Violations. 
A violation of this article shall be punishable as set forth in section 17-16A of the Cortez City Code now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 1220 , § 11, 3-28-17)  
Article X. - Merchant Police Force. 
 
Sec. 15-69. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. 
(a)  Merchant patrol. Any person who conducts or is engaged in the business of keeping surveillance upon any premises for the purposes of ascertaining that such premises are safe and secure, such surveillance being generally for the determination of suspicious circumstances which would indicate unlawful trespass or other illegal interference with such premises, including but not limited to lights being turned out, doors locked and windows intact. 
The term "merchant patrol" shall not include an individual or a firm duly licensed by the state as a detective agency; provided, that such individual or firm is carrying on detective business and not surveillance for security and notifies the chief of police of such detective business in advance thereof. The term shall not apply to individuals employed as watchmen or security guards for the purpose of maintaining surveillance upon any premises; provided, that such surveillance activity does not involve the use of public ways. 
(b)  Individual merchant patrolman. Any employee of a merchant patrol business who is engaged in surveillance and patrol work for his employer. 
(c)  Owner. Any individual owner or general partner. If a limited partner, owner shall mean any limited partner having a financial interest of twenty percent or greater. If a corporation, owner shall mean any stockholder holding twenty percent or more of the total outstanding stock of the corporation. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1.)  
Sec. 15-70. - License—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate and engage in the merchant patrol business as provided herein without first having obtained a license from the city. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-71. - Same—Application. 
Application for a business license to operate and engage in the business of merchant patrol within the city shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk upon such forms as may be provided by the city clerk for such purposes. The application shall set forth the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the applicant and the owner or owners of the merchant patrol business. 
(b)  The present occupation and occupations for the preceding five years of the applicant and each owner. 
(c)  The trade or other name, if any, under which the applicant and owner conduct business or propose to conduct business. 
(d)  The training and experience of the applicant in the merchant patrol business. 
(e)  A list of names and addresses of all other businesses in which any of the persons listed in subsections (a) and (b) above have an interest. 
(f)  Any other pertinent information requested by the city clerk for the purpose of administering the provisions of this article. Applications for licenses under the provisions of this section shall require an application fee as set by the council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 632, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-72. - Same—Affidavits required. 
There shall be submitted with the application for a merchant patrol license, individual affidavits setting out sufficient facts to prove the good character, competency and integrity of the applicant and of each owner with financial interest greater than twenty percent. Such affidavits shall list any previous police record. Each affidavit shall be supported by statements in writing from not less than five reputable citizens, each of whom shall certify that he has personally known the applicant or owner for a period of at least five years prior to the filing of the aforesaid affidavit and that he believes the applicant or owner is competent, honest and of good character and that he would recommend to the city manager that the applicant or owner be licensed to engage in the merchant patrol business. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 4.)  
Sec. 15-73. - Same—Issuance. 
The application for a merchant patrol business license as herein provided shall be forwarded to the city manager, who, if he shall find after investigation that the requirements set forth in this division have been met and that the character, competence and integrity of all those whose names which appear on the application for the license are such as to command the confidence of the public and to warrant belief that the business will operate lawfully, honestly, fairly and efficiently, shall thereupon direct the city clerk to issue and deliver to the applicant a merchant patrol business license. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 4.)  
Sec. 15-74. - Same—Fees; renewal. 
(a)  The annual license fees for persons engaged in the merchant patrol business as herein defined shall be as follows: 
(1)  Individuals ..... $10.00 per year 
(2)  Partnerships and corporations employing fewer than six agents or employees ..... 25.00 per year 
(3)  Partnerships and corporations employing six to nine agents or employees ..... 50.00 per year 
(4)  Partnerships or corporations employing ten or more agents or employees ..... 75.00 per year 
(b)  Renewal date of all licenses shall be the first day of July of each year. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 7.)  
Sec. 15-75. - Same—Insurance requirements. 
No license shall be issued until a merchant patrol business has secured such insurance as will protect itself and the city from claims of bodily injury, death or property damage which may arise from carrying on a merchant patrol business. The following insurance coverage shall be required in the name of the licensee with the city as a named insured: 
Public liability and property damage: 
Bodily injury: 
Each person ..... $100,000.00 
Each accident ..... 300,000.00 
Property damage: 
Each accident ..... $50,000.00 
Aggregate ..... 100,000.00 
Each such policy of insurance shall contain an endorsement to the effect that the insurance carrier shall notify the city clerk at least thirty days in advance of the effective date of any reduction or cancellation of the policy. The cancellation or reduction of insurance shall be the cause for automatic suspension of the license until the coverage shall be reinstated. All policies shall be kept in force for the period of the license. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 9.)  
Sec. 15-76. - Same—Indemnification of city. 
The licensee shall be responsible for any and all damage to property or injury to persons arising out of the exercise of the license and the licensee shall indemnify and save harmless the city and all of its officers, agents and employees from all suits, actions or claims of injuries received or sustained by any person or persons or property on account of the exercise of the license or of any act or omission of the licensee thereunder, his agents or employees, or on account of the failure of the licensee to observe this division and further to faithfully perform and honestly conduct all surveillance undertaken by the merchant patrol business and each individual merchant patrolman employed thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 9.)  
Sec. 15-77. - Permit—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall be an employee of a merchant patrol business to engage in surveillance and patrol work without first having obtained a permit from the city. No permit shall be issued to any person who has not reached the age of eighteen years. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 3.)  
Sec. 15-78. - Same—Application. 
Applications for individual merchant patrolmen permits shall be made to the city clerk upon such forms as may be provided by him for such purpose. The application shall set forth the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the applicant, and the places of residence two years previous to moving to his present address, and the length of time he has resided in the city. 
(b)  The age of the applicant. 
(c)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and if so, the pertinent facts relating thereto. 
(d)  The applicant's training and experience in surveillance and patrol work. 
(e)  Whether the applicant is licensed to operate motor vehicles and whether this license has ever been revoked or suspended in any jurisdiction and if so, for what cause. 
(f)  Two character references. 
(g)  Any other pertinent information requested by the city clerk for the purpose of administering the provisions of this section concerning individual merchant patrolmen permits. 
Applications for permits under the provisions of this section shall require an application fee as set by the council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 632, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-79. - Same—Affidavit required. 
There shall be submitted with the application an affidavit from the holder of the merchant patrol license by whom the applicant will be employed stating that he believes the applicant is competent, honest and of good character, and that the applicant is qualified to do basic surveillance work and the reasons upon which such statements are based. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 5.)  
Sec. 15-80. - Same—Issuance. 
The application for an individual merchant patrolman permit shall be forwarded to the chief of police, who, if he shall find after investigation that the requirements in this division have been met and that the character, competency and integrity of the applicant is such as to command the confidence of the public, shall thereupon issue and deliver to the applicant an individual merchant patrol man permit in the form as the city police department shall direct. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 5.)  
Sec. 15-81. - Same—Fees; renewal. 
(a)  The annual permit fee to be paid individually by or for each individual merchant patrolman shall be five dollars. 
(b)  Renewal date of each permit shall be the first day of July of each year. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 8.)  
Sec. 15-82. - License and permit—Assignment or transfer. 
No license or permit shall be assigned or transferred except upon approval by the city council. A sale or exchange of stock in excess of fifty percent of the total outstanding stock shall be deemed a transfer of the business license for the purposes of this article. Any change of ownership or any exchange of stock of ten percent or more shall be reported in writing to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 6.)  
Sec. 15-83. - Same—Suspension or revocation. 
The city council shall have the authority to revoke any license or permit issued under this division for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  The applicant or owner of the merchant patrol business or any individual merchant patrolman permittee employee thereunder has been convicted of a crime under the laws of the United States or under the laws of any territory of the United States. 
(b)  The applicant or owner of any merchant patrol business or individual merchant patrolman permittee employee thereunder has failed to report a crime to the police department or has failed to report circumstances to the police department which should have put him on notice that a crime has been committed. 
(c)  The applicant or owner of any merchant patrol business or individual merchant patrolman permittee employee thereunder has failed to comply with the requirements set forth in this section. 
(d)  The council finds and determines that the public interest requires a suspension or revocation of any license or permit. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 10.)  
Sec. 15-84. - Compliance with Code. 
Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting or allowing the applicant or owner of any merchant patrol business hereunder or any individual merchant patrolman employed by any merchant patrol business to violate or disobey any section of this Code or any duly enacted ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 11.)  
Sec. 15-85. - Badges, uniforms and equipment. 
All badges and uniforms and equipment used by individuals, partnerships or corporations engaged in the merchant patrol business shall be sufficiently distinctive to avoid confusion in the mind of the public with badges, uniforms and equipment of local law enforcement agencies. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 12.)  
Sec. 15-86. - Suspicious circumstances. 
It shall be the duty of every person engaged in merchant patrol work to report break-ins and suspicious circumstances to the police department as soon as possible and to cooperate with the police department in the investigation of the same whenever requested to do so, but such person shall not attempt to investigate suspicious circumstances himself. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 13.)  
Article XI. - Mobile Home Parks. 
 As to mobile homes and mobile home parks generally, see Ch. 12A of this Code. 
 
Sec. 15-87. - License—Required; fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a mobile home park within the city without first securing a license therefor. 
(b)  For each mobile home park license issued there shall be paid to the city an annual fee of five dollars. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 1.)  
Sec. 15-88. - Same—Transfer. 
A license issued pursuant to the above sections may be transferred upon application therefor being made to the city and approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 1.)  
Sec. 15-89. - Same—Term; renewal. 
A license for a mobile home park shall be valid for the calendar year in which it is issued. Such license shall be renewable upon written request on forms provided by the city prior to December 31 of any year upon payment of the fee prescribed in section 15-87. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 1.)  
Sec. 15-90. - Same—Revocation or suspension; penalty for violation. 
When it appears to the building inspector, the chief of the police department, the chief of the fire department or the health department that any person holding a license under this article has knowingly violated any of the provisions of this article or any of the health and safety regulations of the city, a written notice shall be served upon such licensee in person or by registered mail specifying wherein it is believed that he knowingly violated or may have violated this article or health or safety regulation and requiring him to appear before the city manager at a time specified therein not less than ten days after such service and show cause why such license should not be suspended or revoked. At such time the licensee and the health, fire, police and building inspection departments of the city may produce such evidence as may be relevant to determine whether the violation contained in the charge has been knowingly committed. If the city manager finds that such violation has not been committed knowingly or unknowingly, he shall so advise the licensee and the licensee shall be permitted to continue operation, but if the city manager finds from the evidence that such violation has been knowingly committed, he shall so advise the licensee and the city council who may suspend or revoke the license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate, continue to operate or offer to operate or occupy any mobile home or mobile home stand that has violated any of the provisions of this article until such violation has been corrected, or to operate, continue to operate or offer to operate a mobile home park if the license for such park has been revoked. In addition, any person violating any of the provisions of this article or suffering or permitting the same to be violated shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction may be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment not to exceed one hundred eighty days or both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any one violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and each day thereafter that prohibitive conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate and chargeable offense. 
(Ord. No. 482, §§ 1, 13; amended by memo 3519.)  
Article XII. - Transient Merchant. 
 
Sec. 15-91. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter "transient merchant" which includes any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee(s), is defined as follows: 
A vendor is to be considered transient if all the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Vendor does not have a city business street address, and 
(b)  Vendor does not have their services or products available to the public for a minimum of three consecutive months, and 
(c)  Vendor attempts to sell their service or product within the corporate limits of the city on a temporary basis (less than three consecutive months) and who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, property, and merchandise within said city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, trailer, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, public room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops, or any lot, public right-of-way or other place within the city for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise provided that such definition does not include any person, firm or corporation who, while occupying such temporary location does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. The person, firm or corporation so engaged is not relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(d)  The definitions herein stated for "transient merchants" shall not apply towards any resident of the city who wishes to dispose of personal property and thereby holds a sale at his residence for the disposal of the personal property, such sale being commonly known as a garage and/or yard sale. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 2; Ord. No. 620, § 1.)  
Sec. 15-92. - License required. 
It is unlawful for any transient merchant to engage in any such business within the city without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-93. - Exemptions from chapter provisions. 
The terms of this chapter do not apply to: 
(a)  Persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles; 
(b)  Acts of merchants or their employees in delivering goods in the regular course of business; 
(c)  Newspaper carriers; 
(d)  Colorado State licensed real estate brokers, salesmen and insurance agents; 
(e)  Employees of any public utility; 
(f)  Automobile salesmen; 
(g)  Milk and milk producers and salesmen; 
(h)  Dissemination of information without solicitation of money or other consideration; 
(i)  Any sale required by statute or court order; 
(j)  Any bona fide auction sale; 
(k)  Any person selling food or food products grown or raised in the state of Colorado; 
(l)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the City Code, any recognized local nonprofit organization or unincorporated association may, with the prior approval of the city council, sponsor temporary activities upon the public streets, alleys and other public grounds of the city, which encompass food goods grown, processed or created solely by the vendor, arts and crafts manufactured solely by the vendor, and other like activities. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 2; Ord. No. 858, § 1.)  
Sec. 15-94. - Application for license; investigation fee, license fee. 
Applicants for a license under this chapter shall file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city clerk at least thirty days in advance of the first sale for which a license is required hereunder, which shall give the following information: 
(a)  Name and physical description of applicant. 
(b)  Complete permanent home and local address of the applicant, and the local address from which proposed sales will be made. 
(c)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(d)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with the credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship. 
(e)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(f)  The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery. 
(g)  A recent photograph of the applicant which picture shall be approximately two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(h)  The names of at least two residents of the city, who will certify as to the applicant's character and business responsibility, or in lieu of the names and references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility. 
(i)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, other than traffic violations, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor, and a statement that the applicant has no objections to the release of any criminal history discovered upon investigation to the license issuing authority. 
(j)  The last cities or towns, not to exceed three, where applicant carried on business immediately preceding the date of application and the addresses from which such business was conducted in those municipalities. Proof that the merchant has permission of any property owner to conduct business upon private property. 
(k)  The applicant shows proof sufficient to the licensing authority that the applicant has a valid Colorado State Sales Tax License. 
At the time of filing the application, a fee of seventy-five dollars shall be paid to the city to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated therein. The license shall be issued by the city clerk upon payment of a fee of one hundred dollars per year, or ten dollars per day. An annual license shall be valid for one year from the date of issue. There shall be no application for renewals in the succeeding license period. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 3.)  
Sec. 15-95. - Investigation and issuance of license. 
Upon receipt of such application, it shall be referred to the chief of police who shall immediately institute such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good and shall endorse the application in the manner prescribed in this section within thirty days after it has been filed by the applicant with the city clerk. 
If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval and return the application to the city clerk, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the applicant his license. Such license shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall show the name, and the kinds of goods to be sold thereunder, and shall contain the wording, "The City of Cortez does not endorse the products of the Licensee," the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such licensed business. Each transient merchant must secure a personal license. Except as herein provided for agent licenses, no license shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it is issued. The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 4.)  
Sec. 15-96. - Agent license. 
Any person or corporation which obtains a license in its own name under the provisions of this chapter may thereafter obtain numbered agent licenses authorizing another person to act in its behalf. A person may engage in the business of a transient merchant pursuant to an agent license, upon the filing of an application with the city clerk, which application shall conform to the requirements of section 15-93. Such application shall be deemed to be approved unless the licensee is notified of its denial within seven days and shall remain in effect until the license expires, is revoked, or suspended, or a new application is submitted for transfer to another person. 
Any licensee who obtains agent licenses pursuant thereto shall be strictly responsible for his agent's full compliance with the laws of the city and any violation of ordinance by an agent shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the primary license as well as the agent license. For purposes of such suspension or revocation, it shall not be necessary to establish intent or knowledge on the part of the primary licensee. 
Any primary licensee may obtain agent licenses upon the payment of the license fee. Such agent licenses shall become effective only upon the submission of an application to operate thereunder and shall be transferable to another individual upon the filing of a new application signed by the primary licensee, the payment of a transfer fee of five dollars, and the surrender of the previous license. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-97. - Bond. 
Every applicant for license hereunder shall file with the city clerk cash or an adequate surety bond by a surety licensed to do business in the state, running to the city in the amount of one thousand dollars, if the license is issued for less than six months, and two thousand dollars if the license is issued for six months or longer, guaranteeing that the applicant shall comply fully with all the provisions and ordinances of the city and statutes of the state. If a bond is used, such bond shall provide that any person or persons aggrieved, including the city, shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorneys' fees and expenses on subject bond and the final judgment is obtained of such person or persons or the city. Action on such bond or the cash deposit may be brought by the person or persons aggrieved and for whose benefit among others the bond is given, but the surety may, by paying, pursuant to order of the court, the face amount of the bond to the clerk of the court in which suit is commenced be relieved without costs of all further liability. A separate bond in the above amount shall be posted for each agent license. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 5.)  
Sec. 15-98. - Expiration of license. 
All annual licenses under the provisions of this chapter shall expire at midnight, one year after the date of issue. Other than annual licenses shall expire at midnight on the date specified on the license. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 6.)  
Sec. 15-99. - Religious, charitable and special events permits. 
Any person or organization desiring to solicit donations of money or property or desiring to sell literature or merchandise from door to door or in any public place, for charitable purposes, shall be exempt from the provisions of sections 15-93 through 15-97; provided there is filed a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city clerk which shall give the following information: 
(a)  Name and purpose of the cause for which permit is sought. 
(b)  Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization. 
(c)  Period during which solicitation is to be carried on. 
(d)  Whether or not any commission, fees, wages, or emoluments are to be expended in connection with such solicitation and the amount thereof. 
Upon determining that such solicitation is in furtherance of charitable purposes, the city clerk shall issue a permit without charge to such person or organization to solicit in the city. 
The term "charitable purposes" shall mean any organization, campaign or project which: 
(a)  Has as its primary purpose the furtherance of science, education, philanthropy, religion, the arts, or any political campaign; and 
(b)  Which is not conducted for personal gain; and 
(c)  No portion of the net proceeds of solicitation for which, inures to the benefit of any individual or shareholder. 
Any organization to which contributions are deductible for federal income tax purposes, shall conclusively be deemed to be within this definition. 
Upon a resolution by the city council, the city may waive the requirements of sections 15-93 through 15-97 for persons, corporations or organizations selling or displaying their goods, wares, property, or merchandise at special events sponsored or endorsed by the city including, but not limited to, fairs and craft shows. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-100. - Loud noises and speaking devices. 
No licensee, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound amplifying device upon any of the public rights-of-way, parks or other public places of the city or upon private premises where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the public rights-of-way, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-101. - Use of streets. 
No licensee shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public rights-of-way, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location thereon, nor shall any be permitted to operate in a congested area where such operation might impede or inconvenience the public use of such public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-102. - Exhibition of license. 
Licensees are required to exhibit their certificate of license at the time of initial introduction to any person in the city for the purpose of consummating any transaction covered by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 7.)  
Sec. 15-103. - Duty of police to enforce. 
It shall be the duty of the police of the city to require any person peddling, soliciting, or canvassing, and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his license and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-104. - Police records. 
The chief of police shall report to the city clerk all convictions for violation of this chapter and the city clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of violation therein. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-105. - Revocation and suspension of license. 
Licenses and permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the city manager of the city after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(a)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement contained in the application for the license; 
(b)  Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement made in the course of carrying on his business as transient merchant; 
(c)  Any violation of this chapter; 
(d)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor; 
(e)  Conducting the business of transient merchant in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public; 
(f)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement in the application for a charitable solicitation permit; 
(g)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement to any person from whom charitable contributions are solicited; 
(h)  Failure to remove the display framework, signage, tables, and all other merchandising apparatus from the site when the merchant or merchant's representative is absent for a period in excess of twenty-four hours. 
Notice of hearing for the revocation of a license shall be given by the city clerk in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for hearing, or shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner as a summons at least three days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 2; Ord. No. 988, § 1.)  
Sec. 15-106. - Appeals to city manager. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the city clerk in the denial of a permit or license of this chapter may appeal to the city manager. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city manager within fourteen days after notice of the action complained of, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for an appeal. The city manager shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-107. - Reapplication for license. 
No licensee whose license has been revoked shall make further application until at least one year has elapsed since the last previous revocation. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 2.)  
Sec. 15-108. - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm, association, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, whether he does so wilfully or otherwise, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person, firm, association or corporation convicted of violating any of said provisions shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 2; amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 13, 9-25-12)  
Article XIII. - Flea Market. 
 
Sec. 15-109. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. 
Flea market. Any market, indoors or out-of-doors (where permitted), where new or used items are sold from individual locations, with each location being operated independently from the other locations. Items sold include, but are not limited to, household items, antiques, rare items, decorations, used books, and used magazines. 
Flea market operator. A person, firm, or corporation in the business of renting space or allocating space to flea market sellers. 
Flea market seller. Any person, firm, or corporation selling items or offering items for sale at a flea market. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15-110. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall operate the business of renting space or allocating space to flea market sellers without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15-111. - Application for license; license fee. 
Applicants for a license under this chapter shall file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city clerk at least fourteen days in advance of the first day of operation of the flea market for which a license is required hereunder, which shall give the following information: 
(a)  Name and physical description of applicant. 
(b)  Complete permanent home and local address of the applicant, and the local address from which the proposed flea market will be operated. 
(c)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the types of goods to be sold at the flea market. 
(d)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(e)  The names of at least two residents of the city who will certify as to the applicant's character and business responsibility, or in lieu of the names and references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility. 
(f)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, other than traffic violations, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor, and a statement that the applicant has no objections to the release of any criminal history discovered upon investigation to the license issuing authority. 
(g)  If applicable, the last cities or towns, not to exceed three, where applicant carried on business immediately preceding the date of application and the addresses from which such business was conducted in those municipalities. Proof that the merchant has permission of any property owner to conduct business upon private property. 
Only one license shall be required for each flea market, and the individual flea market sellers shall not be required to obtain a license under this section. 
At the time of filing the application, a fee in an amount to be set by city council in its annual fee resolution shall be paid by the applicant to the city clerk. An annual license shall be valid for one year from the date of issue. There shall be no application required for renewals in the succeeding license period. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).) 
( Ord. No. 1191, 9-9-14 )  
Sec. 15-112. - Investigation and issuance of license. 
Upon receipt of such application, it shall be referred to the chief of police who shall immediately institute such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good and shall endorse the application in the manner prescribed in this section within fourteen days after it has been filed by the applicant with the city clerk. 
If, as a result of the such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval and return the application to the city clerk, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee and bond, as provided for in Section 15-113, deliver to the applicant his license. Such license shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall show the name, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number, and shall contain the wording, "The City of Cortez does not endorse the products of the Licensee." No license shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it is issued. The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15-113. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1191 , adopted September 9, 2014, repealed § 15-113, which pertained to bond and derived from Ord. No. 741.  
Sec. 15-114. - Expiration of license. 
Annual licenses under the provisions of this chapter shall expire at midnight, one year after the date of issue. Other than annual licenses shall expire at midnight on the date specified on the license. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15-115. - Religious, charitable and special events permits. 
Any person or organization desiring to establish a flea market for charitable purposes shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections 15-109 through 15-113; provided there is filed a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city clerk which shall give the following information: 
(a)  Name and purpose of the cause for which permit is sought; 
(b)  Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization; 
(c)  Period during which flea market is to be carried on; and 
(d)  Whether or not any commissions, fees, wages, or emoluments are to be expended in connection with such flea market and the amount thereof. 
Upon determining that such solicitation is in furtherance of charitable purposes, the city clerk shall issue a permit without charge to such person or organization to operate a flea market. 
The term "charitable purposes" shall mean any organization, campaign, or project which: 
(a)  Has as its primary purpose the furtherance of science, education, philanthropy, religion, the arts, or any political campaign; and 
(b)  Which is not conducted for personal gain; and 
(c)  No portion of the net proceeds of solicitation for which inures to the benefit of any individual or shareholder. 
Any organization to which contributions are deductible for federal income tax purposes shall conclusively be deemed to be within this definition. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15-116. - Records to be kept by licensee. 
Each person required by this chapter to obtain a license shall keep accurate records of the names and addresses of each flea market seller, together with a brief description of the type or types of merchandise offered for sale by that seller. These records shall be made available to the chief of police upon his request. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15-117. - Secondhand stores excepted. 
No person, firm or corporation having a license as a secondhand store shall be required to obtain a license under this chapter for the same business location. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15-118. - More than one market. 
Any person, firm or corporation renting or allocating space to flea market sellers in more than one place of business shall be required to obtain a license for each place of business, provided that one license shall be adequate for locations that are on the same lot, adjacent lots, or lots separated only by an alley. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15-119. - Unlawful transactions. 
No person shall sell or offer for sale at any flea market any goods known to such person to be stolen. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15-120. - Purchases from children. 
No flea market seller shall purchase any used household item, antique or used article whatsoever from any person under the age of eighteen years, unless such person is accompanied by the person's parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15-121. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1191 , adopted September 9, 2014, repealed § 15-121, which pertained to sales tax license required and derived from Ord. No. 741.  
Sec. 15-122. - Exhibition of license. 
Licensees are required to exhibit their certificate of license at all times. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15-123. - Duty of police to enforce. 
It shall be the duty of the police of the city to require any flea market operator who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his license and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15-124. - Police records. 
The chief of police shall report to the city clerk all convictions for violation of this chapter and the city clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of violation therein. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15-125. - Revocation and suspension of license. 
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the city manager of the city after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(a)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement contained in the application for the license; 
(b)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement made in the course of carrying on the flea market; 
(c)  Any violation of this chapter; 
(d)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor; 
(e)  Conducting the flea market in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public; 
(f)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement in the application for a charitable permit. 
Notice of hearing for the revocation of a license shall be given by the city clerk in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Said notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for hearing, or shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner as a summons at least three days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15-126. - Appeals to city manager. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the city clerk in the denial of a permit or license of this chapter may appeal to the city manager within fourteen days after notice of the action complained of, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for an appeal. The city manager shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15-127. - Reapplication for a license. 
No licensee whose license has been revoked shall make further application until at least one year has elapsed since the last previous revocation. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part).)  
Sec. 15-128. - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm, association, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, whether he does so wilfully or otherwise, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person, firm, association or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code Section 17-16A as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3 (part); amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 14, 9-25-12)  
Article XIV. - Reserved. 
 
§§ 15-129 to 15-299. - Reserved.  
Article XV. - Medical Marijuana Businesses.  
Division 1. - License. 
 
Sec. 15-300. - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person to own or operate a medical marijuana business, as that term is defined in the Cortez Land Use Code, or Cortez City Code without first obtaining a license as provided in this article. The following two types of business operations as defined in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code C.R.S. 12-43.3-101 et seq. may be licensed hereunder: Medical marijuana centers and medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing. 
(Ord. No. 1164, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 15-301. - Application; term fee. 
Any person operating or proposing to operate a medical marijuana business shall first procure from the city clerk a medical marijuana business license, which the clerk shall issue in accordance with the following procedures: 
(a)  A person seeking to obtain a license pursuant to this article shall submit an application to the city clerk. The form of the application shall be provided by the city clerk. 
(b)  A license issued pursuant to this section does not eliminate the need for the licensee to obtain other required licenses and permits related to the operation of the medical marijuana business, including, without limitation, any development approval required by the land use code; a sales tax license; and a building, mechanical, plumbing, or electrical permit. 
(c)  An application for a license under this article shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A completed state and local licensing authority application forms; 
(2)  A completed set of individual history form, including a set of the fingerprints for the applicant and for any person owning ten percent or more of the medical marijuana business. 
(3)  The street address of the proposed medical marijuana business; 
(4)  If the applicant is not the owner of the proposed location of the medical marijuana business, a notarized statement from the owner of such property authorizing the submission of the application; 
(5)  An acknowledgement by the applicant that the applicant and its owners, officers, and employees may be subject to prosecution under federal laws relating to the possession and distribution of controlled substances, that the city of Cortez accepts no legal liability in connection with the approval and subsequent operation of the medical marijuana business; and that the application and documents submitted for other approvals relating to the medical marijuana business operation are subject to disclosure in accordance with the Colorado Open Records Act. 
(6)  A complete and accurate list of all owners, officers, managers, and employees of the medical marijuana business and of all persons having a direct or indirect financial interest, and the nature of such interest in the medical marijuana business, including names and addresses for such persons. 
(7)  Plans and specifications for the interior of the building in which the medical marijuana business is located. If the building is not in existence, the applications shall file a plot plan and detailed sketch for the interior and submit an architect's drawing of the building to be constructed. 
(8)  Evidence that the applicant is, or will be, entitled to possession of the premise for which the application is made under a lease, rental agreement, or other arranged for possession of the premises, or by virtue of ownership of the premises. 
(d)  The applicant shall pay to the city a non-refundable application fee when the application is filed. The purpose of the fee is to cover the administrative and other costs of processing the application. A separate license fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the local license. These fees shall be initially set by resolution and each year hereafter they shall be reviewed and reset in the annual city fee resolution enacted as part of the annual budget process. 
The city shall not accept or act upon an application for a medical marijuana business license if the business application concerns a particular location that is the same as or within one thousand five hundred feet of a location for which, within the two years immediately preceding date of the application, the city or the state licensing authority denied an application for the same class of license due to the nature of the use or other concern related to the location. 
(Ord. No. 1164, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 15-302. - Renewal fee. 
Each license issued pursuant to this section shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed as provided in this section. 
(a)  An application for renewal shall be made to the city clerk not less than forty-five days prior to the date of expiration and shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount to be initially set by resolution and each year hereafter they shall be reviewed and reset in the annual city fee resolution enacted as part of the annual budget process. A licensing renewal fee shall also be collected in an amount to be initially set by resolution and each year hereafter they shall be reviewed and reset in the annual city fee resolution enacted as part of the annual budget process. The city clerk will accept late applications not more than ninety days after the date of expiration upon a payment of a five hundred dollars late application fee which shall be in addition to the renewal fee. The city clerk shall not in any circumstances accept renewal applications more than ninety days after the date of expiration. 
(b)  The license shall be renewed by the city clerk unless it appears to the city clerk that grounds exist to deny the renewal application, in which case the city clerk shall refer the application to the city council for review at a public hearing. The city clerk shall rely on section 15-306 in determining whether to renew a license. The city clerk shall refer the renewal application for public hearings only if the licensee has had complaints filed against it, the licensee has a history of violations, or there are allegations against the licensee that would constitute good cause for denial of a license as defined in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. The city council shall rely on section 15-306 in determining whether to renew a license. 
(c)  A criminal history record of the applicant and all employees of applicant shall be provided to the city clerk as part of the renewal application. 
(Ord. No. 1164, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 15-303. - Investigation of applicant. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this article, the city clerk shall transmit copies of the application to the police department, the city manager, the planning and building department, and any other person or agency who the city clerk determines should participate in the review of the application. The city or any of its departments or officials may visit and inspect the plant or property in which the applicant proposes to conduct business and investigate the fitness to conduct such business of any person, or the officers and directors of any corporation, or the partners of any partnership applying for a license. 
In investigating the fitness of the applicant, the city may obtain criminal history record information furnished by a criminal justice agency subject to any restrictions imposed by such agency. In the event the city takes into consideration information concerning the applicant's criminal history record, the city shall also consider any information provided by the applicant regarding such criminal history record, including, but not limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, character references, and educational achievements, especially those items pertaining to the period of time between the applicant's last criminal conviction and the consideration of the application for a license. 
Not less than five days prior to the date of the public hearing on a license application or, in the event of an application for which no public hearing is scheduled, not less than five days prior to the decision to approve or deny an application, the city clerk shall make known the findings of the investigation in writing to the applicant and other parties of interest. 
(Ord. No. 1164, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 15-304. - Public hearings; notice; publication. 
(a)  Public hearings before the city council or a hearings officer appointed by the city council shall be required for the following types of applications and determinations: 
(1)  Applications for a medical marijuana center license or for the relocation of such license, shall be reviewed by the city council; 
(2)  Renewal applications when the city clerk determines grounds exist for denial per section 15-302(b) of this article shall be reviewed by the city council; 
(3)  Suspensions or revocations of any license, shall be heard by the city council. 
(b)  The following types of licenses may be approved by the city clerk: 
(1)  All renewal applications, unless the city clerk determines grounds exist for denial per section 15-302(b) of this article; 
(c)  In the event an application is scheduled for a public hearing the city clerk shall post and publish public notice thereof not less than ten days prior to the hearing. 
(1)  Public notice given by posting shall include a sign of suitable material, not less than twenty-two inches wide and twenty-six inches high, composed of letters not less than one inch in height and stating the type of license applied for, the nature of the hearing, the date of the application, the date of the hearing, the name and address of the applicant, and such other information as may be required to fully apprise the public of the nature of the application. In the case of a new license application, the sign shall contain the names and addresses of the officers, directors, or manager of the facility to be licensed. The sign shall be placed on the subject premises in a location that is conspicuous and plainly visible to the general public. 
(2)  Public notice given by publication shall contain the same information as that required for signs. 
(Ord. No. 1164, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 15-305. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  Any person whose criminal history indicates the person is not of good moral character; 
(2)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors, or stockholders whose criminal histories indicate such person is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any partnership, association, or company, any of whose officers, or any of whose members whose criminal histories indicate such person is not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any person employing, assisted by, or financed in whole or in part by any other person whose criminal history indicates such person is not of good moral character, or who is not a resident of Colorado. 
(5)  Any cooperative association, any of whose officers, directors, or stockholders or members whose criminal histories indicate that such person is not of good moral character. 
(6)  A licensed physician making patient recommendations; 
(7)  A person under twenty-one years of age; 
(8)  A person licensed pursuant to this article who, during a period of licensure, or who, at the time of application, has failed to: 
(A)  Provide surety bond or file any tax return with a taxing agency, 
(B)  Pay any taxes interest, or penalties due, 
(C)  Pay any judgments due to a government agency, 
(D)  Stay out of default on a government issued student loan, 
(E)  Pay child support, or 
(F)  Remedy an outstanding delinquency for taxes owed, an outstanding delinquency for judgments owed to a government agency; or an outstanding delinquency for child support; 
(9)  A person who has discharged a sentence in the five years immediately preceding the application date for a conviction of a felony or a person who at any time has been convicted of a felony pursuant to any state or federal law regarding the possession, distribution or use of a controlled substance; 
(10)  A person who employs another person at a medical marijuana facility who has not passed a criminal history record check; 
(11)  A sheriff, deputy sheriff, police officer, or prosecuting officer, or an officer or employee of the state licensing authority or a local licensing authority; 
(12)  A person whose authority to be a primary caregiver as defined in C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106(2) has been revoked by the state health agency; 
(13)  A person for a license for a location that is currently licensed as a retail food establishment or wholesale food establishment; or 
(14)  A person who has not been a resident of Colorado for at least two years prior to the date of the person's application. 
(b)  In making a determination as to good moral character or when considering the conviction of a crime, the city council shall be governed by the provisions of C.R.S. § 24-5-101. 
(Ord. No. 1164, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 15-306. - Issuance or denial of license. 
(a)  In determining whether to issue a license under this section the city council may consider the following: 
(1)  Whether the application is complete and signed by the applicant; 
(2)  Whether the applicant has paid the application fee; 
(3)  Whether the application complies with all the requirements of this article; 
(4)  Whether the application contains any material misrepresentations; 
(5)  Whether the proposed medical marijuana business complies with applicable zoning regulations. The city council shall make specific findings of fact with respect to whether the building in which the proposed medical marijuana business will be located conforms to the distance requirements set forth in the Cortez City and Land Use Codes; 
(6)  The facts and evidence adduced as a result of its investigation; 
(7)  Any other facts pertinent to the type of license for which application has been made, including the number, type and availability of medical marijuana outlets located in or near the premises under consideration; and 
(8)  In the case of an application for a second license, after considering the effect on competition of granting or denying the additional license, that the issuance of a second license will not have the effect of restraining competition. 
(b)  The city council shall deny the license application if the application fails for good cause as defined in C.R.S. § 12-43.3-104(1). 
(c)  The city council may impose reasonable conditions upon any license issued pursuant to this article. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Within thirty days after the public hearing or completion of the application investigation, the city shall issue its decision approving or denying the application. The decision shall be in writing, shall state the reasons for the decision, and a copy of the decision shall be mailed by certified mail to the applicant at the address shown on the application. 
(f)  The city shall not issue a license until the building in which the business to be conducted is ready for occupancy and has been inspected for compliance with the architect's drawing and the plot plan and detailed sketch for the interior of the building submitted with the application. 
(g)  After approval, the city shall notify the state licensing authority of such approval. 
(Ord. No. 1164, 3-13-12; Ord. No. 1168, 7-24-12)  
Sec. 15-307. - Contents and display of license. 
The licensee shall post the license in a conspicuous location at the medical marijuana business. A medical marijuana center license shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The name of the licensee; 
(b)  The date of issuance of the license; 
(c)  The street address at which the licensee is authorized to operate the medical marijuana business; 
(d)  Any conditions of approval imposed upon the license by the city council; 
(e)  The date of expiration of the license; and 
(f)  The license shall be signed by the applicant and the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1164, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 15-308. - Transfer/termination. 
A license holder wishing to transfer ownership of the medical marijuana business shall apply for such a transfer on forms prepared and furnished by the state licensing authority. In determining whether to permit a transfer of ownership, the city shall consider only the provisions of this article, of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, and any rules promulgated by the state licensing authority. 
(Ord. No. 1164, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 15-309. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A license issued pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked by the city council, or the hearings officer appointed by the city council for the purpose, after a hearing for the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or a false statement of material fact contained in the permit application; 
(2)  Any violation of city ordinance or state law pertaining to the operation of a medical marijuana business including regulations adopted by the state licensing authority or the possession or distribution of marijuana; 
(3)  A violation of any of the terms and conditions of the license; 
(4)  A violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
(b)  In deciding whether a license should be suspended or revoked, and in deciding whether to impose conditions in the event of a suspension, the city council, or the hearings officer appointed by the city council, shall consider: 
(1)  The nature and severity of the violation; 
(2)  Corrective action, if any, taken by the licensee; 
(3)  Prior violation(s), if any, by the licensee; 
(4)  The likelihood of recurrence of the violation; 
(5)  The circumstances of the violation; 
(6)  Whether the violation was willful; and 
(7)  Previous sanctions, if any, imposed on the licensee. 
(c)  The provisions of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code shall govern proceedings for the suspension or revocation of a license issued. 
City council may adopt its own codes or ordinances governing the proceedings for the suspension or revocation of license issued under this article. 
(d)  City council or the hearings officer appointed by city council may impose a fine in lieu of a suspension in accordance with the provisions of C.R.S. § 12-43.3-601(3). 
(Ord. No. 1164, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 15-310. - Change of location. 
(a)  A licensee may move his or her permanent location to another location in the city, but it shall be unlawful to cultivate, manufacture, distribute, or sell medical marijuana at any such place until permission to do so is granted by the city and the state licensing authority. 
(b)  In permitting a change of location, the city shall consider all reasonable restrictions that are or may be placed on the new location and any such new location shall comply with all requirements of this article, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, and rules promulgated by the state licensing authority. 
(c)  The City shall not authorize a change of location until the applicant produces a license issued and granted by the state licensing authority covering the period for which the change of location is sought. 
(Ord. No. 1164, 3-13-12)  
Division 2. - General Requirements. 
 
Sec. 15-311. - Operational requirements. 
Medical marijuana centers shall comply with the following operational requirements: 
(a)  Medical marijuana centers shall provide clients contact information for local drug abuse treatment centers as well as educational materials regarding the hazards of substance abuse. 
(b)  Medical marijuana centers shall operate only during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(c)  Medical marijuana businesses shall provide adequate security on the business premises, which shall include the following: 
(1)  Twenty-four-hour security surveillance cameras to facilitate the investigation of crimes and to include video and audio capabilities, with a redundant power supply and circuitry to monitor entrances/exits and parking lot along with the interior and exterior of the premises. 
Copies of all security audio or video should be retained as set forth in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Enforcement Division Rules, Section 10, Security Requirements effective 7-1-11 and as may be amended from time to time. 
The business owner may, but shall not be required to, provide segments of surveillance footage upon request to law enforcement officers investigating crimes committed against the business or its patients. The business owner shall not be required to produce surveillance footage disclosing the identity of business patients and may edit surveillance footage to protect patient privacy. The resolution of these color cameras will be of sufficient quality to allow for the identification of the subject's facial features, in all lighting conditions, in the event of a crime. 
(2)  A burglar alarm system that is professionally monitored and maintained in good working order. 
(3)  A locking safe permanently affixed to the premises suitable for storage of the centers' inventory and cash; all to be stored during non-business hours; live plants being cultivated shall not be deemed inventory requiring storage in a locked safe. 
(4)  Exterior lighting that illuminates the exterior walls of the business and that complies with the lighting code set forth in the Cortez Land Use Code. 
(d)  No firearms, knives, or other weapons shall be permitted in a marijuana center except those carried by sworn peace officers. 
(e)  Marijuana shall not be consumed or used on the premises of a medical marijuana center and it shall be unlawful for a medical marijuana licensee to allow medical marijuana to be consumed on its premises. In the case of a medical marijuana business located in a structure with a legal secondary unit or other legal dwelling unit, the dwelling unit shall not be considered part of the medical marijuana business premises if access to the dwelling unit is prohibited to the medical marijuana business customers. 
(f)  Medical marijuana centers shall comply with the provisions of Article XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution and with any other relevant Colorado statute or administrative regulation. The operator of a medical marijuana business shall provide evidence of said compliance and shall permit the inspection of the premises upon request of any sworn peace officer in the employ of the city of Cortez Police Department. Inspection of the premises shall be limited to determining the quantity of marijuana and marijuana plants present on the premises and obtaining written evidence of the licensee's authority to possess such quantity of medical marijuana. Registry identification cards with patient names and other identifying information redacted shall be deemed satisfactory written evidence if the registry identification cards' serial number(s) are not redacted. In the event the medical marijuana center serves patients who have applied for a registry identification card thirty-five days or more prior to the inspection and who have not received such card, the operator may produce the patient's application form with the patient's name and identifying information redacted along with proof of mailing the form to the medical marijuana registry. In the event a patient has changed the caregiver designation on the registry identification card, the operator may produce the patient's change of caregiver form with the patient's name and identifying information redacted along with proof of mailing the form to the medical marijuana registry. The operator of a medical marijuana business shall not be required to disclose patient name(s) or other identifying information except as required by a duly issued court order or warrant. 
(g)  Medical marijuana centers shall sell or distribute only marijuana lawfully grown in compliance with Article XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, rules promulgated by the state licensing authority, and with any other relevant Colorado statute or administrative regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1164, 3-13-12; Ord. No. 1215 , 7-26-16)  
Sec. 15-312. - Distance requirements. 
(a) All medical marijuana businesses or retail marijuana establishments shall be at least one thousand five hundred feet from any school, the principal campus of any college, university, or seminary, residential child care facility, or other medical or retail marijuana establishment. 
(b)  Any distance to be computed regarding the distances between medical marijuana licensees, marijuana retail licensees and other establishments where a distance requirement has been established shall be measured as follows: 
Said distance shall be computed by direct measurement from the nearest property line of the land used for non-licensee purposes the main entry of the building in which medical marijuana or retail marijuana are to be sold, using a route of direct pedestrian access measured as a person would walk safely and properly without trespassing, with right angles at crossings and with the observance of traffic regulations and lights. 
(Ord. No. 1164, 3-13-12; Ord. No. 1165, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 1197, 11-25-14 ; Ord. No. 1207 , 2-23-16)  
Sec. 15-313. - Zoning. 
All marijuana businesses shall be located only in those zoning districts designated for medical marijuana businesses in the Cortez Land Use Code. 
(Ord. No. 1164, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 15-314. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Section 15 Article XV is guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of up to five hundred dollars and a jail sentence of up to one year or both a fine and jail sentence as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16-A now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
Every day that a violation of this section and article continues shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 1164, 3-13-12)  
§§ 15-315 to 15-399. - Reserved.  
Article XVI. - Cortez Retail Marijuana Code. 
 
Sec. 15-400. - Purpose and Legislative Intent. 
The purpose of this article XVI is to exercise the authority of the city of Cortez to allow state-licensed marijuana establishments to exist in Cortez in accordance with applicable state laws and regulations as well as the additional local approval requirements and other restrictions set forth herein. This article is adopted pursuant to the aforesaid constitutional and statutory authority and the city's plenary authority as a home rule city to preserve the public health, safety and general welfare. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-401. - Defined terms. 
The definitions set forth in subsection 16(2) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution and the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, C.R.S. § 12-43.4-103, as amended, shall apply to this article XVI. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-402. - Effective date; applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be effective upon publication after final passage, and shall govern local approval of all applications for state licensing of any retail marijuana establishment in the city of Cortez on and after that date. 
(b)  Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, this article shall not affect or apply to the operation or licensing of businesses under the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, C.R.S. 12-43.3-101 et seq., and the city of Cortez ordinances relating to medical marijuana in the Cortez City Code (hereafter "Cortez Medical Marijuana Code") and in the city of Cortez Land Use Code. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-403. - Transition provisions. 
(a)  The applicant for licensing of a retail marijuana establishment is currently operating in good standing a licensed medical marijuana center, a medical marijuana optional premises cultivation operation, or a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing operation; is currently licensed under both the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and the Cortez Medical Marijuana Code at article XV Sec 15-300 et seq. and the city of Cortez Land Use Code; and the applicant proposes to surrender the existing medical marijuana license upon receipt of a retail marijuana license, thereby entirely converting an existing medical marijuana establishment into a retail marijuana establishment. 
(b)  The applicant proposes to retain the existing medical marijuana license while locating a retail marijuana establishment under common ownership at the same location to the extent allowed by the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, applicable state rules and regulations and city ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(c)  Prior to January 1, 2015, any person who obtains a transfer of ownership of an existing medical marijuana business located in the City of Cortez that is duly licensed under both the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and the Cortez Medical Marijuana Code may qualify for licensing in the City of Cortez as allowed by subsection (1) of this section and section 15-416 of this chapter. 
(d)  Any person who obtains a change of location of an existing medical marijuana business located in the city of Cortez that is duly licensed under both the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and the Cortez Medical Marijuana Code may qualify for licensing of a retail marijuana establishment in the new location as allowed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  On and after January 1, 2015, any person who otherwise qualifies for licensing under applicable state and city laws may apply for approval of a retail marijuana establishment in the city of Cortez, regardless of whether or not the applicant is the owner of an existing medical marijuana business in the city. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-404. - Local licensing authority. 
The city council of the city of Cortez is hereby designated to act as the local licensing authority for the city. Under any and all circumstances in which state law requires communication to the city by the state licensing authority or any other state agency in regard to the licensing of retail marijuana establishments by the state, or in which state law requires any review or approval by the city of any action taken by the state licensing authority, the exclusive authority for receiving such communications shall be exercised by the city clerk. Authority for granting such approvals shall be exercised by the city council. Council may appoint a hearing officer to hear certain matters and exercise enforcement powers as council deems appropriate. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-405. - Relationship to Colorado Retail Marijuana Code; other laws. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, this article incorporates the requirements and procedures set forth in the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this article and the provisions of the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code or any other applicable state or local law, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-406. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any retail marijuana establishment in the city without an approval duly issued therefor under this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any form of business or commerce involving the cultivation, processing, manufacturing, storage, sale, distribution or consumption of marijuana other than those forms of businesses and commerce that are expressly contemplated by Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution, the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, Section 14 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution or the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to sell, serve, give away, dispose of, exchange, distribute, deliver, or to permit the sale, service, gift, disposal, exchange, distribution, or delivery, of marijuana or marijuana derivatives in any form to any person under the age of twenty-one years. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to manufacture hash oil by any method in the city of Cortez. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-407. - Classes of licenses authorized. 
For the purpose of regulating the cultivation, manufacture, testing, distribution, offering for sale, and sale of retail marijuana, the local licensing authority, upon application in the prescribed form made to the city clerk, may issue and grant to the applicant a certificate of local approval from any of the following classes, and the city hereby authorizes issuance of the licenses of the following classes by the state licensing authority in locations in the city, subject to the provisions and restrictions provided in this article: 
(a)  Retail marijuana store; 
(b)  Retail marijuana cultivation facility; 
(c)  Retail marijuana testing facility. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-408. - Screening and response to state license applications. 
Upon receipt of notice from the state licensing authority of any application for a license under the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, the city clerk shall: 
(a)  Initially determine, in consultation with the director of the planning and building department, whether or not the proposed location complies with any and all zoning and land use laws of the city, and any and all restrictions on location of retail marijuana establishments set forth in this article or the city of Cortez Land Use Code. If the city clerk makes an initial determination that the proposed license would be in violation of any zoning law or other restriction on location set forth in city laws, the city clerk shall, no later than forty-five days from the date the application was originally received by the city clerk, notify the state licensing authority in writing that the application is disapproved by the city. The failure of the city clerk to make such a determination upon the initial review of a state license application shall not preclude the local licensing authority from later determining that a proposed license is in violation of city zoning laws or any other restriction on location set forth in city laws, and disapprove the issuance of a state license or city approval on this basis. 
(b)  For any application that is not disapproved as provided in subsection (a), the city clerk shall notify the state licensing authority in writing that the city's further consideration of the application is subject to a local approval process, and that the city's ultimate decision to approve or disapprove the issuance of the state license in Cortez is subject to the completion of the local approval process as set forth in this article, after which the city will notify the state licensing authority in writing of whether or not the retail marijuana establishment proposed in the application has or has not been approved by the city. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-409. - Application; fee. 
Any person operating or proposing to own or operate a retail marijuana establishment shall first procure from the city clerk a retail marijuana establishment approval, which the city clerk shall issue in accordance with the following procedures: 
(a)  A person seeking to obtain a state license pursuant to this article shall submit an application for local approval to the city clerk. The form of the application shall be provided by the city clerk. 
(b)  An approval issued pursuant to this chapter does not eliminate the need for the licensee to obtain other required licenses and permits related to the operation of the retail marijuana establishment, including, without limitation, any development approval required by the city of Cortez Land Use Code; a sales tax license; and a building, mechanical, plumbing or electrical permit. 
(c)  An application for a license approval under this article shall contain all information required by the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code and such additional documents as may be required in the discretion of the city clerk, including without limitation, the following information and documents: 
(1)  A completed local approval application form; 
(2)  A completed individual history form, including a set of fingerprints, for the applicant and/or for any person owning ten percent or more of the retail marijuana establishment; 
(3)  The street address of the proposed retail marijuana establishment; 
(4)  If the applicant is not the owner of the proposed location of the retail marijuana establishment, a notarized statement from the owner of such property authorizing the submission of the application; 
(5)  An acknowledgement by the applicant that the applicant and its owners, officers, and employees may be subject to prosecution under federal laws relating to the possession and distribution of controlled substances, that the city of Cortez accepts no legal liability in connection with the approval and subsequent operation of the retail marijuana establishment, and that the application and documents submitted for other approvals relating to retail marijuana establishment are subject to disclosure in accordance with the Colorado Open Records Act; 
(6)  A complete and accurate list of all owners, officers, managers, and employees of the retail marijuana establishment and of all persons having a direct or indirect financial interest, and the nature of such interest, in the retail marijuana establishment, including names and addresses for such persons; 
(7)  Plans and specifications for the interior of the building in which the retail marijuana establishment is to be located. If the building is not in existence, the applicant shall file a plot plan and detailed sketch for the floor plan of the interior and submit a design professional prepared set of drawings of the building to be constructed; in accordance with all city and state codes, ordinances, rules or regulations now in effect or as may be adopted or amended from time to time. 
(8)  Evidence that the applicant is, or will be, entitled to possession of the premises for which application is made under a lease, rental agreement, or other arranged for possession of the premises, or by virtue of ownership of the premises. 
(d)  The applicant shall pay to the city an operating fee when the application for local approval is filed. The city council shall determine the amount of the fee annually as part of the budget process and shall divide it into application and enforcement components. The enforcement component of the fee shall be refunded in the event the application is denied. The purpose of the fee is to cover the routine administrative costs of processing the application and routine inspections required in enforcing the requirements of this chapter and other applicable Cortez City Code, City of Cortez Land Use Code (city codes including but not limited to building, plumbing, electrical and fire codes), all other applicable state statutes, rules and regulations and now in effect or as may be adopted or amended from time to time. The payment of this operating fee shall in no way limit the city's ability to charge each applicant additionally for the cost of any future inspection and/or enforcement. 
The city shall bill the licensee for any and all costs of inspection not deemed routine, that are due to the licensee's failure to meet any and all applicable state statutes, city ordinances, state or city codes, rules or regulations now in effect or as may be adopted or amended from time to time. 
(e)  The city clerk shall not accept or act upon an application for a retail marijuana establishment if the application concerns a particular location that is the same as or within one thousand five hundred feet of a location for which, within the two years immediately preceding date of the application, the local or the state licensing authority denied an application for the same class of license due to the nature of the use or other concern related to the location. 
(f)  The Cortez City Clerk shall not accept or act upon an application for a retail marijuana license if the proposed location fails to comply with the distance requirements as set forth in section 15-312, distance requirements, now in effect or as may be amended from time to time, excepting when an operator/owner has a licensed dispensary and retail marijuana establishment at the same physical location whether located within or outside the corporate limits of the city. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 ; Ord. No. 1197, 11-25-14 )  
Sec. 15-410. - Renewal; fee. 
Each local approval issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed as provided in this section. 
(a)  An existing retail marijuana operation shall file an application for renewal with the city clerk not less than forty-five days prior to the date of expiration. The application shall be accompanied by a renewal operating fee in an amount set by the city council. The city clerk will accept late applications not more than ninety days after the date of expiration upon payment of a five hundred dollar late application of approval fee. The city clerk will not in any circumstances accept renewal applications more than ninety days after the date of expiration. 
(b)  The approval may be renewed by as a council action item unless it appears to the city clerk or other city staff that grounds exist to deny the renewal application, in which case the city clerk shall refer the application to the city council for review at a public hearing. 
(c)  No local approval shall be issued until the applicant produces a license issued and granted by the state licensing authority covering the period for which the renewal is sought. 
(d)  No approval shall be issued unless and until a renewal applicant is current in payment of all city sales tax, other fees assessed in accordance with section 15-409 above and any other fees assessed upon applicant by the city. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-411. - Investigation of applicant. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for approval under this article, the city clerk shall transmit copies of the application and attachments to the chief of police, the city manager, the planning and building department, the city attorney, and any other person or agency who the city clerk determines should participate in the review of the application. The city or any of its departments or officials may visit and inspect the plant or property in which the applicant proposes to conduct business and investigate the fitness to conduct such business of any person, or the officers and directors of any corporation, or the partners of any partnership applying for a license. 
(b)  In investigating the fitness of the applicant, the city shall obtain criminal history record information furnished by a criminal justice agency subject to any restrictions imposed by such agency. In the event the local licensing authority takes into consideration information concerning the applicant's criminal history record, the local licensing authority shall also consider any information provided by the applicant regarding such criminal history record, including, but not limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, character references, and educational achievements, especially those items pertaining to the period of time between the applicant's last criminal conviction and the consideration of the application for a license. 
(c)  Not less than five days prior to the date of the public hearing on a license application or, in the event of an application for which no public hearing is scheduled, not less than five days prior to the decision whether to approve or deny an application, the city clerk shall make known the findings of the investigation in writing to the applicant and other parties of interest. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-412. - Hearings; notice; publication. 
(a)  Public hearings before the city council or a hearing officer appointed by the city council shall be required for the following types of applications and determinations: 
(1)  Applications for a retail marijuana store or for the relocation of a retail marijuana store, which shall be reviewed by the city council; 
(2)  The applications described in subsection (b) when the city clerk determines grounds exist for denial per subsection 15-410(b) of this article; and 
(3)  Suspensions or revocations of any license, which shall be heard by the Cortez City Council or a hearings officer appointed by city council. 
(4)  Applications for a retail marijuana cultivation license or for the relocation of such a license; 
(5)  Applications for a retail marijuana testing facility or for the relocation of such a license; and 
(6)  All renewal applications; 
(7)  Applications to modify the ownership structure of an existing licensee. 
(b)  In the event an application is scheduled for a public hearing the city clerk shall post and publish public notice thereof not less than ten days prior to the hearing. 
(1)  Public notice given by posting shall include sign of suitable material, not less than twenty-two inches wide and twenty-six inches high, composed of letters not less than one inch in height and stating the nature of the type of license applied for, the nature of the hearing, the date of the application, the date of the hearing, the name and address of the applicant, and such other information as may be required to fully apprise the public of the nature of the application. In the case of a new license application, the sign shall contain the names and addresses of the officers, directors, or manager of the facility to be licensed. The sign shall be placed on the subject premises in a location that is conspicuous and plainly visible to the general public. 
(2)  Public notice given by publication shall contain the same information as that required for signs and shall be made in a newspaper of general circulation in Montezuma County. 
(c)  At the public hearing held pursuant to this section, any party in interest shall be allowed to present evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. 
(1)  "Party in interest" means any of the following: 
(A)  The applicant; 
(B)  An adult resident of the neighborhood under consideration; or 
(C)  The owner or manager of a business located in the neighborhood under consideration. 
(2)  The city council or a hearing officer appointed by city council may limit the presentation of evidence and cross-examination so as to prevent repetitive and cumulative evidence or examination. 
(3)  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent a representative of an organized neighborhood group that encompasses part or all of the neighborhood under consideration from presenting evidence subject to this section. Such representative shall reside within the neighborhood group's geographic boundaries and shall be a member of the neighborhood group. Such representative shall not be entitled to cross-examine witnesses or seek judicial review of the licensing authority's decision. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-413. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license approval provided by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  Any person whose criminal history indicates the person is not of good moral character; 
(2)  Any corporation, any of whose officers', directors', or stockholders' criminal histories indicate such person is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any partnership, association, or company, any of whose officers', or any of whose members', criminal histories indicate such person is not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any person employing, assisted by, or financed in whole or in part by any other person whose criminal history indicates such person is not of good moral character or who is not a resident of Colorado; 
(5)  Any cooperative association, any of whose officers', directors', or stockholders' or members' criminal histories indicate that such person is not of good moral character; 
(6)  A person under twenty-one years of age; 
(7)  A person approved pursuant to this article who, during a period of licensure or approval, or who, at the time of application, has failed to: 
(A)  Provide surety bond or file any tax return with a taxing agency relating to the operation of a retail marijuana establishment; 
(B)  Pay any taxes, interest, or penalties due to a taxing agency relating to the operation of a retail marijuana establishment. 
(8)  A person who has discharged a sentence in the five years immediately preceding the application date for a conviction of a felony or a person who has discharged a sentence for a conviction of a felony pursuant to any state or federal law regarding the possession, distribution, manufacturing, cultivation, or use of a controlled substance in the ten years immediately preceding his or her application date or five years from the effective date of HB 13-17, enacted in 2013, whichever is longer; except that the local licensing authority may grant a license to a person if the person has a state felony conviction based on possession or use of marijuana or marijuana concentrate that would not be a felony if the person were convicted of the offense on the date he or she applied for licensure; 
(9)  A person who employs another person at a retail marijuana establishment who has not submitted fingerprints for a criminal history record check or whose criminal record history check reveals that the person is ineligible; 
(10)  A sheriff, deputy sheriff, police officer, or prosecuting officer, or an officer or employee of the state licensing authority or a local licensing authority; 
(11)  A person for a location that is currently licensed as a retail food establishment or wholesale food establishment; or 
(12)  A person who has not been a resident of Colorado for at least two years prior to the date of the person's application. 
(b)  In making a determination as to character or when considering the conviction of a crime, the local licensing authority shall be governed by the provisions of C.R.S. § 24-5-101. 
(c)  The focus of the inquiry into the character of any person associated with the operation of a retail marijuana business shall be whether the person's character is such that violations of state law or city ordinances pertaining to the possession and distribution of marijuana and/or the operation of retail marijuana establishments would be likely to result if a license were granted. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-414. - Issuance or denial of approval. 
(a)  In determining whether to issue an approval under this article, the city council may consider the following: 
(1)  Whether the application is complete and signed by the applicant; 
(2)  Whether the applicant has paid the application fee; 
(3)  Whether the application complies with all the requirements of this article, the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, and rules promulgated by the state licensing authority; 
(4)  Whether the application contains any material misrepresentations; 
(5)  Whether the proposed retail marijuana establishment complies with applicable zoning regulations. The local licensing authority shall make specific findings of fact with respect to whether the building in which the proposed medical marijuana business will be located conforms to the distance requirements set forth in the applicable use criteria; 
(6)  The facts and evidence adduced as a result of its investigation as well as any other facts and any other pertinent matters affecting the qualifications of the applicant for the conduct of the type of business proposed; 
(7)  Any other facts pertinent to the type of license approval for which application has been made, including the number, type, and availability of retail marijuana outlets located in or near the premises under consideration; and 
(8)  For applications to approve any retail marijuana store in the same location where any medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store is or has previously been licensed, evidence that the licensed premises have been previously operated in a manner that adversely affects the public health, welfare or safety of the immediate neighborhood in which the establishment is located. 
(9)  Is the applicant current in payment to the city of Cortez, all taxes, fees, sales tax, assessments or charges under section 15-409(d) above. 
(b)  The city council may deny the approval application for good cause as defined in the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code. 
(c)  The city council may impose reasonable conditions upon any license approval issued pursuant to this article. 
(d)  Retail cultivation approvals shall not be subject to this limit if the licensee holds or has successfully applied for a retail marijuana store license. In the case of multiple applications for an available license, the city clerk shall publish the availability of the license and assign priority by lot to each completed application received within forty-five days of the date of publication. 
(e)  No person shall own, operate, manage, control, or hold any interest in more than one retail sales marijuana establishment in the city. 
(f)  Within thirty days after the public hearing or completion of the application investigation, the local licensing authority shall issue its decision approving or denying the application. The decision shall be in writing, shall state the reasons for the decision, and a copy of the decision shall be mailed by certified mail to the applicant at the address shown on the application. 
(g)  The city clerk shall not issue certificate of approval nor notify the state licensing authority of an approval until the building in which the business to be conducted has been issued a certificate of occupancy and is in compliance with the architects drawing, plot plan, and detailed sketch for the interior of the building submitted with the application and all state and city laws, rules and regulations now in effect or as may be adopted or amended from time to time. 
(h)  After approval, the local licensing authority shall notify the state licensing authority of such approval and issue to the successful applicant a certificate of local approval. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-415. - Contents and display of approval. 
The approved licensee shall post the certificate approval in a conspicuous location on the premises. A retail marijuana establishment approval shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Type of approval; 
(b)  The name of the licensee; 
(c)  The date of issuance of the approval; 
(d)  The street address at which the licensee is authorized to operate the retail marijuana establishment; 
(e)  Any conditions of approval imposed upon the license by the city council; 
(f)  The date of expiration of the approval; and 
(g)  The signature of the city clerk. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-416. - Transfer/changes in ownership structure. 
(a)  License approvals held by natural persons may not be transferred. In the event a natural person or persons holding a license sell the associated retail marijuana establishment, the purchaser shall be entitled to apply for a new retail marijuana establishment license for the purchased business notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 15-414(f) If the proposed sale or conveyance of a partial interest in the retail marijuana establishment to a person who previously did not own ten percent or more of the retail marijuana establishment will, after the sale, result in that person owning ten percent or more of the retail marijuana establishment, the licensee shall apply for a change in ownership structure, which the local licensing authority shall process as a new license approval application by the new owner. 
(b)  License approvals held by partnerships, corporations, limited liability companies, or other business entities are not transferable and terminate automatically upon dissolution of the entity. If the proposed sale or conveyance of any interest in the entity to a person who previously did not own ten percent or more of the business will, after the sale, result in the person owning ten percent or more of the entity, the licensee shall apply for a change in ownership structure, which the local licensing authority shall process as a new license approval application by the new owner. 
(c)  Changes in ownership structure that do not result in a person increasing that person's interest from less than ten percent to more than ten percent shall be reported to the local licensing authority and may be approved administratively by the city clerk. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-417. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A license approval issued pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked by the city council or a hearing officer appointed by the city council after a hearing for the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or a false statement of material fact contained in the permit application; 
(2)  Any violation of city ordinance or state law pertaining to the operation of a retail marijuana establishment or a medical marijuana business, including regulations adopted by the state licensing authority, for the possession or distribution of marijuana; 
(3)  A violation of any of the terms and conditions of the license; 
(4)  A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  In deciding whether a license approval should be suspended or revoked, and in deciding whether to impose conditions in the event of a suspension the local licensing authority shall consider: 
(1)  The nature and severity of the violation; 
(2)  Corrective action, if any, taken by the licensee; 
(3)  Prior violation(s), if any, by the licensee; 
(4)  The likelihood of recurrence of the violation; 
(5)  The circumstances of the violation; 
(6)  Whether the violation was willful; and 
(7)  Previous sanctions, if any, imposed on the licensee. 
(c)  The provisions of Part 6 of the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code shall govern proceedings for the suspension or revocation of a license approval issued hereunder. 
(d)  The city council or the hearings officer may impose a fine in lieu of a suspension in accordance with the provisions of the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-418. - Change of location. 
(a)  A licensee may move his or her permanent location to another location in the city, but it shall be unlawful to cultivate, manufacture, distribute, or sell retail marijuana at any such place until permission to do so is granted by the city and the state licensing authority. 
(b)  In permitting a change of location, the city council shall consider all reasonable restrictions that are or may be placed on the new location and any such new location shall comply with all requirements of this article, the city of Cortez Land Use Code, the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, and rules promulgated by the state licensing authority. 
(c)  The local licensing authority shall not authorize a change of location until the applicant produces a license issued and granted by the state licensing authority covering the period for which the change of location is sought. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
Sec. 15-419. - Operational requirements. 
Retail marijuana establishments shall comply with the following operational requirements: 
(a)  Retail marijuana establishments shall provide customers with contact information for local drug abuse treatment centers as well as educational materials regarding the hazards of substance abuse. 
(b)  Retail marijuana stores shall operate only during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(c)  Retail marijuana establishments shall provide adequate security on the business premises, which shall include the following: 
(1)  Twenty-four hour security surveillance cameras to facilitate the investigation of crimes and to include video and audio capabilities, with a redundant power supply and circuitry to monitor entrances/exits and parking lot along with the interior and exterior of the premises. Security video and audio shall be preserved for forty five days. The owner shall provide segments of surveillance footage upon request to law enforcement officers investigating crimes committed against the establishment or its customers. The owner shall be required to produce surveillance footage disclosing the identity of customers and shall not edit surveillance footage to protect customer privacy. The resolution of these color cameras shall be of sufficient quality to allow for the identification of the subject's facial features, in all lighting conditions, in the event of a crime; 
(2)  A burglar fire alarm system that is professionally monitored and maintained in good working order; a locking safe permanently affixed to the premises suitable for storage of inventory and cash, all to be stored during non-business hours. Live plants being cultivated shall not be deemed inventory requiring storage in a locked safe; 
(3)  Exterior lighting that illuminates the exterior walls of the establishment and that complies with the lighting code set forth in this city of Cortez Land Use Code. 
(d)  No firearms, knives, or other weapons shall be permitted in a retail marijuana store except those carried by sworn peace officers. 
(e)  Marijuana shall not be consumed or used on the premises of a retail marijuana store and it shall be unlawful for a retail marijuana store licensee to allow marijuana to be consumed upon its licensed premises. In the case of a retail marijuana store located in a structure with a legal secondary unit or other legal dwelling unit, the dwelling unit shall not be considered part of the retail marijuana store premises if access to the dwelling unit is prohibited to the retail marijuana store customers. 
(f)  Retail marijuana establishments shall comply with the provisions of the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, rules promulgated by the state licensing authority, and with any other relevant Colorado statute or administrative regulation. 
(g)  Retail marijuana stores shall produce such quantities of product sold as required by the applicable state statutes, rules and regulations regarding cultivation of product sold now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(h)  The chief of police or other appropriate city department head shall report to the city clerk all violations of this article and other applicable state and local laws and the city clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of the violations there. 
(i)  Immediately upon receipt from the state licensing authority the licensee, owner, or manager shall provide the city clerk with a photo copy of any and all state "badges" or other form of official identification issued to owners, operators, managers or employees of any retail marijuana establishment in the city of Cortez. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 ; Ord. No. 1194, 9-23-14 ; Ord. No. 1215 , 7-26-16)  
Sec. 15-420. - Penalty. 
A violation of this article shall be punishable as set forth in section 17-16A Cortez City Code now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-14 )  
CHAPTER 15A. - MOBILE HOMES. 
 As to licensing of mobile home parks, see §§ 15-87 to 15-90. 
 As to Fire Code and fire prevention generally, see Ch. 10. 
 As to Building Code and standards and buildings generally, see Ch. 6.  
Article I. - In General. 
 
Secs. 15A-1 to 15A-5. - Reserved.  
Article II. - Regulations and Minimum Standards for Location of Mobile Homes. 
 
Sec. 15A-6. - On single sites. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate a mobile home on any single lot for the purpose of occupancy without first applying for and securing a building permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 1.)  
Sec. 15A-7. - Blocking diagram required. 
The request for a building permit shall be accompanied by a blocking diagram supplied by the manufacturer of the mobile home for the model proposed for location. The city may accept, in lieu of such blocking diagram, a complete stabilizing and tie-down system designed by a registered engineer or architect. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 2.)  
Sec. 15A-8. - Building permit for construction required. 
The city shall issue a building permit for the construction of foundations or stabilizing system in accordance with all of the city requirements regarding the issuance of building permits. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 3.)  
Sec. 15A-9. - Conformance to Uniform Building Code; other requirements. 
(a)  In the event a permanent foundation is to be constructed, the foundation shall meet all the requirements of the Uniform Building Code as well as providing additional supports for the carrying frame as recommended by the unit's manufacturer. 
(b)  Stabilizing devices or piers shall be installed and inspected in accordance with the support system recommended by the manufacturer or designed by the engineer or architect. 
(c)  Ground anchors shall be installed and inspected following the application for and securing of a permit therefor. Unless the entire tie-down system, including ground anchors, is designed by a professional engineer or architect, ground anchors shall be not more than twenty-four feet on centers beginning from the front line of the mobile home, and not more than six feet open-end spacing at the rear line of the mobile home unless additional tie-downs are installed. Ground anchors for diagonal ties shall be provided in conjunction with each vertical tie-down. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 4.)  
Sec. 15A-10. - Exemptions from Uniform Building Code. 
Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, from and after April 8, 1975 any mobile home being hereafter erected upon a foundation within the designated R-4 zones of the city and which mobile home bears a certification insignia issued by the state, shall be deemed to be exempt from the minimum requirements of the Uniform Building Code of this city and such mobile home shall be approved by the city building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 5.)  
Sec. 15A-11. - Minimum size. 
No mobile home installed in accordance with this section shall have a width of less than ten feet nor a length of less than fifty feet. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 6.)  
Sec. 15A-12. - Skirting required. 
Mobile home units not placed on permanent foundations such that all of the undercarriage and running gear are unexposed shall be skirted in a manner to so conceal said undercarriage and running gear. A permit shall be applied for and issued by the city for such skirting. Installation shall be inspected and approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 7.)  
Sec. 15A-13. - Utility connections. 
Utility connections for water, sanitary sewer, electricity and natural gas shall be provided by no lesser standards than those stated in the preceding sections and shall be inspected and approved by the city or other appropriate agency having jurisdiction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 8.)  
Sec. 15A-14. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
Prior to the occupancy of any mobile home on a single lot the city shall issue a certificate of occupancy which indicates that all of the requirements of the city have been met. All of the procedural requirements of the city regarding certificate of occupancy shall be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 9.)  
Article III. - Standards for Mobile Home Parks. 
 
Sec. 15A-15. - Inspection. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city manager to cause to be made with the assistance of the building inspector, police, fire and health department and the owner or his authorized agent, an inspection of each park, including all mobile homes. 
(b)  It shall be the direct responsibility of the city manager or his agent to enforce this ordinance and to issue a summons directly to the offending party. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2.)  
Sec. 15A-16. - Community facilities to conform to construction regulations. 
Every building or structure within a mobile home park shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of all city building and construction regulations and codes as set out in this Code or any other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 3.)  
Sec. 15A-17. - Lot standards. 
(a)  Utility connections serving the mobile home shall be located to properly service the mobile home erected on the stand. 
(b)  Mobile home utility service shall be connected to the mobile home park system by means of approved materials. No rigid utility connections shall be made. 
(c)  No mobile home shall be permanently attached to a foundation. Stabilizing devices or piers may be used. Where specified by the manufacturer, they shall be installed in accordance with his instructions. 
(d)  No combustible material shall be stored under any mobile home. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 4.)  
Sec. 15A-18. - Plumbing standards. 
(a)  Connections shall be made to the city public water supply and be made available to every lot within the park. 
(b)  All new water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and all existing piping fixtures and other equipment shall be maintained in accordance with local regulations and requirements and shall be of a type, size and in location approved by the city. 
(c)  A shutoff valve located below frost line shall be provided on the water riser pipe of each mobile home lot. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 5.)  
Sec. 15A-19. - Sewage disposal standards. 
(a)  Connections shall be made to the city sewage collection system and be available to every lot within the park. 
(b)  All new sewage collection lines shall be installed in accordance with all applicable city standards and requirements as set out in this Code or any other ordinance of the city. 
(c)  The sewage collection inlet for each lot shall have a nominal inside diameter of at least three inches. 
(d)  The lateral line from the mobile home discharge to the sewage collection line shall have a slope of at least one-fourth inch per foot. All joints shall be secure and watertight, and the pipe shall be firmly supported to prevent deflection and movement. 
(e)  All materials used for sewer connections between a mobile home and the inlet shall be semi-rigid, corrosive resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface shall be smooth. 
(f)  Provisions shall be made for plugging the sewage collection inlet with a tamperproof fitting when a mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the inlet. The rim of the inlet shall extend not more than four inches above ground elevation. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 6.)  
Sec. 15A-20. - Electrical standards. 
(a)  All new electrical installations in mobile home parks shall be designed and constructed in accordance with state law, this Code or any other ordinance of the city. 
(b)  All existing electrical systems shall be maintained in a safe condition. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 7.)  
Sec. 15A-21. - Natural or liquefied petroleum gas system standards. 
(a)  Gas equipment and installations within a mobile home park shall be designed in accordance with this Code or any other ordinance of the city. 
(b)  All new gas piping installed below ground shall have a minimum cover of eighteen inches. 
(c)  Each mobile home lot shall have an approved gas shutoff valve installed upstream of the mobile home lot gas outlet. Such valve shall be readily accessible and the location clearly labeled. Whenever the mobile home lot outlet is not in use the outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap or plug to prevent accidental discharge of gas. 
(d)  Each new installation of a mobile home utilizing gas shall be connected to the mobile home lot outlet by an approved three-fourths inch mobile home connection not more than six feet in length. Approved pipe and fittings may be used between the flexible connector and the mobile home lot gas outlet when the distance between the mobile home gas service connection exceeds that required to make a safe installation with only a mobile home connector. 
(e)  All gas outlets, risers, regulators, meters, valves or other exposed equipment shall be protected from mechanical damage by vehicles or other causes. 
(f)  The storage, handling, and use of liquefied petroleum gas shall be in conformity with N.F.P.A. Manual d58. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 8.)  
Sec. 15A-22. - Fire safety standards. 
(a)  The arrangements of lots and streets and roads of each mobile home park shall meet the approval of the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  Fire hydrants shall be provided, installed and connected to the public water system within approximately five hundred feet of all mobile home lots. 
(c)  There shall be no burning of rubbish or trash within the boundaries of any mobile home park. 
(d)  Care shall be taken to maintain the park free of dry brush, leaves, and weeds which might communicate fires between mobile homes and other buildings in the park. 
(e)  Permanent public buildings shall be provided with portable fire extinguishers in accordance with all city regulations. 
(f)  The connecting and disconnecting of all public utility services to mobile homes shall be made by qualified or authorized persons as determined by the city. 
(g)  Owners shall not place empty liquefied petroleum gas containers under their mobile homes. Empty containers shall be left in place if there is more than one container. If the mobile home's liquefied petroleum gas supply is limited to one container and a replacement has been secured, any empty container shall be stored in the area designated for such storage. 
(h)  Operators of vehicular equipment shall observe all posted signs and shall keep all designated fire lanes and access to fire hydrants open at all times. 
(i)  Heat tapes shall be of a type approved by a recognized testing laboratory. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 10.)  
Sec. 15A-23. - Removal of wheels from mobile homes in parks. 
The removal of permanent running gear, including hubs and axles, from any mobile home located in a mobile home park is hereby prohibited except temporarily for the purpose of repairs. The removal of rubber tires and wheels for the protection against decay shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 11.)  
Sec. 15A-24. - Maintenance. 
(a)  All mobile home lots, mobile home stands and utilities existing and new shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All buildings, utilities or structures which were required to have been erected or installed pursuant to any previous building code or ordinance relating to this use shall be maintained in good working order. The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of all buildings, structures and utilities. 
(b)  No mobile home or travel trailer shall be parked or permitted to stand upon any public street, highway, road, alley or other such right-of-way for more than twenty-four hours. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 12.)  
Sec. 15A-25. - Penalties. 
In addition to all other penalties herein provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or suffering or permitting the same to be violated shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. The imposition of one penalty for any one violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and each day thereafter that prohibitive conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate and chargeable offense. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 13; amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 15, 9-25-12)  
CHAPTER 15B. - MECHANICAL CODE. 
 
Sec. 15B-1. - Mechanical Code—Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by reference, as though the same were fully printed and set forth herein, the International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2009 Edition, Copyright 2009, 1st Printing, prepared by said International Code Council, and containing a total of one hundred forty-five pages. 
(Ord. No. 585, § 2; Ord. No. 636, § 2; Ord. No. 701, § 2; Ord. No. 854, § 2.) 
(Ord. No. 1137, § II (part))  
Sec. 15B-2. - Same—Copies on file. 
Three true and exact official copies of the above-described 2009 Edition of the International Mechanical Code (IMC) are on file in the municipal offices of the City of Cortez, Colorado, duly certified by the mayor and attested by the city clerk, and may be examined, duplicated, or copied by any interested person during the regular business hours of said offices, all such reproduction or copying to be at the expense of the person requesting the same. 
(Ord. No. 585, § 3; Ord. No. 636, § 3; Ord. No. 701, § 3; Ord. No. 854, § 3.) 
(Ord. No. 1137, § III (part))  
Article I. - In General. 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Model Traffic Code—Adoption. 
Pursuant to parts 1 and 2 of article 16 of title 31, C.R.S., as amended and part 4 of article 15 of title 30, C.R.S., and article III, section 6, of the Cortez City Charter, there is hereby adopted by reference articles I and II, inclusive, of the 2003 Edition of the "Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities," promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Staff Traffic and Safety Projects Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, EP 700, Denver, CO 80222. The subject matter of the Model Traffic Code relates primarily to comprehensive traffic control regulations for the city. The purposes of this article and the Code adopted herein is to provide a system of traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the state and the nation. Three copies of the Model Traffic Code adopted herein are now filed in the office of the clerk of the city of Cortez, Colorado, and may be inspected during regular business hours. The summary of this article is deemed sufficient by the city council in accordance with article III, section 6 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 817, § 1: Ord. No. 990, § 1.) 
 For state law as to authority of city to adopt Model Traffic Code by reference, see CRSA § 42-4-110.  
Sec. 16-2. - Model Traffic Code—Deletions. 
The 2003 Edition of the Model Traffic Code is adopted as if set out at length. No articles and/or sections are declared to be inapplicable to the city of Cortez. 
(Ord. No. 817, § 2: Ord. No. 990, § 2.)  
Sec. 16-3. - Model Traffic Code—Additions or modifications. 
The adopted Code is not subject to any additions or modifications. 
 Section 1212 Sales to the Public on City Streets, Alleys—Prohibited: 
 No person may, except as otherwise provided in the Cortez Municipal Code, sell any personal property or goods or services on the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other City property located in or owned by the City of Cortez, unless approved by the City Council or City Manager. 
 Penalty: a violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of up to $500.00 or a jail sentence of up to 180 days or both a fine and a jail sentence. 
 Section 102 Definitions, shall be amended to add the following provisions: 
 (90)—"Toy Vehicles" whether or not home built by the user that has wheels with an outside diameter of not more than 14 inches and is not designed, approved, or intended for use on public roadways or highways. Toy vehicles includes but is not limited to gas powered or electric powered vehicles commonly known as minibikes, pocket bikes, kamikazie boards, mopeds, and stand up scooters. 
 (91) — "Off highway vehicles" means any self-propelled vehicle, which is designed to travel on wheels or tracks in contact with the ground which is designed primarily for use off of the public highways and which is generally and commonly used to transport persons for recreational purposes. Off highway vehicle does not include the following: 
 a. vehicles designed and used primarily for travel on, over, or in the water; 
 b. snowmobiles; 
 c. military vehicles; 
 d. golf carts; 
 e. vehicles designed and used to carry disabled persons; 
 f. vehicles designed and used specifically for agricultural, logging or mineral purposes; or 
 g. vehicles registered pursuant to Colorado State Statute, Article 3, Title 42. 
 Section 220 Motorized bicycles, Motor Driven Cycles, Riding Equipment, Department Control, Use and Operation of the Model Traffic Code shall be amended to add the following: 
 (3.) All motorized bicycles shall be registered pursuant to Colorado State Statute and insured as required by this code and Colorado State Statute. 
 Section 109 Motorized bicycles, animals, skis, skates, toy vehicles, and all terrain recreational vehicles on highways of the Model Traffic Code shall be amended to add the following: 
 (13.) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle, which is not registered or insured on the streets, alleys, sidewalks and public ways of the City of Cortez. 
 Penalty Clause 
 Any violation of this section shall result in the imposition of fines, jail time or other sentence as set forth in section 17-16a Cortez Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 817, § 3: Ord. No. 990, § 3; Ord. No. 1095; Ord. No. 1121.)  
Sec. 16-4. - Model Traffic Code—Penalties. 
The following penalties, herewith set forth in full, shall apply to this article: 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions adopted in this article. 
(b)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision adopted in this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding four hundred ninety-nine dollars except that the offenses listed below in (c) may be punished by a fine and imprisonment as set forth in section 17-16A Cortez City Code. 
(c)  The following Model Traffic Code offenses now in effect or as may be amended from time to time shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A now in effect or as may be amended from time to time: 
Model Traffic Code section 1903(1)(a), stopping for school bus. 
Model Traffic Code section 1101(12)(b), speeding in excess of twenty-five miles per hour of the reasonable and prudent speed. 
Model Traffic Code section 1105, speed contests. 
Model Traffic Code section 1413, eluding, attempting to elude a police officer. 
Any other offense not listed above with a point assessment by the Colorado Department of Revenue of greater than six points. 
(All Model Traffic Code sections listed are as currently stated or as may be amended from time to time.) 
(Ord. No. 817, § 4: Ord. No. 990, § 4.) 
( Ord. No. 1200, 5-26-15 )  
Sec. 16-5. - Model Traffic Code—Application. 
This article shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park, and to every other public way or public place or public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of this municipality, the use of which this city has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. The provisions of sections 1401 through 1407.5 and 1409 through 1415, respectively concerning reckless driving — penalty, careless driving — penalty, following fire apparatus prohibited, crossing fire hose, riding in trailers, foreign matter on highway prohibited, spilling loads on highways prohibited, splash guards, when required, compulsory insurance — penalty, use of earphones while driving, operation of bicycles and other human-powered vehicles, eluding or attempting to elude a police officer, moving construction-related equipment, and use of dyed fuel on highways prohibited, shall apply not only to the public places and ways but also throughout this municipality. 
(Ord. No. 817, § 5: Ord. No. 990, § 5.)  
Article II. - Parking. 
 
Sec. 16-6. - Repealed by Ord. No. 860.  
Sec. 16-7. - Limitation on parking. 
(a)  The city of Cortez shall from time to time establish parking areas within the city in which the time and/or place in which one may park is limited or restricted. The city council shall establish such time periods for parking as they deem fit and reasonable. 
(b)  Such limitation as to time or place shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  All such areas which are regulated in accordance with this section as to length of time and/or place shall be clearly marked with signs advising the restriction on parking. 
(d)  The fine for violation of this article shall be eight dollars for each and every violation. If the fine is not paid within five days from the date of the notice of parking violation the fine shall be fifteen dollars. The registered owner and/or owners of a vehicle improperly parked shall be responsible for any fine assessed for improper parking of the vehicle. 
(e)  The City of Cortez fire marshal as well as the Cortez police department and designees of the Cortez police chief are hereby authorized to issue parking tickets for parking in fire lanes properly marked and signed. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 1.) 
(Ord. No. 1128)  
Sec. 16-8. - Prohibition against parking and occupying a recreational vehicle or park trailer on city streets, alleys and other city property. 
(a)  No person shall park and occupy any recreational vehicle or park trailer as defined in the City of Cortez Land Use Code at section 2.02, on any City of Cortez street, alley or other city property including but not limited to parking lots, vacant land, etc. 
It shall be a rebuttable presumption that the recreational vehicle or park trailer is parked and occupied if the recreational vehicle or park trailer is connected to any power source, water source, or sewer discharge location on adjacent real property while parked on a city street or any other signs of occupation that the recreational vehicle or park trailer is parked and in use is observed. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of up to four hundred ninety nine dollars. A violation of this section may be ticketed as a parking ticket with a fine of four hundred ninety nine dollars. 
(c)  In addition to the penalty specified above, the municipal judge may order suspended fines to insure compliance and may also order the removal of said recreational vehicle or park trailer from city streets, alleys and other city property by city staff. 
(d)  This section shall be enforceable by the Cortez Police Department, Cortez Code Enforcement Officers, or the City of Cortez Planning and Building Department or any other city employee authorized by the city manager. 
(e)  Each day a violation or non-compliance exists shall be and constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1179, 6-11-13; Ord. No. 1230 , 9-26-17)  
Article III. - Bicycles. 
 For state law provision relating to bicycles, see CRSA §§ 42-4-109, 42-4-220, 42-4-224(3). 
 
Sec. 16-9. - License—Required. 
No person, who resides within the city, shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, unless such bicycle has been licensed and a license plate attached thereto. 
(Code 1968, § 14-3-1.)  
Sec. 16-10. - Same—Application. 
Application for every bicycle license and license plate shall be made to the city police department. There shall be no charge for the license. 
(Code 1968, § 14-3-2.)  
Sec. 16-11. - Same—Issuance. 
The chief of police upon receipt of a proper application is authorized to issue a bicycle license which shall be effective upon issuance. 
(Code 1968, § 14-3-3.)  
Sec. 16-12. - Same—Records to be kept. 
The chief of police shall keep a record of the number of each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued and the number of the frame of the bicycle for which issued. 
(Code 1968, § 14-3-3.)  
Sec. 16-13. - License plates or decals—Issuance. 
The chief of police upon issuing a bicycle license shall also issue a license plate or decal bearing the license number assigned to the bicycle and the name of this city. 
(Code 1968, § 14-3-4.)  
Sec. 16-14. - Same—Attachment. 
The chief of police shall require such license plate or decal to be firmly attached to the rear mudguard or frame of the bicycle for which such license was issued in such position as to be plainly visible from the rear. 
(Code 1968, § 14-3-4.)  
Sec. 16-15. - Same—Removal prohibited; exceptions. 
No person shall remove a license plate or decal from a bicycle except upon a transfer of ownership or in the event the bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated upon any street in this city. 
(Code 1968, § 14-3-4.)  
Sec. 16-16. - Transfer of ownership generally. 
Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee shall remove the license plate or decal and shall either surrender such plate or decal to the chief of police or may, upon proper application, but without payment of additional fee, have such plate or decal assigned to another bicycle owned by the applicant. 
(Code 1968, § 14-3-5.)  
Sec. 16-17. - Rental agencies to comply with article. 
A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is licensed and a license plate or decal is attached thereto as provided by this article, and unless such bicycle is equipped with the lamps, brakes and other equipment required in this article. 
(Code 1968, § 14-3-6.)  
Sec. 16-18. - Equipment—Lights. 
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a lamp on the front exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet to the rear; except, that a red reflector meeting the requirements of this article may be used in lieu of the red light. All such lamps and reflectors shall be in place and in operation whenever such bicycle is operated after sundown. 
(Code 1968, § 14-3-7.) 
 For state law as to equipment required on a bicycle generally, see C.R.S. 1973, § 42-4-218.  
Sec. 16-19. - Same—Sirens or whistles prohibited. 
No bicycle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle. 
(Code 1968, § 14-3-7.) 
For state law prohibiting the use or existence of a siren or whistle upon any bicycle, see C.R.S. 1973, § 42-4-221(3).  
Sec. 16-20. - Same—Brakes. 
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make a braked wheel-skid on dry, level and clean pavement. 
(Code 1968, § 14-3-7.)  
Sec. 16-21. - Riding, etc., on sidewalk prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or propel any bicycle upon any sidewalk within the city, or to ride any skateboard, roller skates, inline skates or scooters on all city streets and sidewalks in the area bounded to North Street on the North, to First Street on the South, to Maple Street on the West, and to Washington Street on the East. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 1: Ord. No. 941 (part).)  
Sec. 16-22. - Penalties. 
Upon conviction of a violation of this article, every person not a juvenile as defined by state law shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time upon first conviction of the violation of the ordinance codified in this section; if a juvenile as set forth in Section 18-B9 Juvenile Sentencing now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. Upon a second conviction of any offender the judge of the municipal court shall impound the bicycle, roller skates, roller blades, skateboards or scooters of the offending party and the same shall be turned over to the Cortez police department for disposal in accordance with departmental regulations and city ordinances. Said impoundment shall not be in lieu of any punishment applicable as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A now in effect or as may be amended from time to time that the municipal judge wishes to levy upon an adult or any fine as set forth in section 18B-9 juvenile sentencing that the judge may wish to levy upon a juvenile. 
(Code 1968, § 14-3-9: Ord. No. 941 (part); amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 16, 9-25-12)  
Article IV. - Vehicles. 
 
Sec. 16-23. - Neighborhood electric vehicles (NEV). 
Neighborhood electric vehicles (NEV) are described as follows: 
(a)  Vehicles meet the equipment standards set forth in Article 1, Part 2, of the Model Traffic Code; 
(b)  Are designed to carry four or fewer persons; 
(c)  Are designed to be operated at speeds of twenty-five miles per hour or less; 
(d)  Has at least four wheels in contact with the ground; 
(e)  Has an empty weight of less than one thousand eight hundred pounds; and 
(f)  Must be electric motor powered. 
(Ord. No. 1120 § 1.)  
Sec. 16-24. - Regulation of NEV's. 
Regulation of NEV's includes the following: 
(a)  No person shall operate a neighborhood electric vehicle on a limited access highway. 
(b)  No person shall operate a neighborhood electric vehicle on any street or highway with a posted speed limit of more than thirty miles per hour, provided, however, that neighborhood electric vehicles shall be allowed to cross, at intersections, streets and highways that have a posted speed limit in excess of thirty miles per hour. 
(c)  Neighborhood electric vehicles shall not be operated at a speed in excess of twenty-five miles per hour. 
(d)  Neighborhood electric vehicles shall not carry a greater number of persons or carry a greater load than that specified by the manufacturer. The driver and all passengers must be seated in seats substantially similar to those placed in the vehicle by the manufacturer. 
(e)  No person shall operate a neighborhood electric vehicle on a city-owned or maintained trail. 
(f)  Neighborhood electric vehicles shall only be operated by persons holding a valid driver's license. 
(g)  Operators of neighborhood electric vehicles shall obey all traffic laws of the state of Colorado, including but not limited to, laws concerning financial responsibility, and all traffic laws and regulations of the United States of America. 
(Ord. No. 1120 § 2.)  
Sec. 16-25. - Use of retarders prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person while driving any truck, bus, automobile or other motor vehicle to use a retarder (commonly known as a jake brake or compression brake) on any truck, bus, automobile or other motor vehicle within the city of Cortez. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings as stated below. 
(1)  "Retarder" shall mean any device or piece of equipment which helps increase a vehicle's braking power, and includes any exhaust or engine braking device. When activated, a retarder creates noise through a vehicle's exhaust system. 
(b)  Emergencies. This provision shall not prohibit the use of a retarder in an emergency. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be punished as set forth in chapter 17, section 17-16A, sentencing/municipal court, now in effect, or as may be amended from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 1188, 5-13-14 )  
CHAPTER 17. - MUNICIPAL COURTS. 
 For state law as to municipal courts generally, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 13-10-101 to 13-10-125. 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Procedure for handling violations established. 
In order to provide a simple and expedient method for the handling of violations of the Code or ordinances of the city, but one which will also guarantee to all defendants a method of exercising their constitutional rights, the city council does hereby establish the following procedure for the handling of violations of the Code or ordinances as set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 1-3-1.)  
Sec. 17-2. - Initiation of prosecution. 
Prosecution of a violation of the Code or ordinance of the city shall be made in the name of the city and shall be commenced by the issuance of a summons and complaint, by the issuance of summons following a complaint filed with Cortez Municipal Court or by the filing of a complaint following arrest. 
(Code 1968, § 1-3-2.) 
(Ord. No. 1181, 9-24-13) 
 For state law as to commencement of actions in municipal courts by service of process, etc., see C.R.S. 1973, § 13-10-111.  
Sec. 17-3. - Summons and complaint—Issuance; where filed; service. 
A summons and complaint may be issued by any city of Cortez Police Officer, Animal Control Officer or Code Enforcement Officer for a violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city committed in his presence, or if not committed in his presence, concerning matter which he has reasonable grounds for believing was committed by the person charged. A copy of the summons and complaint so issued shall be immediately filed with the municipal court. A copy shall also be served by immediate delivery to the person charged 
(Code 1968, § 1-3-3.) 
(Ord. No. 1181, 9-24-13) 
 For state law as to service of summonses, see C.R.S. 1973, § 16-5-205.  
Sec. 17-4. - Same—Content. 
The summons and complaint issued by any city of Cortez Police Officer, Animal Control Officer or Code Enforcement Officer shall contain the name of the defendant, shall identify the offense charged by the Code or ordinance alleged to have been violated, shall contain a brief statement or description of the offense charged, including the date and approximate location thereof and shall direct the defendant to appear before the municipal court at a stated date, time and place. 
(Code 1968, § 1-3-5.) 
(Ord. No. 1181, 9-24-13) 
 For state law as to content of summons, see C.R.S. 1973, § 16-5-206.  
Sec. 17-5. - Same—Methods of service. 
A summons or summons and complaint shall be served personally upon the defendant and a copy given to him. In lieu of personal service, service may be made by leaving a copy of the summons and complaint at the usual place of abode with any person over the age of eighteen years residing therein or by mailing a copy to the defendant's last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested, not less than five days prior to the time that the defendant is required to appear; provided, that such place of abode or last known address of the defendant is within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1968, § 1-3-7.) 
 For state law as to service of summons, see C.R.S. 1973, § 16-5-206.  
Sec. 17-6. - Same—Issuance by clerk of summons upon complaint. 
A summons may be issued by the clerk of the municipal court if a sworn complaint has been filed by any person requesting the issuance of a summons and it appears from the complaint that there is probable cause to believe that a violation of the City Code or ordinance has been committed and that the defendant committed it. 
(Code 1968, § 1-3-4.)  
Sec. 17-7. - Warrants—Issuance upon request. 
Warrants shall be issued upon specific request from the officer in charge, in place of a summons, but only when specifically requested. 
(Code 1968, § 1-3-6.) 
 For state law as to issuance of warrants, see C.R.S. 1973, § 16-5-206.  
Sec. 17-8. - Same—Issuance upon failure to appear in court. 
If a person upon whom a summons has been served pursuant to this article fails to appear in person or by counsel before the municipal court as specified therein, a bench warrant shall be issued for his arrest. 
(Code 1968, § 1-3-8.) 
 For state law as to issuance of warrant upon failure to respond to summons, see C.R.S. 1973, § 16-5-207.  
Sec. 17-9. - Posting of bond. 
When the court is not immediately available, provision for bail of persons arrested and brought to the city jail on charges of violations of the Code or ordinances of the city shall be made. Such persons may post bail pursuant to rules of the municipal court, by the court clerk or by any other responsible or appropriate officer designated by the court. The court shall provide, by rule, for the conditions and circumstances under which such bail will be granted pending appearance before the court. Bail so required may be, at the election of the accused, in the form of cash security, real property, tangible or intangible personal property, acceptable corporate surety bond or adequate and acceptable private sureties. In cases when so permitted by court rules promulgated pursuant to this section, bail may be upon personal recognizance without security or surety. 
(Code 1968, § 1-3-9.) 
 For state law authorizing city to accept bail bond, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-12-101(61).  
Sec. 17-10. - Right to jury trial; prerequisites; selection. 
(a)  Any defendant charged with a Cortez City Code or city ordinance offense, other than a noncriminal traffic infraction or offense, shall have the right to a jury trial if, within twenty days after arraignment or entry of plea, such defendant files with the court a written jury demand and at the same time tenders to the court a jury fee of twenty-five dollars for a three-person jury or forty-three dollars for a jury of six persons. The fee may be waived by the court because of the indigence of a defendant. 
(b)  No defendant shall have a right to a trial by jury for any noncriminal traffic infraction or offense. Except as hereinafter provided in Cortez City Code section 16-4, all offenses that violate any provision of chapter 16 of the Cortez City Code or of any provision of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities, as currently adopted or as may be amended from time to time are hereby declared to be noncriminal traffic infractions or offenses. Noncriminal offenses are punishable by a fine of up to four hundred ninety-nine dollars only, except as set forth in Cortez City Code section 16-4. 
(c)  Any defendant charged with violation of any of the offenses of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities now in effect or as may be amended from time to time listed in Cortez City Code section 16-4. 
(d)  In the event that a defendant is charged with more than one traffic offense arising out of the same incident and at least one of the charged offenses is listed in Cortez City Code section 16-4 of this Code the defendant shall have the right to demand a trial by jury as to all such offenses, which shall be consolidated for purposes of trial. 
(e)  No defendant convicted of any offense declared to be a noncriminal traffic infraction or offenses shall be punished by imprisonment for any such conviction. 
(f)  Where applicable, failure to make a demand in writing for a jury trial shall constitute a waiver of such right. The defendant shall be tried by a jury of three in number unless at the time of making a demand for a jury trial, request is made for a greater number, not to exceed six jurors. Failure to designate the number of jurors to try the case shall constitute waiver of a jury in excess of three jurors. Upon request for a jury trial, the court shall set a time and place for such trial and shall bring before the court a sufficient number of jurors for the trial of the case. 
(Ord. No. 693, § 1; Ord. No. 1101.) 
( Ord. No. 1200, 5-26-15 ) 
 For state law as to trial by jury in municipal courts, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 13-10-101, 13-10-114.  
Sec. 17-11. - Officer to give testimony. 
(a)  At any hearing on a traffic violation which carries only a fine and no jail time, as set out in section 17-10 of this chapter, the officer who issued the citation may offer evidence of the facts concerning the alleged infraction. 
(b)  The officer may give the court a statement of the facts, at which time the party receiving the citation shall be allowed to cross-examine the officer. 
(c)  The officer may not be allowed to conduct any cross-examination, although he may make a statement in rebuttal after the person receiving the citation or any witness called has testified. 
(d)  The officer may be questioned by the court. 
(e)  Nothing provided herein shall prevent the officer from being represented by the city attorney's office if the defendant shall have counsel present. 
(Ord. No. 777.)  
Sec. 17-12. - Adoption of state and county rules of procedure; promulgation of additional rules by judge. 
Rules concerning the selection of jurors, challenges for cause and other matters concerning court procedure and trials shall, as far as practical, be governed by the statutes of the state and the Municipal Law Rules of Procedure promulgated by the Colorado Supreme Court. The municipal judge is hereby authorized to make such rules of court as he may deem advisable for the conduct of the business of the court, subject to the approval of the city attorney. 
(Code 1968, § 1-3-12.) 
 For state law as to powers and procedures of municipal court, see C.R.S. 1973, § 13-10-112.  
Sec. 17-13. - Entry of judgment generally. 
In all cases either tried by a jury or to the court when the defendant is found guilty, the court, in its discretion, shall fix and determine the sentence, penalty and punishment together with costs, or the court may suspend all or any part thereof or may exercise the powers of probation as deemed advisable under the circumstances, within the discretion of the court, and judgment shall be entered and execution issued thereon without delay. The court may, however, in its discretion, stay the execution of any penalty for a period not to exceed ten days; provided, that the defendant or his counsel have an opportunity to offer testimony or statements in mitigation before judgment is entered. 
(Code 1968, § 1-3-13.) 
 For state law as to power of municipal judge to impose fines and penalties, see C.R.S. 1973, § 13-10-113.  
Sec. 17-14. - Municipal court costs and fees. 
(a)  Court costs before the municipal court of the city of Cortez shall be set as follows: 
(1)  Court costs shall be reviewed annually and set in the annual budget process by resolution. 
(2)  Court costs shall be imposed upon the entry of a guilty plea or after a conviction at trial. Five dollars of court costs assessed for each case where defendants appear in court shall be paid into the police department budget for the use of the drug awareness resistance and education (DARE) program. The balance of any court costs so assessed shall be paid into the general fund. 
(3)  Court costs shall be assessed on all other offenses which are paid prior to the date of court appearance. All court costs collected in this manner shall be paid into the general fund. 
(4)  Jury demand fees in cases tried to a jury of three shall be set annually by resolution and the cost of each additional juror over three shall also be set by annual resolution. 
(5)  All other court costs for copies, transcripts, CDs, etc. shall be in accordance with the city's open records/criminal justice records, fees and costs annually set by resolution. In the event that the cost of a particular item, copy, etc. is not set in said resolution the city shall be paid for its actual time, costs and material etc. for providing said copy or information, etc. 
(b)  Surcharges. There shall be a surcharge of ten dollars assessed on all traffic tickets and other criminal summons and complaints upon issue for the operation of the Bridge Shelter. Said surcharge shall be collected at the same time as fines and court costs. All monies collected shall be paid to the Bridge Shelter at least annually or such other more frequent times as shall be determined by the finance director and city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1158, 11-22-11; Ord. No. 1177, 2-26-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1158, adopted November 22, 2011, repealed the former § 17-14, and enacted a new § 17-14 as set out herein. The former § 17-14 pertained to court costs schedule and derived from Ord. No. 669; Ord. No. 832 and Ord. No. 1011. 
 For state law as to power of municipal judge to assess costs, see C.R.S. 1973, § 13-10-113.  
Sec. 17-15. - Juror fees. 
Juror fees shall be as follows: For serving as a juror, for one day or part thereof, six dollars; for each juror summoned and required to appear in attendance of court, three dollars. 
(Ord. No. 669, § 2 (part).)  
Sec. 17-16. - Repealed September 13, 2005.  
Sec. 17-16A. - Sentencing/municipal court. 
(a)  A violation of any of the provisions of the Cortez City Code/City Ordinances is punishable by a fine of up to four hundred ninety-nine dollars, a jail sentence of up to one hundred eighty days or by both a fine and jail sentence, except as set forth below or at Cortez City Code section 17-10, right to jury trial, section 18B-9, juvenile sentencing and section 16-4, Model Traffic Code. 
(b)  Unless otherwise indicated each day or portion thereof any violation of any provision of the Cortez City Code/City Ordinances shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Unpaid fines and costs may be collected by the court as set forth in C.R.S. 13-10-114 and 18-1.3-506 C.R.S. now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. Unpaid fines and court costs in appropriate circumstances may be collected as set forth/pursuant to § 31-20-105 C.R.S. and certified to the Montezuma County Treasurer for collection in the same manner taxes are collected. 
(d)  In addition to fines or a jail sentence, the court may approve deferred judgment and sentencing for a period of time of up to one year, unsupervised probation of up to one year, a deferred prosecution for up to one year, or suspend jail or fines, contingent upon such terms and conditions including payment of restitution as the court finds appropriate. 
(e)  Juveniles shall not be sentenced to jail as a result of a conviction of the Cortez City Code/City Ordinances. Juveniles shall be sentenced as set forth in Cortez City Code section 18B-9, juvenile sentencing, now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 1, 9-25-12; Ord. No. 1200, 5-26-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1170, § 1, adopted September 25, 2012, repealed the former § 17-16A, and enacted a new § 17-16A as set out herein. The former 17-16A pertained to fines; jail time; deferred judgment and derived from Ord. No. 1052.)  
Sec. 17-17. - Repealed September 13, 2005.  
Sec. 17-18. - Appeal to district court. 
Appeals from the municipal court of the city to the district court shall be as provided by state statutes. 
(Code 1968, § 1-3-18.) 
 For state law as to procedure for appeal from municipal court determinations, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 13-10-116 to 13-10-125.  
Sec. 17-19. - Court of record. 
(a)  The municipal court of the city shall be a court of record. 
(b)  A verbatim record of all proceedings and evidence at trials shall be kept by electric devices or stenographic means. 
(c)  The judge of the municipal court shall be admitted to, and currently licensed in, the practice of law in the state. 
(Ord. No. 503, §§ 1—3.)  
Sec. 17-20. - Municipal court clerk/administrator. 
(a)  Duties. The municipal court clerk/administrator shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for administering all functions of the municipal court by providing the necessary support services, including the processing of court documents and correspondence; 
(2)  Prepare the court's annual budget and monitor the same; 
(3)  Provide court information to the public, defendants, attorneys and law enforcement officers regarding court times and fines; 
(4)  Collect fines and bonds and deposit the same in the appropriate fund. The municipal court clerk/administrator shall maintain records of all funds and prepare necessary accounting statements for the director of finance; 
(5)  Record court proceedings and acts as clerk of the court, and prepare post-court paperwork; 
(6)  Perform all other duties as assigned by the city manager and as prescribed in the Charter of the codified ordinances of the city, as amended. 
(b)  Requirements. The municipal court clerk/administrator shall: 
(1)  Reserved; 
(2)  Take and subscribe an oath of office pursuant to article II, section 5 of the Charter; 
(3)  Be appointed by, and report to, the city manager, and shall be subject to any other requirements as may be prescribed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1.) 
(Ord. No. 1157, 11-22-11; Ord. No. 1158, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 17-21. - Evidence alcohol related offenses. 
(a)  During any trial for a violation of any alcohol related offense contained in this Code, any bottle, can, or any other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can, or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can, or other container shall be admissible into evidence and shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can, or other container were composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can, or other container as "beer," "ale," "malt beverage," "fermented malt beverage," "malt liquor," "wine," "champagne," "whiskey" or "whisky," "gin," "vodka," "tequila," "schnapps," "brandy," "cognac," "liqueur," "cordial," "alcohol," or "liquor" shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can, or other container was composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. 
(b)  The qualitative result of an alcohol test or tests shall be admissible at the trial of any person charged with a violation of any alcohol related offense contained in this Code, upon a showing that the device or devices used to conduct such test or tests have been approved as accurate in detecting alcohol by the executive director of the department of public health and environment. 
(c)  Official records of the department of public health and environment relating to the certification of breath test instruments, certification of operators and operator instructors of breath test instruments, certification of standard solutions, and certification of laboratories shall be official records of the state. Copies of such records, attested by the executive director of the department of public health and environment or his deputy and accompanied by a certificate bearing the official seal for said department, which state that the executive director of the department has custody of such records, shall be admissible in all courts of record and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the information contained in such records. The official seal of the department described in this subsection may consist of a rubber stamp producing a facsimile of the seal stamped upon the document. 
(d)  In any judicial proceeding in the Cortez Municipal Court concerning a charge of any alcohol related offense contained in the Cortez City Code, the court shall take judicial notice of methods of testing a person's blood, breath, saliva, or urine for the presence of alcohol and of the design and operation of devices certified by the department of public health and environment for testing a person's blood, breath, saliva, or urine for the presence of alcohol. This subsection shall not prevent the necessity of establishing during a trial that the testing devices were working properly and that such testing devices were properly operated. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude a defendant from offering evidence concerning the accuracy of testing devices. 
(Ord. No. 1176, 2-12-13)  
CHAPTER 18. - OFFENSES—MISCELLANEOUS. 
 For state law as to authority of city to pass police ordinances, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-15-401(a). As to authority of city to pass ordinances generally, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-15-103. As to the state criminal code generally, see C.R.S. 1973, § 18-1-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Alcoholic beverages—Drinking in public generally. 
From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to drink any spirituous, intoxicating malt, vinous, mixed or fermented liquor at any place described in section 18-2(c) of this chapter between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, except as authorized by section 18-3, Liquor licenses—Special events, Cortez City Code, Ordinance No. 1112, Series 2008, Cortez City Code and section 4-6, Outdoor dining central business district. A violation of this section shall be punishable as set forth in section 17-16A, Cortez City Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 591, § 1; Ord. No. 1112 (part).) 
( Ord. No. 1227 , 8-8-17)  
Sec. 18-2. - Possession of open containers of liquor, wine, or fermented malt beverages. 
(a)  It shall be illegal to have possession of an alcohol beverage whether open or unopened on any city-owned property as the same shall be described on the city zoning map. It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to carry or have any open container of malt, vinous or spirituous liquors or fermented malt beverages on a street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot, park or other place in the city, as enumerated by the city zoning map. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink malt, vinous or spirituous liquors or fermented malt beverages in any of the above enumerated places in the city provided, however, it shall be an absolute defense if an open bottle of vinous liquor was obtained at an establishment which is the holder of a hotel and restaurant license, manufacturer's license, limited winery license, beer and wine license, tavern license, vintner's license, or brew pub license, and the said establishment had allowed the removal of one container of partially consumed vinous liquor purchased on the premises, so long as the original container did not contain more than seven hundred fifty mls of vinous liquor and has been re-corked before its removal. The establishment must have means available for the consumption in accordance with C.R.S. section 12-47-120. 
(c)  The following areas shall be exempted from the terms of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The Conquistador Golf Course, which shall be allowed to sell alcoholic beverages with a hotel and restaurant license, which may be consumed on the golf course, and according to section 18-3, Liquor licenses—Special events, Cortez City Code, Ordinance No. 1112, Series 2008. 
The organization seeking sponsorship of the special event shall obtain proper application as agreed upon by parks and recreation and the police department. 
The City of Cortez may require the permittee to provide security at any event at which alcohol is permitted. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as a waiver of any penal ordinance of the City of Cortez. 
And according to Cortez City Code section 4-6, Outdoor dining-central business district, a violation of this section shall be punishable as set forth in section 17-16A, Cortez City Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1079; Ord. No. 1112 (part).) 
( Ord. No. 1221 , 3-28-17; Ord. No. 1227 , 8-8-17)  
Sec. 18-3. - Liquor licenses—Special events. 
The city council of the City of Cortez reserves to itself the right to allow the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on all city property, including the recreation center, in accordance with its right to issue special events permits as set forth in the Colorado Revised Statutes at Section 12-48-101 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
Applicants applying for a special events permit on city property shall be a nonprofit and meet all qualifications as set forth in Section 12-48-102, C.R.S., as amended from time to time, all conditions imposed by the Colorado Department of Revenue Liquor Enforcement regulations and all applicable state, county and city laws. 
Special events permit applicants shall meet all conditions of use for city property as set forth in the City Code, as amended from time to time, as city council may impose by resolution, or through regulations promulgated by the city manager. 
The applicant shall carry premises and liquor liability insurance in an amount to be determined by resolution of the council or the city manager, if authorized by council. 
All applications for any type of special events permit shall be made on forms provided by the state licensing authority, department of revenue, liquor enforcement division. 
The applications for a special event permit shall be verified by oath or affirmation of an officer of the applicant organization. The properly verified application shall be submitted to the City of Cortez city council, or other designated agency as set forth by statute or ordinance, not less than thirty days prior to date of the special event. 
Each special event permit application shall be accompanied by a check made out to the City of Cortez in the amount necessary to cover all licensing and permit fees involved. 
All applicants shall have a state sales tax license. 
Applicants shall provide such support services as are necessary for the event in the opinion of the city manager or his designee. Support services to include clean-up, security, bathroom facilities, fencing, etc. As a condition of granting the permit, the city may make, as a condition of the permit, the provision of said support services. 
Applicant shall comply with all rules, regulations of the city and its departments. 
The city may deny an application for any grounds, for violation of the provisions of Article 48, Colorado Revised Statutes, for violation of the provisions of Title 12 Articles 46, 47, 48 C.R.S. as amended. The city may deny any application which it determines is incomplete, inaccurate, false or inappropriate. 
No applicant shall allow attendees of the event to bring onto the licensed premises or the event's complete premises, whichever is larger, their own alcoholic or fermented beverages or to violate any federal, state or city ordinances at the permitted event. 
Applicant shall be both criminally and civilly liable for any violations of the state liquor code or regulations as may be amended from time to time, and all other applicable state laws, county or city ordinances. 
A violation of this section shall be punishable as set forth in section 17-16A, Cortez City Code as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1112 (part).) 
( Ord. No. 1221 , 3-28-17)  
Sec. 18-4. - Prohibition of underage consumption of alcohol. 
(a)  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
Establishment means a business, firm, enterprise, service or fraternal organization, club, institution, entity, group, or residence, and any real property, including buildings and improvements, connected therewith, and shall also include any members, employees, and occupants associated therewith. 
Ethyl alcohol means any substance, which is or contains ethyl alcohol. 
Possession of ethyl alcohol means that a person has or holds any amount of ethyl alcohol anywhere on his person, or that a person owns or has custody of ethyl alcohol, or has ethyl alcohol within his immediate presence and control. 
Private property means any dwelling and its curtilage which is being used by a natural person or natural persons for habitation and which is not open to the public and privately owned real property which is not open to the public. "Private property" shall not include: 
(1)  Any establishment which has or is required to have a license pursuant to article 46, 47, or 48 of title 12, C.R.S.; or 
(2)  Any establishment which sells ethyl alcohol or upon which ethyl alcohol is sold; or 
(3)  Any establishment, which leases, rents, or provides accommodations to members of the public generally. 
(b)  (1)  Any person age eighteen to twenty years of age who possesses or consumes ethyl alcohol anywhere in the city of Cortez commits illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person. 
Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person is a strict liability offense. 
(2)  Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or jail up to one hundred eighty days or both a fine and jail sentence. The court, upon sentencing a defendant pursuant to this subsection, may, in addition to any fine, suspend jail time on condition that the defendant submit to and complete an alcohol evaluation or assessment, an alcohol education program, or an alcohol treatment program at such defendant's own expense. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the offense described in subsection (b) of this section that the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed by a person under twenty-one years of age under the following circumstances: 
(1)  While such person was legally upon private property with the knowledge and consent of the owner or legal possessor of such private property and the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed with the consent of his parent or legal guardian who was present during such possession or consumption; or 
(2)  When the existence of ethyl alcohol in a person's body was due solely to the ingestion of a confectionery which contained ethyl alcohol within the limits prescribed by section 25-5-410 (1) (i) (II), C.R.S.; or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed, or intended primarily for a purpose other than oral human ingestion; or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed, or intended solely for medicinal or hygienic purposes; or solely from the ingestion of a beverage which contained less than one-half of one percent of ethyl alcohol by weight. 
(3)  The person is a student who: 
(A)  Tastes but does not imbibe an alcohol beverage only while under the direct supervision of an instructor who is at least twenty-one years of age and employed by a post-secondary school; 
(B)  Is enrolled in a university or a post-secondary school accredited or certified by an agency recognized by the United States department of education, a nationally recognized accrediting agency or association, or the "Private Occupational Education Act of 1981," article 59 of title 12, C.R.S.; 
(C)  Is participating in a culinary arts, food service, or restaurant management degree program; and 
(D)  Tastes but does not imbibe the alcohol beverage for instructional purposes as a part of a required course in which the alcohol beverage, except the portion the student tastes, remains under the control of the instructor. 
(d)  The possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol shall not constitute a violation of this section if such possession or consumption takes place for religious purposes protected by the first amendment to the United States constitution. 
An underage person and one or two other persons shall be immune from criminal prosecution under this section if they establish the following: 
(1)  One of the underage persons called 911 and reported that another underage person was in need of medical assistance due to alcohol consumption; 
(2)  The underage person who called 911 and, if applicable, one or two other persons acting in concert with the underage person who called 911 provided each of their names to the 911 operator; 
(3)  The underage person was the first person to make the 911 report; and 
(4)  The underage person and, if applicable, one or two other persons acting in concert with the underage person who made the 911 call remained on the scene with the underage person in need of medical assistance until assistance arrived and cooperated with medical assistance and law enforcement personnel on the scene. 
(e)  Prima facie evidence of a violation of subsection (b) of this section shall consist of: 
(1)  Evidence that the defendant age eighteen to twenty years of age and possessed or consumed ethyl alcohol anywhere in the city of Cortez; or 
(2)  Evidence that the defendant was age eighteen to twenty years of age and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with ethyl alcohol intoxication or impairment while present anywhere in the city of Cortez. 
(f)  During any trial for a violation of subsection (b) of this section, any bottle, can, or any other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can, or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can, or other container shall be admissible into evidence and shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can, or other container were composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can, or other container as "beer," "ale," "malt beverage," "fermented malt beverage," "malt liquor," "wine," "champagne," "whiskey" or "whisky," "gin," "vodka," "tequila," "schnapps," "brandy," "cognac," "liqueur," "cordial," "alcohol," or "liquor" shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can, or other container was composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. 
(g)  A parent or legal guardian of a person eighteen to twenty years of age or any natural person who has the permission of such parent or legal guardian may give or permit the possession and consumption of ethyl alcohol to or by a person under the age eighteen to twenty years of age under the conditions described in subsection (c)(1) of this section. This subsection shall not be construed to permit any establishment which is or is required to be licensed pursuant to article 46, 47, or 48 of title 12, C.R.S., or any members, employees, or occupants of any such establishment to give, provide, make available, or sell ethyl alcohol to a person under twenty-one years of age. 
(h)  The qualitative result of an alcohol test or tests shall be admissible at the trial of any person charged with a violation of subsection (b) of this section upon a showing that the device or devices used to conduct such test or tests have been approved as accurate in detecting alcohol by the executive director of the department of public health and environment. 
(i)  Official records of the department of public health and environment relating to the certification of breath test instruments, certification of operators and operator instructors of breath test instruments, certification of standard solutions, and certification of laboratories shall be official records of the state. Copies of such records, attested by the executive director of the department of public health and environment or his deputy and accompanied by a certificate bearing the official seal for said department, which state that the executive director of the department has custody of such records, shall be admissible in all courts of record and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the information contained in such records. The official seal of the department described in this subsection may consist of a rubber stamp producing a facsimile of the seal stamped upon the document. 
(j)  In any judicial proceeding in any court of this state concerning a charge under subsection (b) of this section, the court shall take judicial notice of methods of testing a person's blood, breath, saliva, or urine for the presence of alcohol and of the design and operation of devices certified by the department of public health and environment for testing a person's blood, breath, saliva, or urine for the presence of alcohol. This subsection shall not prevent the necessity of establishing during a trial that the testing devices were working properly and that such testing devices were properly operated. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude a defendant from offering evidence concerning the accuracy of testing devices. 
(k)  No law enforcement officer shall enter upon any private property to investigate any violation of this section without probable cause. 
(Ord. No. 1122.)  
Sec. 18-5. - Violation of bail bond conditions. 
(a)  A person who is released on bail bond of whatever kind, and either before, during, or after release is accused by complaint, information, indictment, or the filing of any other charges arising from the conduct for which he was arrested commits a violation of this ordinance if he knowingly fails to appear for trial or other court appearances in the case in which the bail bond was filed or if he knowingly violates the conditions of the bail bond. 
(b)  Bail Bond conditions may be set in general for all offenses by the municipal court judge and in addition may be set specific to the defendant and/or charge filed against said defendant at the judge's discretion. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be punishable as set forth in section 17-16A, Cortez City code as currently in effect and as maybe amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1158, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 18-6. - False reporting. 
A person commits the crime of false reporting if he or she knowingly: 
(a)  Assumes a false or fictitious identity or legal capacity, and in such identity he or she: 
(1)  Performs an act that if done by the person falsely impersonated might subject such person to an action, special proceeding, civil or criminal or to liability, charge, forfeiture or penalty. 
(2)  Uses false or fictitious personal identifying information to identify a specific individual such as but not limited to a name, date of birth, social security #, official government issued driver's license or ID card number. 
(3)  A violation of this section shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 1228 , 8-22-17)  
Sec. 18-7. - Repealed April 13, 1982.  
Secs. - 18-8, 18-9. Reserved.  
Sec. 18-10. - Repealed April 13, 1982.  
Sec. 18-11. - Disturbing the peace. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of disturbing the peace if he or she intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly: 
(1)  Makes a coarse and obviously offensive utterance, gesture, or display in a public place and the utterance, gesture, or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; or 
(2)  Makes unreasonable noise in a public place or near a private residence that he has no right to occupy; or 
(3)  Fights with another in a public place except in an amateur or professional contest of athletic skill; or 
(4)  Not being a peace officer, discharges a firearm in a public place except when engaged in lawful target practice or hunting; or the ritual discharge of blank ammunition cartridges as an attendee at a funeral for a deceased person who was a Veteran of the Armed Forces of the United States; or 
(5)  Not being a peace officer, displays a deadly weapon, displays any article used or fashioned in a manner to cause a person to reasonably believe that the article is a deadly weapon, or represents verbally or otherwise that he or she is armed with a deadly weapon in a public place in a manner calculated to alarm. 
(6)  For purposes of these subsection(s) (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4) and (a)(5) a member of the Cortez Police Department is empowered to make a prima facie determination if such noise or conduct constitutes Disturbing the Peace. 
(b)  Schools, hospitals, and libraries. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person by himself or in the operation of any instrument, machine or vehicle to make any unnecessary noise within one hundred fifty feet of any hospital or any institution reserved for the sick or any school during school hours or any library during normal library hours. 
(2)  For purposes of this section (b)(1), a member of the police department is empowered to make a prima facie determination as to whether such noise constitutes a violation of disturbing the peace. 
(c)  Acts of another. It is unlawful for a person to permit another to commit an act of disturbing the peace in or upon any premises owned, possessed, or under management or control of the person when it is in that person's power to prevent another from committing such an act. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense: 
(1)  To subsection (a)(3) of this section that the actor had significant provocation for his abusive or threatening conduct; 
(2)  To subsections (a)(4), (a)(5) of this section that the actor acted necessarily to prevent serious bodily injury to himself or another. 
(e)  A violation of section 18-11 disturbing the peace shall be punishable as set forth in section 17-16A Cortez City Code now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1968, § 11-4-6; Ord. No. 581, § 7; Ord. No. 757; Ord. No. 837; Ord. No. 1111 (part).) 
( Ord. No. 1217 , 9-27-16) 
 As to disorderly conduct generally, see C.R.S. 1973, § 18-9-106.  
Sec. 18-12. - Indecent exposure—public indecency. 
(a)  A person commits indecent exposure if he/she knowingly exposes his/her genitals to the view of any person under circumstances in which such conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm to the other person. 
(b)  Any person who performs any of the following in a public place or where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public commits public indecency: 
(1)  An act of sexual intercourse; or 
(2)  A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person; or 
(3)  Urinates or defecates. 
(c)  Public indecency is a strict liability crime. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, a member of the police department is empowered to make a prima facie determination as to whether such behavior constitutes an indecent exposure or public indecency. 
(e)  A violation of section 18-12 Cortez City Code shall be punishable as set forth in section 17-16A Cortez City Code now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 1217 , 9-27-16)  
Sec. 18-13. - False alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and knowingly make, turn in or knowingly give a false alarm of fire or need of police or ambulance assistance or to knowingly aid or abet in the committing of such an act. 
(Ord. No. 418, § 1; Ord. No. 420, § 1; Ord. No. 581, § 8.) 
 For state law as to false alarms, see C.R.S. 1973, § 18-8-111.  
Sec. 18-14. - False reports to police. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and knowingly make or file with the police department of the city any false statement or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any offense occurring within the city. 
(Ord. No. 418, § 1; Ord. No. 581, § 9.) 
 For state law as to false reports to authorities, see C.R.S. 1973, § 18-8-111.  
Sec. 18-15. - Fences—Barbed wire, pointed posts, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to put upon, keep or maintain any barb, barbed wire, sharpened nails or any other pointed or sharpened thing of metallic substance upon any fence, cellar guard or window guard that fronts upon or that is erected or constructed upon any street, avenue, lane, alley, building or sidewalk so that such projects or extends beyond the surface of the wood or other material of which such fence, cellar guard or window guard may be constructed. 
(Code 1968, § 11-4-18.)  
Sec. 18-16. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-17. - Repealed April 13, 1982.  
Secs. 18-18 to 18-20. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-21. - Repealed April 13, 1982.  
Secs. 18-22, 18-23. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-24. - Repealed April 13, 1982.  
Secs. 18-25, 18-26. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-27. - Repealed April 13, 1982.  
Sec. 18-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1216 , adopted September 27, 2016, repealed § 18-28, which pertained to loitering prohibited upon public ways and derived from the Code of 1968, § 18-9-113 and Ord. No. 581.  
Sec. 18-29. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-30. - Officers—Impersonating, resisting, etc. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly or willfully: 
(1)  Falsely pretend to be a police officer, firefighter, or other officer of the city and perform an act in that falsely pretended capacity. 
(2)  (A) Exercise or attempt to exercise, without being duly authorized, any duty, power or function of any police officer, firefighter or any city officer. 
(B)  It shall be a defense that such person acted necessarily in an emergency in the interest of protecting public health, safety, or welfare, in the absence of the immediate presence of a police officer, firefighter, or city officer. 
(3)  Obstruct a police officer or firefighter, or any city officer by using or threatening to use violence, force, or physical interference, or obstacle, or knowingly obstruct, impair, or hinder the enforcement of the penal law or the preservation of the peace by a police officer acting under color of his official authority, or knowingly obstruct, impair, or hinder the prevention, control, or abatement of fire by a firefighter, acting under color of his official authority. An officer acts "under color of his official authority" when, in the regular course of assigned duties, he is called upon to make, and does make, a judgment in good faith based upon facts and circumstances that an authorized action should be taken by him in his official capacity. The term "officer" as used in this section means an officer in uniform or, if out of uniform, one who has identified himself by exhibiting his credentials as such officer. 
(4)  (A)  A person commits resisting arrest if he knowingly prevents or attempts to prevent a police officer acting under color of his official authority from effecting an arrest of the actor or another by: 
(i)  Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the police officer or another. 
(ii)  Using any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing bodily injury to the police officer or another. 
(B)  It shall not be a defense that the arrest was unlawful if the police officer was acting under color of his official authority. 
(Code 1968, § 11-4-29; Ord. No. 578, § 1; amended by memo 3519; Ord. No. 1111 (part).) 
 For state law as to obstruction of justice generally, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 18-8-101 to 18-8-114. As to criminal impersonation, see C.R.S. 1973, § 18-5-113.  
Sec. 18-31. - Canine corps—Mistreatment, interference, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable, tease, provoke or kill any dog used by the police department when such dog is being used in the performance of the functions or duties of the police department. 
Further, it shall be unlawful to knowingly torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable, or kill any dog owned by the police department when the dog is at the residence of its handler or the dog is in its designated place of kennel or place boarded. 
(Ord. No. 649, § 1.)  
Sec. 18-32. - Repealed May 23, 2006.  
Sec. 18-33. - Violation—Penalty. 
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 17, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 18-34. - Posters, handbills, etc.—Defacing, removing, etc.; deemed nuisance when posted without authority. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to either wilfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently or in any other manner tear down, deface or cover up any posted advertisement or bill of any person when such is posted or put in harmony with the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city. 
Any handbill, poster, placard or painted or printed matter which is stuck, posted or pasted upon any public or private house, store or other buildings, or upon any fence, power pole, telephone pole or other structure without the permission of the owner, agent or occupant of the house, shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Code 1968, § 11-4-22.)  
Sec. 18-35. - Prisoners—Escaping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, while a prisoner in the city jail, or in any other place where prisoners are confined, or otherwise in custody of and confined by the city, to escape, attempt to escape or to intentionally and knowingly assist others to escape or attempt to escape from such custody or confinement. 
(Code 1968, § 11-5-2; Ord. No. 581, § 17.) 
 For state law as to escape generally, see C.R.S. 1973, § 18-8-208.  
Sec. 18-36. - Same—Assisting escape; introduction of contraband. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly assist or aid, or attempt to assist or aid any person in the custody of or confined under the authority of the city to escape from jail, place of confinement or custody. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly make available to, present to or place within the reach of, or to cause to be made available to, presented to or placed within the reach of any person confined under authority of the city, vinous, spirituous or malt liquors, or any tool, implement or other thing calculated to aid in the escape of such person so confined or any other person so confined under authority of the city. 
(Code 1968, § 11-5-1; Ord. No. 581, § 18.) 
 For state law as to aiding prisoners to escape, see C.R.S. 1973, § 18-8-201. As to introducing contraband into penal institutions, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 18-8-203, 18-8-204.  
Sec. 18-37. - Private property—Injuring or destroying. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to either wilfully, maliciously, or wantonly injure or destroy real property, or improvements thereto, or movable or personal property, belonging to any person. 
(Code 1968, § 11-4-20.) 
 For state law as to trespass, tampering and criminal mischief, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 18-4-501 to 18-4-513.  
Sec. 18-38. - Repealed April 13, 1982.  
Sec. 18-39. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Graffiti prohibited; removal required. 
(1)  As used herein, the term "graffiti" or "graffiti and related vandalism" means any unauthorized inscription, symbol, design or configuration of letters, numbers or symbols, or any combination thereof written, drawn, scribed, etched, marked, painted, stained, stuck on or adhered to any surface (public or private), including, but not limited to, trees, signs, poles, fixtures, utility boxes, walls, windows, roofs, paths, walks, fences, streets, underpasses, overpasses, bridges, trestles, buildings, and any other surface or surfaces, regardless of the material of the component. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person or group of persons to commit or attempt to commit any overt act resulting in the application of graffiti or engaging in or attempting to engage in any act of related vandalism. Such prohibited conduct shall include, but not be limited to, conspiring to commit or assist in the application of graffiti or engaging in or assisting in any act of related vandalism, including, but not limited to, acting as a "look out," regardless of whether the act of applying graffiti or engaging in related vandalism was actually committed or witnessed. 
(3)  Graffiti or graffiti-related vandalism which appears on property or structures (public or private) is deemed to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement as herein proved. Should an owner or responsible party fail to remove or otherwise abate the graffiti as required in any notice of violation served upon him, the city may proceed to abate the graffiti or cause its removal and bill the owner or responsible party for the cost thereof. In the event of nonpayment, the city attorney shall be and is hereby authorized to take appropriate measures to create a lien against the subject property for purposes of recovering such costs, together with interest as provided by applicable law. If it is determined by the city that graffiti exists on property in violation of this section, the city manager or his designated agent may notify the owner of the subject property or responsible party in writing, through the issuance of a notice of violation providing a maximum of ten days within which the graffiti is to be abated or otherwise removed. Such notice may be served by certified mail, personal service or by posting the subject property and publishing a notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within the city of Cortez. Such notice shall identify the property in violation, shall generally describe the location of the graffiti, and shall direct that such graffiti shall be removed or otherwise abated within ten days of the receipt of the notice. It is unlawful for any property owner to fail to remove or otherwise abate graffiti or related vandalism within the time frame set forth in the above notice once the same has been served. 
(4)  As part of any sentence imposed by the municipal court with respect to persons who either admit or are convicted of a violation of this section, the court may, as part of its sentencing, order that restitution be paid to the owner or party responsible for the removal or abatement of the graffiti pursuant to subsection (a)(3) of this section. If the person found to be in violation of this section is a minor under the age of eighteen years living with his or her parents or lawful guardian or custodian, the court may order restitution to be paid by the minor's parents or lawfully designated guardian or custodian. With respect to any minor under the age of eighteen years who admits or is convicted of the application of graffiti or any act of related vandalism on property owned by the city of Cortez, the city attorney shall be and is hereby authorized to seek restitution on behalf of the city against any parent, parents, lawful guardian or custodian with whom the minor resides pursuant to C.R.S., section 13-21-107, as amended. 
(b)  Possession of graffiti implements or paraphernalia by minors prohibited. It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to possess any graffiti implement or paraphernalia in a public place. 
(1)  For purposes of this section, the terms hereinafter set forth shall have the definitions as herein indicated: 
Aerosol paint container. Any canister, can, bottle, container or other receptacle which contains any substance commonly known as paint, stain, dye or any other pigmented substance which is or can be modified to contain pressure (or be pressurized) in order to impel or propel any such substance. 
Etcher. Any tool, device or other mechanism including, but not limited to, any tool, device, drill, bit or other mechanism commonly known as "glass etchers," "metal etchers," "cutting instruments" or any other instrument that can be applied by pressure or any other contact with any surface, including, but not limited to, glass, mirrors, windows, steel, aluminum, brass, tin, fiberglass, wood, plastic, concrete or any other surface which can cause any markings or scratches thereon. 
Graffiti implements or paraphernalia. Any substance or material such as, but not limited to, aerosol paint containers, markers, paint sticks, paint bombs, etchers or gum labels. The term shall also include, but shall not be limited to, tips or nozzles which can be applied to aerosol paint containers; any records of graffiti or related vandalism, including, but not limited to, pictures, photographs, drawings, scrap books, or other records depicting or illustrating any forms of graffiti or related vandalism. 
Gum label. Any substance consisting of a material such as, but not limited to, paper, fabric, cloth, plastic, vinyl or any other similar material, where the material also contains one or more surfaces containing a substance such as, but not limited to, adhesive or glue which cannot be removed from the surface in an intact condition with minimal effort. The term shall include decals, stickers, patches, stamps or labels. 
Markers. Any indelible or permanent ink marker or marking pen or any similar implement which contains any pigmented substances including, but not limited to, ink or any other substance which cannot be easily and completely removed with water after said substance has dried, where the width of the marking is one-sixteenth of one inch or greater. 
Paint bomb. Any latex, rubber, plastic or synthetic enclosure which contains any substance commonly known as paint, stain, ink or any other pigmented substance which is either designed to or is capable of rupture upon impact with any solid surface resulting in the application of the contents of said container to said surface. 
Paint stick. Any device which contains any substance, solid or liquid, including, but not limited to, any form of paint, stain, ink, chalk, wax, epoxy or any other similar substance which can be applied to any surface by such means as applying pressure to or contacting any surface in such a way as to leave any visible mark measuring at least one-sixteenth of one inch at any point. 
(2)  Possession of what would otherwise constitute graffiti implements or paraphernalia shall not be a violation of this section in the following circumstances: 
(A)  Possession of graffiti implements or paraphernalia by any minor enrolled in any educational class which requires otherwise legal possession of such implement or paraphernalia, provided the minor is carrying written verification of any such requirements, including color(s), size(s) and quantity, and written consent from his or her parent or lawfully designated guardian which is dated and signed; 
(B)  Possession of graffiti implements or paraphernalia by any minor whose employment requires possession of such implement or paraphernalia provided such minor is carrying written verification of any such job requirements including color(s), size(s) and quantity, job information and purpose, and written consent from the employer which is dated and signed. 
(Ord. No. 802.)  
Sec. 18-40. - Public property—Injuring or destroying. 
It is unlawful for any person to either wilfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently or in any other manner injure or destroy real property or improvements thereto, or movable or personal property, belonging to the city. 
(Code 1968, § 11-4-19.) 
 For state law as to interference, trespass, etc., relative to public buildings, see C.R.S. 1973, § 18-9-110.  
Sec. 18-41. - Riots, affrays, etc. 
It is unlawful for any person within the city to intentionally and knowingly engage in or encourage any riot, rout, affray or fight. 
(Code 1968, § 11-4-8; Ord. No. 581, § 20.) 
 As to riots generally, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 18-9-101 to 18-9-105.  
Sec. 18-42. - Repealed April 13, 1982.  
Sec. 18-43. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-44. - Repealed April 13, 1982.  
Sec. 18-45. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-46. - Theft. 
(a)  A person commits theft when he knowingly obtains or exercises control over anything of value of another without authorization, or by threat or deception, and: 
(1)  Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value; or 
(2)  Knowingly uses, conceals, or abandons the thing of value in such manner as to deprive the other person of its use or benefit; or 
(3)  Uses, conceals, or abandons the thing of value intending that such use, concealment or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use and benefit; or 
(4)  Demands any consideration to which he is not legally entitled as a consideration of restoring a thing of value to the other person with a value of the thing involved is less than one thousand dollars. 
(b)  "Thing of value" as described in this section shall mean a thing with a value of less than one thousand dollars. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 2; Ord. No. 916 (part); amended by memo 3519; Ord. No. 1097 (part).) 
 For state law as to burglary, theft and robbery, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 18-4-201 to 18-4-208.)  
Sec. 18-47. - Stones, snowballs, etc.—Throwing. 
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or willingly throw any stone, snowball or any other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public way or place, or enclosed or unenclosed ground. 
(Code 1968, § 11-4-17; Ord. No. 581, § 23.) 
 For state law as to throwing of missiles at vehicles, see C.R.S. 1973, § 18-9-117.  
Sec. 18-48. - Repealed April 13, 1982.  
Sec. 18-49. - Vendors—Obstructing sidewalk or other public place. 
It is unlawful for any person engaged in the sale of merchandise to obstruct any sidewalk or other public place unless granted written permission from the Cortez city council, or to disturb or impede others. 
(Code 1968, § 11-4-26; Ord. No. 581, § 25.)  
Sec. 18-50. - Unlawful to deposit refuse within city limits. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to throw, deposit or place upon any sidewalk, alley, street or other public place, or upon private property without the consent of the owner, within the city, any empty bottles, cans, waste material, wastepaper, fruit, or vegetable skins or pulps and any and all forms of refuse, garbage, trash or waste material. 
(Ord. No. 560, § 1.)  
Sec. 18-51. - Theft of rental property. 
(a)  A person commits theft of rental property if he: 
(1)  Obtains the temporary use of personal property of another which is available only for hire, by means of threat or deception, or knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the personal property; or 
(2)  Having lawfully obtained possession for temporary use the personal property of another which is available only for hire, knowingly fails to reveal the whereabouts of or to return the property to the owner thereof or his representative, or to the person from whom he has received it within seventy-two hours after the time at which he agreed to return it. 
(b)  "Rental property" as described in this section shall mean rental property with a value of less than one thousand dollars. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 1; Ord. No. 916 (part); amended by memo 3519; Ord. No. 1097 (part).)  
Sec. 18-52. - Trespass. 
(a)  "Premises" as described herein means real property, buildings, and other improvements thereon. 
(b)  A person commits the crime of trespass if he unlawfully enters or remains in or upon the premises. 
(c)  Unlawful entry or remaining in or upon the premises shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Coming uninvited onto the private property of another; or 
(2)  Remaining thereon after being asked or ordered to leave by the owner, his agent or employee. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall be punishable as set forth in Cortez City Code Section 17-16A as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1; amended at city request, 3-07.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 18, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 18-52A. - Unlawful public trespass. 
(a)  Conduct denying lawful use of public building unlawful. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to so conduct himself at or in any public building owned or operated or controlled by the city, the state or any of its political subdivisions, including the school district, as to wilfully deny to any public official, public employee or any invitee on such premises the lawful right of such official, employee or invitee to enter, use the facilities of or to leave any such public building. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person at or in any such public building to wilfully impede any public official or employee in the lawful performance of duties or activities through the use of restraint, coercion or intimidation or by force and violence or threat thereof. 
(b)  Refusing or failing to leave public building unlawful when. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to wilfully refuse or fail to leave any such public building upon being requested to do so by the chief administrative officer or designee charged with maintaining order in such public building if such person has committed, is committing, threatens to commit or incites to commit any act which did or would, if completed, disrupt, impair, interfere with or obstruct the lawful missions, processes, procedures or functions being carried on in such public building. 
(c)  Impeding or disrupting certain meetings in public buildings unlawful. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person at any meeting or session conducted by any judicial, legislative or administrative body or official at or in any public building to wilfully impede, disrupt or hinder the normal proceedings of such meeting or session by any act or intrusion into the chambers or other areas designated for the use of the body or official conducting such meeting or session or by any act designed to intimidate, coerce or hinder any member of such body or official engaged in the performance of duties of such meeting or mission. 
(d)  Interfering with use of public way or place unlawful. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person or persons to be upon any public way or any other place of public nature in such a manner as to wilfully interfere with the free and unobstructed use of such public way or place of public nature by any other person or persons. 
(e)  Definitions. 
(1)  This section shall be interpreted in such a manner as to be consistent with section 18-9-110, C.R.S., as amended, known as Public Buildings-Trespass, Interference Statute. The definitions provided in said statute shall be applied to this section. 
(f)  Penalty. 
(1)  A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(g)  Severability. 
(1)  Should any one or more sections of this section be judicially determined to be invalid or unenforceable, this section shall be interpreted, if possible, so that all other sections of said section remain valid and enforceable, it being the intent that the various provisions provided for herein are severable. 
(Ord. No. 792.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 19, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 18-53. - Passing bad checks. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to issue or pass a check as payment for any goods, services or other thing of value, or in exchange for cash when that person knew that, at the time of the issuance of the check, there were insufficient funds existing within the account being drawn upon to cover the check. For purposes of this section, the term "insufficient funds" means that a drawer has insufficient funds with the drawee to pay a check when the drawer has no checking account with the drawee or has funds in a checking account with a drawee in an amount less than the amount of the check plus the amount of all other checks outstanding at the time of issuance. A check dishonored for no account shall also be deemed to be dishonored for insufficient funds. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to issue or pass a check as payment for any goods, services or other things of value, or an exchange for cash, and to thereafter fail to tender sufficient funds to make the check good within fourteen days of notification from either the drawee upon which the check was drawn or from the person or firm to which the check was originally issued that the check has been twice refused for insufficient funds. It shall constitute a prima facie violation of this subsection that the firm or person to which the check was originally issued: 
(1)  Obtained photo identification from the drawer at the time of acceptance of the check; 
(2)  Obtained an address of the drawer of the check at the time of the acceptance of the check; 
(3)  Presented the check to the drawee for acceptance or refusal for the first time within thirty days of the date of issuance of the check; and 
(4)  Upon presenting the check to the drawee for collection and having twice received the check back for insufficient funds, the person or firm to whom the check was originally issued shall turn the insufficient fund check over to the Cortez police department for criminal prosecution. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to stop payment or cause payment to be stopped on any check issued or passed as payment for any goods, services or other thing of value, or in exchange for cash, when that person does so with the intent to defraud. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to open a checking account, negotiable order or withdrawal account or share draft account using false identification or an assumed name, for the purpose of and with the intent of committing theft by check. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall apply where the value of the check exceeds one thousand dollars or where the offender is under accusation of formal criminal charges involving the issuance of two or more checks within any sixty-day period within the state with an aggregate value of one thousand dollars. 
(f)  A bank, savings and loan association, industrial bank or credit union shall not be civilly or criminally liable for releasing information relating to the drawer's account to any police authority or officer of the court provided the release of such information is for purposes of investigating or prosecuting a potential or alleged violation of this section. 
(g)  In imposing a penalty for violation of this section, the municipal court is specifically authorized and empowered to require restitution in full to the person or entity to whom any such check described in this section was issued as a portion of, or in addition to, any penalty deemed appropriate by the court. 
(Ord. No. 726; Ord. No. 900; amended by memo 3519; Ord. No. 1097 (part).)  
Sec. 18-54. - Conduct on public property. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any public building or on any public property, or to conduct himself in or on the same in violation of any order, rule, or regulation concerning any matters described in this subsection. In addition to any authority granted by any other law, each resolution may adopt such rules, orders or regulations as are reasonably necessary for the administration, protection and maintenance of such buildings and property, specifically rules, orders and regulations upon the following matters: 
(1)  Preservation of property, vegetation, wildlife, signs, markers, statutes, buildings, grounds and other structures, and any object of scientific, historic, or scenic interest; 
(2)  Restrictions or limitations of the use of such public buildings or property as to time, manner or permitted activities; 
(3)  Prohibition of activities or conduct within public buildings or on public property, which may be reasonably expected to substantially interfere with the use and enjoyment of such places by others, or may constitute a general nuisance; 
(4)  Camping, picnicking, public meetings and assemblage, and other individual or group usage, including the time, place and manner in which such activities may be permitted; 
(5)  Use of all vehicles as the time, place and manner of use; 
(6)  Control and limitation of fires and the designation of fires where fires are permitted. 
(b)  No conviction may be obtained under this section unless notice of such limitations or prohibitions is prominently posted at all public entrances to such buildings or property, or unless such notice is actually first given the person by the appropriate city official, or by any law enforcement officer, having jurisdiction or authority to enforce this section. 
(Ord. No. 950; amended by memo 3519.)  
Sec. 18-55. - Unlawful sale, cultivation, manufacture, testing of retail marijuana or medical marijuana. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of the Cortez City Code when any person violates any of the rules of regulations adopted by the state of Colorado regarding the sale, cultivation, manufacture or testing of medical marijuana or retail marijuana or any city of Cortez rules and regulations adopted by ordinance or resolution for the regulation of retail marijuana or medical marijuana sales, cultivation, manufacturing or testing of medical marijuana or retail marijuana. 
(b)  It shall be illegal to cultivate marijuana, of any type retail, medical or for personal use outdoors. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall have a civil penalty and not be subject to a jail sentence, the fine for a violation of Cortez City Code section 18-55 shall be four hundred ninety-nine dollars. 
( Ord. No. 1194, 9-23-14 ; Ord. No. 1201, 8-25-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1194, adopted September 23, 2014, repealed the former § 18-55, and enacted a new § 18-55 as set out herein. The former § 18-55 pertained to unlawful possession or sale of marijuana and derived from Ord. No. 1166, adopted May 22, 2012.  
Sec. 18-56. - Marijuana, possession, consumption of marijuana on city property. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Marijuana or marihuana whenever used in the Cortez City Code means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marihuana concentrate. "Marijuana" or "marihuana" does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product. 
(2)  City property shall include, but is not limited to, all real estate owned occupied or used by the city such as City Hall, all parks and other facilities, trails, river property, streets and sidewalks, etc. Whether located in the city limits or not. 
(3)  City means the city of Cortez. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume, use, display, transfer, distribute, sell, transport or grow any marijuana or marijuana products as defined in paragraph (a) above on city property as defined above. Except that the transportation of small amounts of marijuana (one ounce or less and up to six plants) of marijuana as defined in paragraph (a) above shall be allowed on city streets and sidewalks. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be punishable as set forth in chapter 17 section 17-16A, sentencing, municipal court, Cortez City Code now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1174, 2-12-13)  
Sec. 18-57. - Underage consumption/possession of marijuana. 
(a)  Any person age eighteen to twenty years of age who possesses, consumes, uses, displays, transfers, distributes, sells, or grows marijuana or marihuana as defined in Cortez City Code section 18-56(a)(1) definitions, in the city of Cortez commits illegal possession or consumption of marijuana by an underage person. 
Illegal possession or consumption of marijuana by an underage person is a strict liability offense. 
(b)  Illegal possession or consumption of marijuana by an underage person shall be punished as set forth in section 17-16A, sentencing, municipal court, Cortez City Code now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. The court, upon sentencing a defendant pursuant to this paragraph (b), may, in addition to any fine, suspend jail time on condition that the defendant submit to and complete a substance abuse or assessment, a substance abuse education program, or a substance abuse program at such defendant's own expense. 
(c)  Prima facie evidence of a violation of subsection (a) of this section shall consist of: 
(1)  Evidence that the defendant was age eighteen to twenty years of age and possessed, consumed, used, displayed, transferred, distributed, sold or grew marijuana as defined in Cortez City Code section 18-56(a)(1) anywhere in the city of Cortez; or 
(2)  Evidence that the defendant was age eighteen to twenty years of age and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with marijuana consumption, or impairment, or is under the influence of marijuana while present anywhere in the city of Cortez. 
(d)  The qualitative result of a marijuana test or tests shall be admissible at the trial of any person charged with a violation of subsection (a) of this section upon a showing that the device or devices used to conduct such test or tests have been approved as accurate in detecting marijuana by the executive director of the appropriate state department which regulates marijuana detection testing. 
(e)  In any judicial proceeding in the Cortez Municipal Court concerning a charge of underage possession/consumption, the court shall take judicial notice of methods of testing a person's blood, breath, saliva, or urine for the presence of marijuana and of the design and operation of devices certified by the department of public health and environment or other state agency in charge of marijuana detection testing standards for testing a person's blood, breath, saliva, or urine for the presence of marijuana. This subsection shall not prevent the necessity of establishing during a trial that the testing devices were working properly and that such testing devices were properly operated. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude a defendant from offering evidence concerning the accuracy of testing devices. 
(f)  No law enforcement officer shall enter upon any private property to investigate any violation of this section without probable cause. 
A violation of this section shall be punishable as set forth in chapter 17 section 17-16A, sentencing, municipal court, Cortez City Code now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1174, 2-12-13)  
Sec. 18-58. - Prohibition of clubs or other places for the consumption of marijuana. 
(a)  It shall be illegal to consume marijuana as defined in Cortez City Code section 18-56(a)(1) in any marijuana smoking club or other place as defined in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  Definitions. Marijuana smoking club means any place where people pay a membership or other fee to consume marijuana as defined in Cortez City Code section 18-56(a)(1). This includes but is not limited to commercial operations, private groups or any organization which allows for the consumption of marijuana on its premises. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be punished as set forth in chapter 17 section 17-16A, sentencing, municipal court, Cortez City Code now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1174, 2-12-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1174, adopted February 12, 2013, set out provisions intended for use as § 18-57. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 18-58.  
Sec. 18-59. - Occupation of recreational vehicles or park trailers on private property. 
(a)  Definitions. Recreational vehicle (RV) or park trailer when used in this Cortez City Code section shall have the same meaning as defined in the city of Cortez Land Use Code section 2.02, definitions. 
(b)  No owner of real property or any other person shall occupy or permit to be occupied any recreational vehicle or park trailer on private property within the city of Cortez except in those RV and manufactured home parks approved by the city of Cortez. 
An RV or park trailer may be occupied on private property for a period of less than thirty days during any calendar year by out of town guests or family. 
(c)  It shall be rebuttable presumption that an RV or park trailer is occupied or in use, in violation of this code section, if the recreational vehicle or park trailer is connected to electrical or water supplies or sewer line located on the real property where the RV or park trailer is located, if auxiliary fuel tanks, other than those provided with the trailer, extended awnings, the set up of tables and chairs outside the RV or park trailer and the use of interior lights within the RV or park trailer or any other signs of occupation are observed. 
(d)  This section may be enforced by the Cortez City Police Department, Cortez Code Enforcement Officers, the planning and building department and any other city employees authorized by the city manager. 
(e)  A violation of this code section shall be punished by a fine of up to five hundred dollars. 
In addition to the penalty specified in subsection (e) above. The city of Cortez Municipal Court Judge may issue any orders necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance including but not limited to suspended fines and jail sentences, cease and desist orders, and orders for the removal of recreational vehicles or park trailers not owned by the property owner from the real property, or removal from city right-of-ways, streets and alleys and other city property. 
(f)  Each day a violation or non-compliance exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 1179, 6-11-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1179, adopted June 11, 2013, set out provisions intended for use as § 18-56. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 18-59.  
Sec. 18-60. - Unauthorized dumping in trash receptacles/dumpsters 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, and it is a theft of services to throw, deposit, or place without the consent of the owner or authorized user of any dumpster or trash receptacle, any refuse, rubbish, ruin, solid waste, weed, wreckage, yard waste, combustible trash, ashes or any other waste material in any dumpster or trash receptacle located within the city of Cortez. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings as set forth in section 22B-1 Definitions: Ashes, brush, combustible trash, garbage, hazardous waste, litter, recyclable material, refuse, rubbish, ruins, solid waste, weed, wreckage, yard waste. 
(c)  Any person, firm, association, or corporation who violates this section shall be guilty of a municipal offense and shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 1187, 5-13-14 )  
CHAPTER 18A. - PARKING, STANDING, KEEPING AND STORING INOPERABLE VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 18A-1. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
Antique vehicles. Any vehicle which is currently licensed as an antique by the state, or for which an application for registration as such is pending. This definition shall include cars which can be licensed with collector's license plates and/or street rod license plates. 
Inoperable vehicle. A vehicle in a condition of being junked, wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, discarded, abandoned or unable to perform the functions for which it was originally constructed. 
Permanent fence. A fence of durable nature conforming to city ordinances and construction in such a manner so as to shield or conceal the area contained within the fence from public view. 
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Property. Any real property within the City which is not a street or highway. 
Storage. The use of property for the purpose of keeping a vehicle thereon which is not in use by the owner thereof, or any other person. It shall be prima facie evidence that a vehicle is being stored if it has not been moved from its position on the property in the sixty days previous to the date of notice of noncompliance. 
Street or highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Vehicle. A machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel on the road by using wheels, treads, runners or slides to transport persons or property or pull machinery and includes without limitation automobiles, airplanes, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, motorscooters, tractors, buggies and wagons. The term "vehicle" does not include antique vehicles as defined in this section. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1; Ord. No. 789, §§ 1, 2.)  
Sec. 18A-2. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter it is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park or leave standing upon any public street, alley or thoroughfare within the city, an inoperable vehicle as the same is herein defined for a period of longer than twenty-four hours. 
(b)  From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person being the owner of, lessee of, renter or in custody of any inoperable vehicle to permit the same to remain upon private property within the city, for a period of more than thirty days after such owner, lessee, renter or custodian of the private property has been notified to remove the same. Such act is prohibited whether the inoperable vehicle is stored or parked upon private property belonging to the owner, lessee, renter or custodian of such inoperable vehicle or upon private premises belonging to another person, firm or corporation. 
(c)  From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter it is unlawful for the owner, lessee, renter or person in charge of any private property within the city, to suffer or permit the storing, keeping or standing of any inoperable vehicle upon such private property for a period of more than thirty days after the notice is given in the form and manner as set forth in this chapter, whether the inoperable vehicle is the property of such owner or not. 
(d)  It shall be prohibited to store any car on any private residential property even though said vehicle is operable. It shall be prima facie evidence that a car is being stored on private property if the vehicle does not have a current Colorado license plate. 
(e)  It shall be prohibited to store any car on any street within this city, even though said vehicle is operable. It shall be prima facie evidence that a vehicle is being stored on the street if the vehicle does not have a current Colorado license plate. 
Upon forty-eight hours' notification in writing that the vehicle is in violation of this section, the car will be towed and stored at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 2; Ord. No. 789 §§ 3—5; Ord. No. 833 (part).)  
Sec. 18A-3. - Exclusions and permits. 
(a)  This chapter shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building; to vehicles being stored by a business enterprise, as long as the storage of the vehicle is on the same premises where the business is being conducted; or a vehicle being stored by any law enforcement agency in a storage place kept for that purpose. 
(b)  This chapter shall not apply to the storage of a vehicle or parts thereof on private property, provided such vehicle and parts of cars and the outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a manner that they do not constitute a health hazard, a safety hazard or a fire hazard and are effectively screened from ordinary public view by means of a permanent fence. Such storage area shall be kept free of weeds, trash and other objectionable items. 
(c)  Permits. If a notice of noncompliance has been given as set forth herein the vehicle owner may apply to the chief of police or his designee for a one time, nonrenewable permit to extend the period to achieve compliance for an additional sixty days if: 
(1)  There is an ongoing dispute over insurance coverage as to a wrecked or damaged vehicle which has not been totally destroyed by the wreck or accident; 
(2)  The owner is doing vehicle repairs which can reasonably be completed within the sixty-day period. 
Such permit shall clearly state that it is nonrenewable, set forth the penalties for noncompliance and the other remedies available to the city. If compliance is not achieved by the owner by the fiftieth day, the city shall provide written notice that if such compliance is not achieved by the date that ends the compliance period, the city will commence legal proceedings, including but not limited to, filing a misdemeanor complaint in the municipal court. 
There shall be no charge for the permit. The issuance of the permit herein shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 3; Ord. No. 789 §§ 6—8.)  
Sec. 18A-4. - Notice—Form and contents. 
(a)  The notice to be given to the owner of such vehicle and the owner of the private premises upon which the same is stored or kept, shall be in such form as shall be prescribed by the city manager, but such notice shall provide, at least, the name of the reputed owner, a description of the inoperable vehicle, the description of the premises upon which the same is stored or kept, and a demand that the same is removed no later than thirty days following the date of such notice. 
(b)  In the event the owner of the private property upon which vehicle is stored or kept is also the owner of the inoperable vehicle, only one notice shall be sent. 
(c)  All notices shall be sent by first class mail, and shall be mailed to the address of such person, if such address is known, or to the address of such person as reflected by the records of the county clerk and recorder of the county or the county assessor of the county. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 4; Ord. No. 833 (part).)  
Sec. 18A-5. - Posting of notice. 
In the event the letter is returned by the post office unclaimed or for any reason undeliverable, then a copy of the notice shall be posted in the city clerk's office on a bulletin board to be kept by the city clerk for that purpose and upon the inoperable vehicle in question. The notice is to be posted for a period of thirty consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 5; Ord. No. 789 § 9.)  
Sec. 18A-6. - Right of removal. 
(a)  In the event the owner of the motor vehicle or the owner, lessee, tenant or person in charge of the personal property upon which the same is stored does not remove the offending vehicle within thirty days after date of mailing of the notice or within thirty days from date of posting of the notice as provided in this chapter, the city manager or his representative shall have the right to go upon the private premises and to remove the offending vehicle and to impound the same for a period of thirty days from and after the date of such removal. 
(b)  Any police officer of the city shall have the right to remove or cause to be removed any inoperable vehicle left on a public street, alley or thoroughfare after the same has been left thereon for more than twenty-four hours. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 6; Ord. No. 789 § 10.)  
Sec. 18A-7. - Right to reclaim. 
For a period of thirty days following the impounding of the vehicle, the owner thereof may reclaim the vehicle by paying to the city all costs involved in the removal and storage of the motor vehicle; provided, that the vehicle so reclaimed may not thereafter be stored at any place within the city in violation of this chapter. In the event a summons and complaint has been issued by the municipal court of the city and the owner thereof or the owner of private property upon which the same was stored shall be convicted for violation of this chapter then prior to the reclamation of said vehicle by the owner, such fine imposed by the court shall be first paid. 
(Ord. No. 558, § 7.)  
Sec. 18A-8. - Disposition of unclaimed vehicle. 
After the passage of thirty days from date of impoundment, and if the vehicle is not reclaimed by the owner as provided in this chapter, the owner of the vehicle, if known, shall be notified by registered mail (return receipt requested) that the vehicle shall be disposed of by either public or private sale on a date certain. The internal administration and procedures of the entire private or public sale process shall conform with the applicable subsections of Colorado Revised Statutes § 42-4-1103. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 9.)  
Sec. 18A-9. - Violation—Penalty. 
In addition to the right of the city to remove any offending vehicle as provided in this chapter, any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A, penalty as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 8; amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 20, 9-25-12)  
Chapter 18B. - OFFENSES—JUVENILE 
 
Sec. 18B-1. - Juvenile offenders—Definitions. 
As used in this chapter unless a context otherwise requires; 
Child. A person who has reached the age of ten years and is under eighteen years of age at the time of the alleged offense. 
Parent. Either a natural parent of a child as may be established pursuant to article VI of title 19 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, as amended, or a parent by adoption. 
(Ord. No. 776, (part).)  
Sec. 18B-2. - Duty of parent—Appearance in court. 
(a)  Whenever a summons and complaint under this Code is filed against a child, the court shall send a parent or guardian, by first class mail, a notice that includes the alleged violation, date of violation, location at which the alleged violation occurred and the date, time and place of the scheduled court appearance and an order that the parent or guardian appear with the minor at each and every court appearance. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of a parent or guardian to appear with the child at each and every court appearance. It shall be unlawful for a parent to fail to appear at each and every required court appearance or fail to comply with the written promise to appear with the child, and a violation of the same may be punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars and/or not more than ninety days in jail. It shall be an affirmative defense to this violation if the parent demonstrates to the court that at the time of the offense either (1) the parent(s) did not have lawful custody of the minor; (2) the minor was not residing with the parent(s); (3) the minor was emancipated or (4) if the parent(s) can demonstrate that the juvenile was uncontrollable. 
(Ord. No. 776, (part).)  
Sec. 18B-3. - Responsibility of parents for payment of fine. 
(a)  Whenever a minor under the age of eighteen years of age, residing or living with his/her parent(s), is convicted of an offense under this Code for which the court imposes a fine, restitution or court fees or costs, the parent of the minor child shall be jointly responsible of payment for such fine, restitution or court fees or costs. It shall be an affirmative defense to the obligation created by this section if the parents demonstrate to the court that at the time of the offense either (1) the parent(s) did not have lawful custody of the minor; (2) the minor was not residing with the parent(s); (3) the minor was emancipated or (4) if the parent(s) can demonstrate that the juvenile was uncontrollable. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section only, an "emancipated minor" means a minor over fifteen years of age and under eighteen years of age who has, with real or apparent assent of his/her parent(s), demonstrated his/her independence from his/her parent(s) in the matter of care, custody and earnings. The term may include, but shall not be limited to, any such minor who has the sole responsibility for his/her own support, who is married or who is in the military. Failure to pay any court-ordered fine, restitution, or court fees or costs shall be subject to the contempt powers of the city municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 776, (part).)  
Sec. 18B-4. - Appointment of counsel. 
If a child has been brought before the court for an offense of the Municipal Code that for an adult is punishable by a jail sentence; (a) the child or his/her parent(s) may request an attorney and if the child or parent(s) fail to have sufficient financial means, counsel shall be appointed by the court; or (b) the court may appoint counsel without such request if it deems representation by counsel is necessary to protect the interest of the child or other parties. 
(Ord. No. 776, (part).)  
Sec. 18B-5. - Hearing procedures. 
The general public shall not be excluded unless the court makes a specific finding that it is in the best interest of the child to exclude the general public, and in such event the court shall admit only such persons who have an interest in the case or the work of the court, including persons who the parent(s) wish to have present. Hearings may be continued from time to time as ordered by the court. 
(Ord. No. 776, (part): Ord. No. 1033.)  
Sec. 18B-6. - Issue of summons, complaint and custody. 
A member of the Cortez police department shall be empowered to issue a summons and complaint to a child for any violation of this Code. If, in the opinion of the officer, the issuance of the summons and complaint is not adequate to ensure that a child will answer charges under this Code, and the officer finds it necessary to take the child into custody, the child's custody shall conform to applicable state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 776, (part).)  
Sec. 18B-7. - Juvenile warrant. 
(a)  Any arrest warrant issued by the municipal court for a child shall bear a conspicuous notation that the arrestee is a child and the provisions of the applicable state statutes must be observed in the execution of the warrant. 
(b)  Whenever a child is arrested, the arresting officer shall notify the parent(s) without unnecessary delay. Such notification may be made to a person with whom the child is residing if the parent, guardian or legal custodian cannot be located. 
(Ord. No. 776, (part).)  
Sec. 18B-8. - Incarceration of child. 
(a)  No jail sentence shall be imposed upon persons under the age of eighteen years who have been convicted of a violation under this Code. 
(b)  Incarceration not to exceed forty-eight hours may be imposed on a child for failure to comply with a lawful order of the court, including an order to pay a fine. Any incarceration of a child shall be in compliance with section 19-2-204(4) C.R.S. 
(Ord. No. 776, (part), 1993.)  
Sec. 18B-9. - Juvenile sentencing. 
Upon the conviction of a violation of the Cortez City Code a juvenile as defined herein shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A and may also be ordered at sentencing to perform community service as a condition of any suspended sentence. Any costs imposed to perform community service shall be the responsibility of the juvenile and/or his parents and included in the fines and costs assessed by the court at sentencing. 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 21, 9-25-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1170, § 21, adopted September 25, 2012, repealed the former § 18B-9, and enacted a new § 18B-9 as set out herein. The former 18B-9 pertained to fine, court fees and costs and derived from Ord. No. 776, 1993 and amended by memo 3519.  
CHAPTER 18C. - RESERVED.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1216 , adopted September 27, 2016, repealed Chapter 18C, §§ 18C-1—18C-3, which pertained to prohibition of nighttime juvenile loitering and derived from Ord. No. 784; amended by memo 3519 and Ord. No. 1170, adopted September 25, 2012. 
 
Sec. 18D-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Yard/garage sale. A retail sale of personal property conducted by the occupant of a single-family residence or the owner/manager of a multi-family residence. There shall be no limitations on the number of individuals who can participate in the yard sales, as sellers. The term shall include all sales entitled "yard sale," "garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale," "patio sale," "rummage sale," or other similar sales of tangible personal property which are advertised by a sign or other means for the public to attend. Such sales are subject to the following limitations: 
(a)  Yard/garage sales shall be limited to the residential zone districts, including the R-1, R-2, NB and MH. 
(b)  Yard/garage sales shall be limited to the principal or accessory structure and the driveway of the dwelling. 
(c)  Each yard/garage sale shall be limited to no more than three consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 1005 (part).)  
Sec. 18D-2. - No permit required. 
No sales tax license will be required provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The person conducting the yard sale has not participated in more than two yard sales in any calendar year at that specific location subsequent to the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(b)  The conduct of yard sales as a fundraiser for civil or charitable purposes shall not be limited by this Code as to location, so long as the location does not constitute a hazard to safety and is not in violation of any existing municipal code. 
(Ord. No. 1005 (part).)  
Sec. 18D-3. - Signs. 
All persons are permitted to direct signs advertising a yard sale in public rights-of-way, provided the signs meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Do not exceed eighteen inches by eighteen inches; 
(b)  Bear the name and address of the person holding the yard sale and date of sale; 
(c)  Are not placed on a traffic regulatory device or municipal utility structure; 
(d)  Do not obstruct traffic view or hinder municipal operations; and 
(e)  It shall be prima facie evidence that the party identified on the signs has placed the signs in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1005 (part).)  
Sec. 18D-4. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any yard sale sign to be posted more than three days prior to the date of the yard sale. The sign shall be removed not later than the date after the last day of the yard sale. 
(Ord. No. 1005 (part).)  
Sec. 18D-5. - Violation penalty. 
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1005 (part); amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 24, 9-25-12)  
CHAPTER 19. - PARKS AND RECREATION. 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Establishment and duties of parks and recreation department. 
There is hereby established the parks and recreation department of the city. The parks and recreation department shall have the management, control and supervision of all facilities, public parks, fields, tracts and areas of the city used for recreation purposes both within and without its corporate limits, as well as the center parkings in the streets and avenues and such other areas as may be designated from time to time by the council, and shall administer all recreation programs sponsored by the city. 
A parks and recreation director shall be appointed by the city manager and shall have the duty to administer the parks and recreation department as established. The parks and recreation director may appoint one or more authorized representatives to administer any part of the duties of this chapter. Both the director of parks and recreation and his authorized representatives shall be hereinafter referred to as "director" for the purposes of this chapter. The parks and recreation department shall hereinafter be referred to as "department." 
"Park" or "parks," as used in this chapter, means all athletic fields, parks, playgrounds, tracts, recreational facilities and areas of the city administered or regulated by the city and used for recreational purposes. These areas include the city pool, the golf course, all picnic areas, tennis courts, athletic fields used for softball, baseball, soccer or other sports, now owned or hereafter acquired. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 19-2. - Generally—Parks and recreation areas. 
(a)  Presence in parks. Parks will be open daily from 6:00 A.M. to 11:00 P.M. The director may extend the closing time to 12:00 midnight for such parks, playgrounds and athletic areas equipped with general athletic lighting. The director may also specify exceptions for specific parks from the above-scheduled open and closing times. If open and closing times for a specific park, athletic field, playground etc. are different than the times above specified, the applicable open and closed times for that particular park, athletic field or playground shall be prominently posted at that particular park, athletic field or playground location. 
Law enforcement personnel, emergency service personnel, authorized municipal employees, and security personnel employed for special functions are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
Loitering in the park between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. for the purpose of consuming alcohol, purchasing or selling narcotics, the use of narcotics or disturbing the peace is prohibited. 
(b)  Riding vehicles on grounds of municipal parks, etc. No person shall at any time drive or ride any automobile, truck, motorcycle, motor scooter or other motor vehicle upon the grounds of any municipal park, playground or golf course, except in public streets running through such premises or within designated parking areas or sidewalks located upon such premises, without the express written permission of the director. 
(c)  Swimming, wading and boating in parks. Boating allowed at Denny Lake Park and Geer Natural Area, no person shall swim, wade or operate a boat upon any lake, lagoon or other water facilities located in any city park or other areas under the supervision of the department without the express written permission of the director. Non-motorized boats are permitted at Denny Lake Park and Geer Natural Area. 
(d)  Damaging, tampering with, etc., facilities. No person shall damage or wastefully or improperly use toilet, water and sewer facilities in any municipal park, or cause the lighting facilities or electrical appliances to be turned on or used without appropriate fees and/or reservation or the express written permission of the director. The city may charge fees for athletic lighting, to be determined on an annual basis. 
(e)  Golfing in parks and on city-owned property. No person shall use any portions of any city park or city-owned property for golfing purposes, or make use of any golf club or golf ball in any city park or on city-owned property, except at places designated for golfing by the director. 
(f)  Public meetings in parks. It is unlawful to hold any public meetings, addressed by one or more speakers and attended by twenty-five or more persons, within the parks of the city unless and until a permit therefore, pursuant to section 19-7 of this chapter, has been issued by the director. Such meetings shall be conducted in an orderly and law-abiding manner. 
(g)  Intoxicating beverages. No person shall have in their possession, nor will any person consume any form of alcoholic beverage within the parks of the city, except as provided in this chapter for the golf course and authorized special events. 
(h)  Loud noises, disturbances prohibited. No person or persons shall play any radio, tape players, band or musical instrument, television, phonograph, tape recorder or other device capable of reproducing sound at such a high volume in any municipal park or recreation area as to disturb the peace and quiet of another. There shall be no loud, or band music, or excessive noise beyond 9:00 P.M. or before 9:00 A.M., without the express written consent of the director. 
(i)  Animals in parks. Dogs and cats must be on a leash at all times except when participating in obedience classes or other activities authorized by the director. Horses shall use only bridle paths designated by posted notices. No other animals shall be allowed on the grounds of parks, playground or golf courses without the express written consent of the director. 
(j)  Overnight camping. No person or group of persons shall be allowed to camp overnight on any park grounds or parking areas without the express written consent of the director. 
(k)  Garbage and trash. No person shall dump, spill, deposit, place, throw or leave refuse, rubbish, filthy or odor-causing objects, substances or other trash upon any municipal park grounds except in identified trash receptacles. 
(l)  Sales advertising in parks and recreation areas. 
(1)  Sales, displays prohibited. It is unlawful for any person in a park or recreation area to expose or offer for sale any article, substance or thing, legal or illegal, or to station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale of display of any such article, substance or thing, except any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the written authority of the director or a concession agreement executed by the city: and any nonprofit or charitable organization acting under the written authority of the director. 
(2)  Advertising prohibited. It is unlawful for any person in a park or recreation area to announce, advertise or call the public's attention in any way to an article or service for sale or hire, except any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the written authority of the director or a concession agreement executed by the city; and any nonprofit or charitable organization acting under the written authority of the director. 
(3)  Sale or offering of personal services is prohibited. It is unlawful for any person in a park or recreation facility to offer for sale or trade any personal service to be conducted on park or recreation facilities, except any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the written authority of the director or a concession agreement executed by the city; and any nonprofit or charitable organization acting under the written authority of the director. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 869, § 1; Ord. No. 1112 (part).) 
(Ord. No. 1147, 11-23-10; Ord. No. 1199, 5-26-15 )  
Sec. 19-3. - Rules and regulations generally—Tennis courts. 
(a)  No person shall operate skateboards, roller skates, bicycles, motorized cycles or any other form of wheeled vehicle on tennis courts. Tennis courts shall be used exclusively for the purpose of playing tennis. Lights shall be turned off at 11:00 P.M. on all municipal tennis courts. 
(b)  Special reserved playing times for city-sponsored tennis tournaments, tennis lessons and school district tennis practice are provided at the express written consent of the director. Fees for this special reserved playing time shall be set annually, or before such special event, by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  Intoxicating beverages. No person shall have in their possession, nor shall any person consume, any form of alcoholic beverage at the municipal tennis courts. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2 (part).)  
Sec. 19-3a. - Rules and regulations generally—Skateboard park. 
(a)  The exclusive use of the skateboard park shall be for the use of in-line skates, skateboards, scooters, bicycles and any other form of non-motorized, wheeled vehicle approved by the director. No person shall operate motorized cycles, any non approved form of wheeled vehicle or any other form of motorized wheeled vehicle in the skateboard park. Lights shall be turned off at 11:00 P.M. at the skateboard park. 
(b)  Intoxicating beverages. No person shall have in their possession, nor shall any person consume any form of alcoholic beverage at the skateboard park. 
(Ord. No. 924.) 
(Ord. No. 1147, 11-23-10)  
Sec. 19-4. - Rules and regulations generally—Swimming pool. 
(a)  No person shall swim in, or enter any fenced area around, any swimming pool owned or operated by the city at any time the pool is not staffed and open to the public without written permission of the director. 
(b)  Reserved times for pool rental and swim meets are established by the director and fees for these reserved times shall be set annually. 
(c)  Intoxicating beverages. No person shall have in their possession, nor shall any person consume, any form of alcoholic beverage within the municipal swimming pool complex. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2 (part).) 
(Ord. No. 1147, 11-23-10)  
Sec. 19-5. - Rules and regulations generally—Athletic fields. 
(a)  Non-fenced athletic fields will be open for public use between the hours of 6:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M. Fenced athletic fields must be reserved and a permit issued for the reservation. 
(b)  Athletic fields may be reserved for tournaments, games and practices. Tournaments, games and practices held on a continuing basis are given preference over new tournaments, games and practices. 
(c)  Fees for athletic field use shall be set annually by resolution of the council. 
(d)  Intoxicating beverages. No person shall have in their possession, nor shall any person consume, any form of alcoholic beverage within the athletic fields located within the city limits unless proper permits are obtained. 
(e)  Rules and regulations regarding the softball leagues and play shall be promulgated by the director. Individuals or teams who violate these regulations may be evicted from any city-owned softball facility or field and may be denied use of or access to city softball facilities or to other city athletic facilities. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2 (part).) 
(Ord. No. 1147, 11-23-10)  
Sec. 19-6. - Rules and regulations generally—Cortez Municipal Golf Course. 
(a)  Golf season. The "golf season" is hereby to open on March 1st and close on November 15th, weather permitting, and: 
(1)  The golf course shall be open from 7:00 A.M. to sundown. The pro shop will be open from 7:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M. (May to September) and primarily 8:30 A.M. to 5:00 P.M., weather dependent, during other open times; 
(2)  The interior of the golf course is closed from approximately November 15th to March 1st to all use, depending upon weather. However, the perimeter cart pathway may be used for walking and/or cross country skiing during the closed months of the golf course; 
(3)  Nine holes may be closed for maintenance purposes for a short period of time at the discretion of the golf course superintendent; 
(4)  The opening and closing of the golf course will be decided by the golf course professional and the golf course superintendent. The director will make the final decision if the golf course professional and the superintendent are in disagreement. 
(b)  Golf professional. The golf professional (pro) is the authority for the general management, operation and improvement of the golf pro shop during the term of their contract. The city shall employ a golf course superintendent, course personnel, and shall provide the operating budget for the maintenance and upkeep of the course. The pro is responsible for providing all the services at the golf course including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Golf lessons; 
(2)  Driving range; 
(3)  Golf club rental; 
(4)  Pull cart rental; 
(5)  Self-propelled cart rental; 
(6)  Food services; 
(7)  Liaison with men's and women's golf associations; 
(8)  Supervision of golf tournaments; 
(9)  Supervision of junior golf programs. 
(c)  Fees. Fees will be set yearly by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  Golf advisory board . 
(1)  Board created, appointment, qualifications and terms of members. There is created a golf advisory board for the city consisting of five voting members, one member of which shall be a city council person, three members of which shall be residents of either Cortez or Montezuma County, and one member shall be a high school youth, and shall be appointed by the city council in the following manner and for the following terms: 
(A)  The members of the board shall be appointed by the council to serve terms as follows: One member at large from either Cortez or Montezuma County shall serve a three-year term; one member to be nominated by the men's golf association board who shall be a member of that association from either Cortez or Montezuma County and will serve for one year; and one member to be nominated by the women's golf association board who shall be a member of that association from either Cortez or Montezuma County and will serve for one year; and one member to be a high school youth and will serve for one year. As the term of each member expires, the vacancy thus created shall be filled by a majority vote of the council for a term equal to the position being vacated. If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of term, the council, by a majority vote, shall appoint a new member to fill the unexpired term. 
(B)  The four remaining members of the advisory board shall be ex officio members without vote and shall consist of the mayor of the city, the director, who shall serve as secretary of the board, the golf pro, and the golf course superintendent. 
(2)  Absence from meetings. Should a member be absent for three consecutive regular meetings of such advisory board without cause, the office of such member shall be deemed to be vacant and the term of such member terminated, and the secretary of the advisory board shall immediately inform the city council of such termination. An absence due to illness or an unavoidable absence from the city, and notice thereof to the secretary of the advisory board on or before the day of any regular meeting by such advisory board, shall be deemed absence for cause. A regular meeting as provided for by law or rule of the advisory board or any regularly advertised public hearing shall be deemed a regular meeting. 
(3)  Election and term of chairperson; creation and filling of other offices. The advisory board shall elect its chairperson from among the appointed members and shall create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the chairperson shall be one year with the eligibility for reelection. The position of chairperson shall be filled at the first regular meeting of each year. 
(4)  Regular meetings; calling of special meetings. The advisory board shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month during the months of March through October of each year, and such special meetings as are necessary in the opinion of the chairperson; provided, that a special meeting may be called by any three members of the advisory board or the city manager and/or the director upon due notice to the chairperson and the other members of the advisory board. 
(5)  Adoption of procedural rules; records. The advisory board shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its meetings, resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(6)  Majority vote required for recommendation, extension or amendment of plans. In voting upon the recommendation of any plan or any part thereof or any amendment, extension or addition by resolution of the advisory board, the same must be carried by the affirmative vote of a simple majority of the entire voting membership of the advisory board. 
(7)  Powers and duties generally. The advisory board shall perform the following duties: 
(A)  Make regular visits to the golf course, i.e., touring course in carts and playing the course; 
(B)  Bring comments, complaints and suggestions to the advisory board and act as a liaison to the city council; 
(C)  The chairperson should stay in regular communication with the director; 
(D)  Help to promote and advertise the golf course; 
(E)  Review all tournaments and tournament dates; 
(F)  Review and recommend to the council golf course rules and regulations for incorporation into applicable ordinances and resolutions; 
(G)  Advise and make recommendations concerning agreements with and hiring of a golf pro; 
(H)  Review and recommend to the council a master plan for the continued development and improvement of the golf course; 
(I)  Upon referral by the director the advisory board shall review cases of habitual offenders continually violating course rules and/or etiquette and help determine a course of action for the director to implement. 
(e)  Open play. Open play rules and regulations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Register in the pro shop before starting play. 
(2)  Replace divots and repair ball marks on the greens. 
(3)  Appropriate attire is required. 
(4)  Each player must have set of clubs. 
(5)  Groups of more than a foursome must have permission from the pro shop. 
(6)  Groups finishing on Number 9 have the right-of-way on Number 10. Other groups must check with the pro shop before starting Number 10. 
(7)  Tuesday morning is ladies' day. 
(8)  No range ball is allowed on the golf course. Violators may be evicted from the course. 
(9)  Tee times are available and are encouraged on any day of the week. 
(10)  Inappropriate conduct and/or golf etiquette will be handled on a case-by-case basis. 
(11)  Persons or groups in violation of the above rules and regulations may be evicted from the course by the pro and/or denied access to the golf course. 
(f)  League play. League play rules and regulations shall be as follows: 
(1)  League administrator must coordinate with the golf pro no later than 6 weeks prior to start. 
(2)  Excluding ladies' and men's association events there shall be a maximum of three league nights per week during May 15th to September 1st, and leagues will start no earlier than 5:30 P.M. on the front 9 (Monday—Thursday). 
(3)  If a league has 32 or more players, the golf pro or their designated staff member will close the front 9 holes and run a shotgun start. If this requirement is not met, then the golf pro or their designated staff member reserves the right to allow outside play on the front 9 and use a modified shotgun start. 
(4)  All rules and regulations at the golf course apply to any league. 
(g)  Tournament rules. Tournaments shall be governed by the following: 
(1)  All open play rules shall apply. 
(2)  Greens fees for tournaments will be set annually by resolution of the council. 
(3)  Tournament sponsors are required to sign an initial tournament use contract with the city and to complete a tournament request form and can be renewed or have first right of refusal. 
(4)  Tournaments shall be scheduled and regulated through the golf professional. 
(5)  The high school team is allowed to play free during the C.H.S.A.A. established high school golf season. 
(h)  Golf carts. Rental carts are available through the golf professional shop. Private carts (with exception of narrow wheel carts) are allowed at the course with a cap of eighty carts. Private golf carts must be built by a golf cart manufacturer and must be approved by the golf professional. Private carts will be charged a usage fee which is set annually by resolution of the council. Owners of private carts are completely responsible for all operating and maintenance expenses of the carts (including any towing charges). Private carts may be removed from the course if they are determined to be doing damage to the course (i.e., leaking gas, oil, etc.). No storage for private carts will be provided at the golf course through the city. Cart operators shall follow the rules and regulations set forth below: 
(1)  Stay thirty feet from the greens. 
(2)  Do not drive over tees. 
(3)  Drive around the outside of all golf trail signs. 
(4)  Do not drive rental carts at slow speed constantly, as it will drain battery dead after nine holes. 
(5)  Apply brakes evenly and smoothly so turf will not be torn. 
(6)  Stay out of bunkers and traps. Keep all carts out of the tall, bumpy and rough areas. Do not drive over ditches except at crossings. Reckless and careless use of carts is not permitted. 
(7)  Cart operators must possess a valid drivers' license. Children under sixteen years of age are not allowed to drive carts. 
(8)  No more than two riders are allowed on carts, except as approved by the golf pro. 
(9)  All private carts to be used on the golf course must be registered with the city prior to play and may only have two principal owners listed. If ownership of a private cart changes during any golf season, the cart must be re-registered and the registration fee paid. Each private cart owner will be given a list of rules and regulations pertaining to the usage of their private cart. 
(10)  One of the two registered owners must be in the private cart for each round of golf played. Occupancy is limited to that person and one other. 
(11)  Private cart owners must sign in at the pro shop prior to the playing of any hole at the golf course. 
(12)  Fees for private cart registration will be set annually by resolution of the council. All fees must be paid prior to use of the private cart on the golf course. 
(13)  Persons or groups in violation of the above rules and regulations may be evicted from the course. 
By the city or the city's duly authorized agent (golf pro) and/or denied access to the golf course. A refund of the private cart registration fee will not be given to cart owners evicted for cause. 
(i)  Intoxicating beverages. Only alcoholic beverages sold by and purchased from the Conquistador Golf Course, currently the Golf Pro, are allowed to be possessed and consumed on the Conquistador Golf Course. 
Consumption of alcohol in the golf course parking lot is prohibited and subject to Cortez City Code sections 18-1, Alcoholic beverages—drinking in public generally and 18-2, possession of open containers of liquor, wine and fermented beverages. 
(j)  Driving range. Driving range hours are posted in the pro shop. Driving range rules and regulations are as follows: 
(1)  Carts are not allowed on the driving range or driving range tee box except as approved by the golf pro or golf course superintendent. 
(2)  All range users shall stay within the boundaries as posted by the golf course superintendent. 
(3)  Golfers/spectators shall not loiter or be in attendance on the golf course driving range ball landing area, which is marked by out-of-bounds markers. 
(4)  Intentionally hitting balls to land outside the driving range is cause for eviction from the driving range. 
(5)  Range balls are the property of the golf professional. Using range balls in areas not authorized by the pro is strictly forbidden. 
(6)  The golf course superintendent may close the range for maintenance purposes. 
(7)  Violators of the above rules regarding the driving range may be evicted from the driving range or denied access to the driving range by the pro. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 723, § 1; Ord. No. 731, § 1; Ord. 762 § 1.) 
(Ord. No. 1154, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 1156, 10-25-11; Ord. No. 1178, 4-23-13; Ord. No. 1211 , 6-28-16; Ord. No. 1221 , 3-28-17)  
Sec. 19-7. - Park and facility use permit. 
(a)  A permit shall be obtained from the office of the director whenever any person or group desires to reserve any portion of the public parks or recreational facilities for any activity. The director of parks and recreation shall interpret this chapter and may act in any case not specifically covered by this chapter. Any request for a use prohibited in this chapter may be forwarded to the city manager who will take the matter before the city council for its consideration. 
(b)  Department-organized recreation activities shall be given first preference for use of facilities. 
(c)  An application for permission to reserve a park or portion thereof or parks and recreation facilities by persons or groups not officially a part of the department shall be initiated at least two weeks prior to the requested date, and shall have written approval of the director or his authorized representative; provided, however, that in extraordinary cases, the director or his authorized representative may waive or shorten the two-week time period as set forth above. 
(d)  All activities shall be under competent, adult supervision, and the organization using the facility shall assume full responsibility for any damage to the facility or the equipment. The department employee on duty shall exercise authority over the organization or its activities. Cleanup of the contracted area shall be the responsibility of the user. The user shall be charged on an hourly basis to pay for cleanup if it is necessary for the city to provide additional cleanup services. The fees or charges shall be established by the city council and administered by the director; provided, however, the city council may, in appropriate cases, waive the user fee or charge. 
(e)  All permits shall be revocable for cause by the director or upon finding of a violation of any rule, this Code or other city ordinance or state statute. If notice of cancellation of a request is not received at the office of the director at least forty-eight hours prior to the date of the event, the permit holder may be held responsible for all charges at the discretion of the director. 
(f)  No apparatus (scenery, etc.) or furniture and equipment shall be moved into a park facility unless special permission is granted in advance and so stated in the permit. Such apparatus, furniture or equipment (provided by the holder of the permit) shall be removed from the park area promptly after use and before 8:30 A.M. the following morning so that there shall not be any interference with normal park and recreation programs. Failure to comply may prohibit such groups from using facilities at a later date. 
(g)  Any person or group using facilities shall indemnify the city by signing a disclaimer for any and all damage to the facilities by any person or persons attending the event, and all liability and damages to any person for injuries, including death. Adequate insurance may be required for activities as determined by the director. If insurance is required it shall be provided by the person or groups using park facilities to cover such liability, listing the city as an "additional insured." Responsibility for loss, breakage or need for repair of any piece of furniture, equipment or portion of the facility or area shall rest solely with the person in charge, and/or the individual signing the agreement, who shall report same to the director. 
(h)  Building facilities and areas shall be vacated by 11:00 P.M. unless permission is otherwise granted specifically in the permit. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to ensure that this policy is administered. Programs shall be concluded in time to provide for cleanup and clearance of the facility as stated in the permit. 
(i)  The following specific rules shall be observed while using any facility. The permit holder shall be held responsible for any loss or damage growing out of such violation: 
(1)  The use of tobacco in any facility in any form shall be carefully controlled. No smoking shall be allowed unless proper and adequate containers are provided. 
(2)  Functions shall be confined to the specific part of the facility assigned to the permit holder. 
(j)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  The following activities shall be prohibited unless approved by the director: 
(A)  Continuous use of park and recreation facilities. 
(k)  The total number of people admitted for any usage shall not exceed the capacity of the facility involved, as determined by the director. 
(l)  All federal, state, county and city statues and ordinances shall be complied with by the permit holder. 
(m)  The use of special equipment shall be permitted only when operated by department employees or other persons specifically authorized in the permit. When used by other than department employees, and so stated in the permit, the special equipment shall be returned in the condition in which it was found (with the exception of normal wear) or the user shall be responsible for repair or replacement charges. 
(n)  No material of any kind shall be attached to any part of the facility or area without express written approval from the director. 
(o)  If control personnel, parking attendant, etc., are necessary, such personnel shall be supplied by the applicant. The director shall specify when control personnel are necessary. 
(p)  Concession rights shall be reserved to the city unless specifically stated otherwise in the permit. 
(q)  Sidewalks, roadways and parking facilities shall be those specifically surfaced areas within the park property constructed for that purpose. 
(r)  Continuous use of facilities by clubs or enterprises shall be permitted through signed agreements which shall be reissued as necessary at the direction of the director. No permit shall exceed a period of time of one year. Permits may be reissued each year with the approval of the director. 
(s)  When an application for use of the facilities has been approved by the director, notification shall contain the date, hours of use, type of activity and number of participants. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 723, § 2.) 
(Ord. No. 1147, 11-23-10)  
Sec. 19-8. - Cancellation. 
The director reserves the right to cancel the use of any parks, recreation or golf course facility if he deems that damage may occur to the facility during inclement weather. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2 (part).)  
Sec. 19-9. - Refunds. 
The director shall approve the issuance of refunds by the finance department for the use of facilities (when charged) and recreation programs on the following basis: 
(a)  Athletic leagues. 
(1)  If the league is canceled by the department, a full refund shall be issued. 
(2)  If a participant, team or sponsor wants a refund before schedules are completed, the original fee charged less a five-dollar handling fee shall be refunded. 
(3)  After schedules are completed, seventy-five percent of the original fee charged shall be refunded. 
(4)  After leagues have started playing and before fifty percent of the league schedule has been completed, fifty percent of the original fee charged shall be refunded. 
(5)  No refund shall be issued once fifty percent of the league schedule has been completed. 
(b)  Recreation programs. 
(1)  If the program is canceled by the department a full refund shall be issued. 
(2)  If a refund is requested prior to the first class meeting, the original fee charged less a five-dollar handling fee shall be refunded. 
(3)  After the first class has met, no refunds shall be issued. 
(c)  Refunds. 
(1)  All refunds authorized by this section shall be issued during the regular business hours of the city, 8:00 A.M. through 5:00 P.M., Monday through Friday, with the exception of holidays. 
(Ord. No. 723, § 3.)  
Sec. 19-10. - Fees established. 
Fees for all city recreation facilities and programs shall be established annually by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2 (part).)  
Sec. 19-11. - Penalty. 
Any person or persons guilty of violating any of the provisions contained in Sections 19-2, 19-3, 19-4, 19-5, 19-6 (e), (f), (g), (h), and (i) and 19-7 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2 (part); amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 25, 9-25-12)  
CHAPTER 19A. - CITY PARKS TO BE USED BY "FOR PROFIT" ENTERPRISES. 
 
Sec. 19A-1. - Establishment of procedures for the allowance of city parks to be used by "for profit" enterprises. 
(a)  All "for profit" activities which are allowed in any city park or facility shall be approved by the parks and recreation director. 
(b)  The city shall receive to a percentage of the gross revenues raised by any such activity based on city involvement at a minimum to cover city costs. This percentage of the gross may be negotiated between the person or entity that wishes to have the activity and the director of parks and recreation, or percentages may be set by council in their annual fee setting resolution. 
Section 19-2(a) of the codification determines the times that city parks shall be open. If an event is approved under this new chapter, section 19-2(a) will not be applicable but event times will be negotiated. 
(c)  Section 19-2(l), sales, advertising in parks and recreation areas, shall not be applicable to the events approved by the city in this chapter. 
(d)  Alcohol will only be permitted in an event with a "for profit" entity if it is co-sponsored by an approved non-profit eligible to host events which includes the sale of alcohol. 
(e)  A liquor license for any event serving alcohol must be obtained by the non profit entity sponsor pursuant to city licensing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1147, 11-23-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1147, adopted November 23, 2010, repealed the former § 19A-1, and enacted a new § 19A-1 as set out herein. The former 19A-1 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1010.  
CHAPTER 20. - PERSONNEL. 
 
Secs. 20-1 to 20-5. - Reserved.  
Sec. 20-6. - Police pension fund—Adopted by reference. 
The statutes of the State of Colorado, Title 31, Article 30, Sections 301—324, Part 3, as amended, insofar as the same pertains and applies to the city, are hereby adopted by reference as fully and to the same extent as though the same were printed in full herein. The police pension fund of the city shall be operated in accordance with such statutes, as amended, except as otherwise provided by city charter or by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 504, §§ 1—2.)  
Sec. 20-7. - Same—Disability insurance. 
(a)  Any member of the police pension fund who receives funds from a disability insurance plan funded by the city shall as a condition to acceptance of such funds be deemed to have assigned such funds to the police pension fund of the city. 
(b)  The board of trustees of the police pension fund is hereby authorized and directed to consider the amount of any such funds received by the member as a portion of any award made from the police pension fund and to credit the fund with such payment in the same manner as if made directly from the police pension fund. 
(Ord. No. 504, §§ 3—4.)  
CHAPTER 21. - PLUMBING. 
 As to buildings generally, see Ch. 6 of this Code. As to gas generally, see Ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 21-1.1. - Plumbing Code—Copies on file. 
Three true and exact official copies of the above-described 2009 Edition of the International Plumbing Code (IPC) are on file in the municipal offices of the City of Cortez, Colorado, duly certified by the mayor and attested by the city clerk, and may be examined, duplicated, or copied by any interested person during the regular business hours of said offices, all such reproduction or copying to be at the expense of the person requesting the same. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 3; Ord. No. 703, § 3; Ord. No. 738, § 3; Ord. No. 798, § 3.) 
(Ord. No. 1137, § III (part)) 
 Prior ordinance history: Ord. Nos. 541, 584 and 637.  
Sec. 21-1.2. - Deleted. 
  Editor's note: § 21-1.2 was deleted at the city's request after adoption of the 1985 Uniform Plumbing Code by Ord. No. 637.  
Sec. 21-2. - Plumbing Code—Enforcement; inspections by building official. 
The building official shall enforce the Plumbing Code and any other plumbing regulations of the city, and make all inspections of plumbing installations; provided, that his duly authorized representative may act for him. 
(Code 1968, § 13-4-2.)  
Sec. 21-3. - Plumbers' licenses—Required; issuance; fee generally; qualifications; exception. 
No person shall carry on the business, trade or calling of plumbing, install or contract to do any plumbing within the city without first obtaining a license to do so. The building official, upon the payment of an annual license fee, as set forth by the city council by resolution, in advance, and upon being satisfied that the applicant has the qualifications herein specified, may issue to any applicant a plumber's license for the fiscal year or balance thereof. Every person applying for a license shall give satisfactory evidence to the building official that he is a regular practicing plumber, and has a license from the state board of health as required by law. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to require a property owner to have a plumber's license to repair leaks on his own property. All plumbing work within the city must be performed under the direct supervision of a master plumber. 
(Code 1968, § 13-4-3.) 
 For state law as to plumbers generally, see C.R.S. 1973, § 12-58-101 et seq.  
Sec. 21-4. - Same—Bond required; proration of fee. 
No license shall be issued under this chapter until the applicant has executed and furnished a bond to the city with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the building official, in the amount of one thousand dollars conditioned upon compliance with the regulations and instructions of city officials in charge of the sewers and water system and their authorized agents, and with all the requirements of the ordinances of the city and the state Plumbing Code, in relation to sewers, waterworks and plumbing. 
The city council by resolution may, from time to time, change the amount of the bond referenced above. 
No reduction of license fee shall be made because a license may be granted for only the balance of the fiscal year. 
(Code 1968, § 13-4-4; Ord. No. 909 (part).)  
Sec. 21-5. - Same—Transfer; cancellation. 
Plumbing licenses are not transferable either directly or indirectly. 
The building official shall, for unskillfulness, carelessness or willful violation of the state Plumbing Code or any instructions of the water and sewer superintendents or their authorized agents, cancel any such license after giving the licensee a hearing with due notice of the charges. 
(Code 1968, § 13-4-5.)  
Sec. 21-6. - Plumbing permits. 
A permit must be obtained for each and every installation of plumbing in the city. 
A plumbing permit fee will be established by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1968, § 13-4-7.)  
Sec. 21-7. - Inspection required. 
All plumbing and sanitary sewer lines must be inspected by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(Code 1968, § 13-4-8.)  
Sec. 21-8. - Installation of grease traps. 
Grease traps shall be installed in accordance with the latest regulations approved by the state department of public health. 
(Code 1968, § 13-4-6.)  
Sec. 21-9. - Penalties for violation. 
In addition to all other penalties herein provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or suffering or permitting the same to be violated shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and a violation upon conviction shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. Each day that the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. A separate and additional complaint may be filed by the building inspector for such continuing violations. 
(Ord. No. 909 (part); amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 26, 9-25-12)  
CHAPTER 21A. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL GENERAL POLICY 
 
Sec. 21A-1. - Responsibility. 
(a)  This program applies to all metered water accounts provided by the City of Cortez. The cross-connection administrator, or his designee, shall be responsible for the protection of the public water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. 
(b)  If a backflow prevention device is required for the in-plant, industrial piping or owner's premises for the protection of the potable water system, the cross-connection administrator shall give written notice to the owner to install an approved backflow prevention device or devices at his or her own expense within ninety days of the receipt of the notice, or the customer's water service will be discontinued until the proper device or devices are installed. In case of a direct hazard, immediate termination of service will occur and will only be restored when approved assemblies have been installed to protect the potable water supply. 
(Ord. No. 1048, § 1 (part).) 
( Ord. No. 1226 , § 1.00, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 21A-2. - Right of entry. 
(a)  A representative of the City of Cortez will carry proper credentials of his or her office. By previously-arranged appointment and upon presentation of proper credentials, the representative shall have the right of entry to inspect any and all buildings and premises for cross connections relative to possible hazards. This right of entry shall be a condition of water service in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the customers throughout the city's distribution system. Where building security is required, the backflow assembly should be located in an area not subject to security. Questions regarding proper credentials should be directed to the department of public works. 
(b)  The department of public works may request an administrative search warrant for the purpose of inspecting buildings and premises for cross-connections relative to possible hazards. Applications shall be made to the Cortez Municipal Court which, upon proper showing, may grant a search warrant to the department of public works for the purpose of inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1048, § 1 (part).) 
( Ord. No. 1226 , § 1.01, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 21A-3. - Violations. 
(a)  Failure of the customer to cooperate in the installation, maintenance, testing, or inspection of backflow prevention assemblies required by these standards shall be grounds for the discontinuance of water service to the premises, or the requirement of installation of an air-gap separation from the public water system. 
(b)  Service of water to any premises may be discontinued by the public works director if unprotected cross-connections exist on the premises. When any defect is found in an installed backflow prevention assembly, or if a backflow prevention assembly has been removed or bypassed, the service may be discontinued. Service shall not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(c)  Discontinuance of service may be summary, immediate, and without written notice whenever, in the judgment of the public works director, such action is necessary to protect the purity of the public potable water supply or the safety of the water system. 
(Ord. No. 1048, § 1 (part).) 
( Ord. No. 1226 , § 1.2, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 21A-4. - General requirements. 
(a)  All building plans must be submitted to the City of Cortez Cross-Connection Administrator for approval prior to the issuance of water service. Building plans must show: 
(1)  Water service type, size, and location; 
(2)  Meter size and location; 
(3)  Backflow prevention device size, type, and location; and 
(4)  Fire sprinkling system(s) service line, size, and type of backflow prevention device. 
(b)  Backflow prevention assembles are to be installed in an accessible location to facilitate maintenance, testing, and repair. Drawings must show various installations. 
(c)  All backflow prevention assembles shall be installed downstream of the water meter prior to any uses. 
(d)  Before installing a backflow prevention assembly, pipelines should be thoroughly flushed to remove foreign material. 
(e)  In no case will it be permissible to have a bypass on a backflow assembly, unless also protected by the same level backflow assembly. 
(f)  Backflow prevention valves are not to be used as the inlet or outlet valve of the water meter. Test cocks are not to be used as supply connections (not applied to residential dual-check meter installations). 
(g)  In order to insure that backflow prevention assembles continue to operate satisfactorily, it will be necessary that they be tested at the time of installation and on an annual schedule thereafter. Such tests will be conducted in accordance with ASSE and/or USC Cross-Connection Control 10th Edition and Field Test Procedures as directed by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (CDPHE). 
(h)  The City of Cortez will require inspection of all containment installations. 
(i)  All cost for design, installation, maintenance, repair, and testing are to be borne by the customer. 
(j)  No grandfather clause exists. All laws and regulations apply regardless of the age of the facility. 
(k)  All fire sprinkling systems shall have a minimum protection of an approved double-check valve for containment of the system. 
(1)  All glycol (ethylene or propylene), or antifreeze systems shall have an approved reduced pressure zone assembly for containment. 
(2)  Dry fire systems shall have an approved double-check valve installed upstream of the air pressure valve. 
(3)  Single family residence with a fire sprinkler system and domestic water combined shall have a double check valve when no chemicals are used. 
(l)  All fire sprinkler systems shall conform to the currently-adopted International Fire Code. 
(m)  Commercial fire hydrant meters shall have the reduce pressure zone assembly tested prior to use and a copy of the test report turned in to the cross-connection administrator. 
(n)  All commercial water haulers shall have a reduce pressure zone assembly installed and tested prior to receiving water from the City of Cortez. 
(1)  Exception: Trucks configured with top fill air gaps. 
(Ord. No. 1048, § 1 (part).) 
( Ord. No. 1226 , § 1.3, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 21A-5. - Reference manuals. 
(a)  Reference manuals adopted for guidelines on cross-connection control include: 
(1)  Cross-Connection Control Manual, Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (CDPHE), latest edition. 
(2)  Definitions of terms used in this regulation are those contained in the Cross-Connection Control Manual, CDPHE, latest edition. 
(3)  American Water Works Association Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control Manual M14, Fourth Edition 2015. 
(4)  Manual of Cross-Connection Control, 10th Edition, USC. 
(Ord. No. 1048, § 1 (part).) 
( Ord. No. 1226 , § 1.4, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 21A-6. - Copies on file. 
(a)  Three true and exact official copies of the Cross-Connection Control Manual, CDPHE, latest edition, shall be on file: one in the office of the Cortez City Clerk; one in the Cortez Public Library; and one in the office of the Director of Public Works of the City of Cortez, duly certified by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk, and may be examined, duplicated, or copied by any interested person during the regular business hours of said office, all such reproduction or copying to be at the expense of the person requesting the same. 
(Ord. No. 1048, § 1 (part).) 
( Ord. No. 1226 , § 1.5, 8-8-17)  
CHAPTER 22. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. 
 For charter provisions as to public improvements, see Char., art. VIII, §§ 5, 9, art. IX, §§ 5, 7, art. XIII. 
 For state law as to authority of city to make public improvements, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-35-303. As to sidewalk improvements, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-35-305. 
 As to sewers generally, see Ch. 23 of this Code. As to streets and sidewalks generally, see Ch. 24. As to the location of curb lines, see §§ 24-3 to 24-6. As to curb cuts, see §§ 24-7, 24-8. As to street grades, see §§ 24-9 to 24-15. As to sidewalk, curb and gutter construction generally, see §§ 24-16 to 24-19. As to subdivision of land generally, see Ch. 25. As to water generally, see Ch. 27.  
Article I. - In General. 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Paving. Includes repaving, macadamizing and remacadamizing. 
Real estate. All lands whether platted or unplatted, regardless of lot or land lines. Lots, plots, blocks and other subdivisions may be designated in accordance with any recorded plat thereof and unplatted lands by any definite description. 
Street. Avenues, boulevards, alleys and other highways. 
(Code 1968, §§ 8-5-1, 8-5-4.)  
Sec. 22-2. - Council to award contracts and assess costs; director of public works to make recommendations as to contracts and supervise work. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to contract for or have made local improvements and to assess the cost thereof, wholly or in part, upon the property especially benefitted. 
(b)  All contracts for public improvements shall be awarded by the council upon recommendation of the director of public works, except as provided by this chapter, and the improvements shall be constructed by and under the direction of the director of public works in accordance with the specifications prescribed or approved by the council. 
(Code 1968, § 8-5-2.)  
Sec. 22-3. - Improvements to be authorized by ordinance. 
Whenever the council by resolution orders any of the local improvements mentioned under this chapter, such improvement shall be authorized by ordinance. 
(Code 1968, § 8-5-3.)  
Sec. 22-4. - Adoption of existing improvements. 
If at the time of the passage of an ordinance authorizing any improvements for any district, any piece of real estate or any railway company to be assessed in the district has the whole or any part of the proposed improvements, conforming to the general plan, the same may be adopted in whole or in part, or may be changed to conform to the general plan, if deemed practical, and the owner of such real estate shall, when the assessment is made, be credited with the amount which is saved by reason of adapting or adopting such existing improvements. 
(Code 1968, § 8-7-1.)  
Sec. 22-5. - Assessment of costs generally—Against benefitted land generally. 
Whenever any improvement authorized to be made by the city pursuant to this chapter is so ordered, the city council shall determine that all or any part of the total cost thereof, including, but not limited to, the cost of improving the intersections of streets and alleys, but excepting the share to be assessed against any street or other railway company, shall be assessed against the tracts or parcels of land specifically benefitted thereby and included within the district or within the assessment unit, if the district is divided into such units, with the following exceptions: Any tract or parcel owned by the United States of America or any agency, instrumentality or corporation thereof and any street or other public right-of-way. Such special assessments shall be in proportion to the special benefits derived to such property and on a front foot, area, zone or other equitable basis, as may be determined by the city council, sufficient to cover the portion of the total cost of the improvement to be defrayed by special assessments. Regardless of the basis so determined, in cases of wedge, V or irregularly shaped lots or tracts, the amount apportioned thereto shall be in proportion to the special benefits thereby derived. 
(Code 1968, § 8-7-3.)  
Sec. 22-6. - Same—Allocation for street and alley intersections. 
The cost of improvements in street intersections may be segregated and such cost, except the share assessable to street or other railway companies, may be assessed upon all frontage of the street improved and on intersecting streets within a distance of one-half block in each direction from such intersections, in proportion to the frontage of each lot or tract on the street improved or on an intersecting street, or on both within such distance. The cost of the improvement of an alley intersection may be assessed upon the real estate in the same block extending to the nearest street intersection and half the length of the block along its sides; provided, that where the sides of blocks are of unequal length, the council may determine the limit of assessment. The cost of improving street and alley intersections may be treated as one of the costs of any improvement without separately segregating such intersection cost. In such case, the total cost of any improvement shall be assessed as provided by this section upon the basis determined without any separate assessment for intersection costs. 
(Code 1968, § 8-7-5.)  
Sec. 22-7. - Same—Allocation for sidewalks. 
The whole cost of construction and reconstruction of sidewalks, including intersections and necessary grading and removal of obstructions, shall be assessed upon the lots or lands in front of which such improvements are made, as follows: The grading, removal of obstructions, intersections and all other general expenses, including cost of collection and interest, pro rata per front foot; new walks, pro rata per front foot where constructed; and reconstructed walks upon each lot or piece of land where reconstructed according to the cost of reconstruction. 
(Code 1968, § 8-7-7.)  
Sec. 22-8. - Same—Against public corporation land. 
When the state, any agency, instrumentality or corporation thereof, or any city, county, school district or any other public or quasi-public corporation, except the United States of America or any agency, instrumentality or corporation thereof, owns any land or hold the title to any land not used as a street or other public right-of-way, which if owned by a private person would be liable to assessment for benefits to pay for any public improvement mentioned in this chapter, an assessment shall be made against such land as though such land were the property of a private person, and the state, its agency, instrumentality or corporation, or the city, county, school district or other public or quasi-public corporation shall pay the amount of that assessment. If such assessment is not paid within thirty days after the final publication of the assessing ordinance, suit may be brought in the district court to enforce the collection of such assessment and the judgment rendered against such city, county, school district or other public or quasi-public corporation shall be enforced as other judgments against such entities, but no such land owned thereby shall be sold under any such judgment. 
(Code 1968, § 8-7-8.)  
Sec. 22-9. - Grading or paving of area belonging to street or railway company. 
Whenever any grading or paving district is created under this chapter, the council shall include in the area to be paved or graded the entire width of the street from curb to curb, or in the absence of curbs to street lines determined by the city council including the portion of such street occupied by, or required by franchise obligation to be paved, chargeable or assessable to any street or other railway company whose tracks run through or across any street in such district. The council shall charge to, assess and collect the proper proportion of the cost of such improvement from such street or railway company in the same manner as is provided in this chapter for other property specially benefitted thereon, and shall issue bonds for the same, which bonds shall be issued and made payable in like manner as bonds issued for the improvement to be assessed against the real estate especially benefitted. A street or railway company shall be held to occupy and shall be liable for the grading and paving of that part of the street lying between the rails of each track and two feet outside of each rail, and every railway company, whether street railway, shall be assessed for the cost of the paving and grading of any part of any street or alley occupied by or required by franchise obligation to be paid by them. The assessment levied for the cost of such improvement chargeable to a railway company shall be a first and prior lien against the entire franchise and property of the company within and without such district, but within the limits of the city, excepting any lien thereon to secure the payment of general taxes. All the terms, conditions and provisions in this chapter relative to the collection of the amounts chargeable against tracts or parcels of land assessed shall be applicable in the enforcement and collection of such assessment against such railway company, and the property of such railway shall be sold by the city as in cases of default in payment of general taxes levied thereon; but railway trackage shall not be considered or computed as assessable frontage, in determining the sufficiency of petitions or remonstrance as provided by this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 8-7-4.)  
Sec. 22-10. - Construction of walks by owner. 
In districts for the construction and reconstruction of sidewalks alone, or in combination with other improvements, the work may include the necessary grading from the curb line to the lot line, and the owner of any lot or tract to be assessed shall have the right to construct or reconstruct his own walks in conformity with the plans and specifications for the district, within thirty days from the publication of the ordinance authorizing such improvement. 
(Code 1968, § 8-7-6.)  
Sec. 22-11. - Notices generally—Effect of failure to receive. 
Whenever any notice is mailed as required in this article, the fact that the person to whom it was addressed does not receive it shall not in any manner invalidate or affect the proceedings provided for under this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 8-7-9.)  
Sec. 22-12. - Same—Use of figures, general descriptions, etc. 
In all proceedings and notices authorized by this chapter, figures may be used instead of words and it shall not be necessary in an improvement district to designate each piece of real estate in the district separately. General description and quantities may be used, except in the assessment rolls, and except in assessments, any cost stated may be stated as being a probable amount per front foot, per square foot or per lot, of a given size and proportionate amounts for other lots, or when a different method of assessment is provided, then as being subject to such method. 
(Code 1968, § 8-7-10.)  
Sec. 22-13. - Legal actions—Generally. 
The finding of the council by ordinance that any improvement provided for in this chapter was duly ordered after notice duly given, or that a petition or remonstrance was or was not filed, or was or was not duly subscribed by the required number of owners, shall be conclusive in every court or other tribunal. Within fifteen days immediately succeeding the publication of such ordinance upon its final passage, any person who has filed a written remonstrance, as provided by this chapter, shall have the right to commence an action or suit in any court of competent jurisdiction to correct or set aside the determination of the council. Any person concerned who objects to the regularity, validity and correctness of proceedings and instruments taken, adopted or made at or subsequent to such hearing and prior to the final passage of such ordinance shall also have the right to commence such an action or suit to cure or set aside such purported irregularity, invalidity or incorrectness. Nothing in this section shall be construed as not requiring any person to make any objection by written remonstrance at such hearing in order not to waive such objection, if the purported irregularity, invalidity or incorrectness of any matter first occurred prior to the first publication of the notice of the hearing. After the expiration of such fifteen days all actions or suits not so commenced attacking the regularity, validity and correctness of that ordinance and of all proceedings, determinations and instruments taken, adopted or made prior to such ordinance's final passage, shall be perpetually barred. 
(Code 1968, § 8-7-2.)  
Sec. 22-14. - Same—Statute of limitations. 
Except as otherwise provided in sections 22-13, 22-23 and 22-52 of this Code, all actions legal or equitable for relief against any proceedings had under this chapter whether based upon irregularities or jurisdictional defects, shall be commenced within thirty days after the wrongful act complained of, or else be thereafter perpetually barred. 
(Code 1968, § 8-7-11; Ord. No. 497, § 1.)  
Sec. 22-15. - Connection with utilities may be compelled by city manager; assessment of costs of connections. 
Whenever any paving district or local improvement providing for paving is ordered under the provisions of this chapter, the city manager, if he deems it advisable, may order the owners of the abutting real estate to connect their several premises with the water and gas mains or with any other utility in the street in front of their several premises and upon default of the owners for twenty days after such order to make such connections the city may contract for and make such connections or do the work by day labor in the manner and in accordance with the specifications prescribed for such work. The whole cost of each connection shall be assessed against the property with which the connections are made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for the acquisition of improvements, creating local improvement districts and defraying the cost thereof, for such paving or local improvement district. 
(Code 1968, § 8-7-12.)  
Sec. 22-16. - Power and duty of city officers to enforce chapter. 
The officers of the city are authorized and directed to take all action necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 8-7-13.)  
Sec. 22-17. - Applicability of chapter to prior improvement districts. 
The provisions of this chapter insofar as applicable shall apply to all local improvement districts heretofore created and to the collection of any assessment or installment of assessments therein not delinquent and certified to the county tax collector for collection. 
(Code l968, § 8-10-17.)  
Article II. - Initiation. 
 
Sec. 22-18. - By resolution of council. 
(a)  Required. Proceedings to improve streets, alleys and public highways and parts thereof by paving, grading, curbing, guttering and surfacing with suitable material, the construction and reconstruction of sidewalks upon and otherwise improving, of the whole or any part or parts of any street, alley or streets and alleys, which need not be connected or contiguous, in the city, or any combination of such improvements, including necessary grading, crosswalks, curbs, drains, readjusting manholes, catchbasin and such other incidentals, including the incidental storm sewers in case of paving, as the council may prescribe, shall be initiated upon recommendation of the director of public works by the adoption of a resolution by the city council. 
(b)  Contents. The resolution by the city council initiating proceedings on proposed improvements, except as otherwise provided by this chapter shall state the nature and location of the improvement to be made, without mentioning minor details and incidentals, describe the local improvement district to be assessed, by boundaries or other brief description, and instruct the director of public works, or an engineer specially retained by the city in connection with such district, who, in such event, may perform all or any portion of the duties prescribed by this chapter to be performed by the director of public works as directed by the council, to prepare and present to the council: 
(1)  Preliminary plans and specifications for such improvement. 
(2)  An estimate of the probable total cost thereof, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the cost of constructing or otherwise acquiring such improvement, engineering and clerical service and supplies, cost of inspection, cost of collecting assessments, advertising, printing, interest on bonds until interest on assessments is available to defray such, fiscal services, legal services for preparing proceedings and advising in regard thereto and other incidental costs. 
(3)  A map of the local improvement district to be assessed. 
(c)  Preliminary plans. The preliminary plans shall show a typical section of the comtemplated improvement, the type of material and the approximate thickness and width. Such resolution may provide for one or more types of construction. 
(d)  Combination of improvements. More than one improvement may be combined in one local improvement district when the city council determines such improvements may be combined together in an efficient and economical district. If in the combination of improvements they shall be separate and distinct by reason of substantial difference in their character or location, or otherwise, each such improvement shall be considered as a unit or district for the purpose of petition, remonstrance and assessment, such unit or district being sometimes designated as an assessment unit. In case of such combination the city council shall designate the improvement and area constituting each such assessment unit, and in the absence of an arbitrary and unreasonable abuse of discretion, its determination that there is or is not such a combination and its determination of the improvement and area constituting each such unit shall be final and conclusive. The costs of constructing and otherwise acquiring each such improvement shall be segregated for the levy of assessments and an equitable share of the incidental costs shall be allocated to each such assessment unit. 
(e)  Cost estimates not limitation on council. Any estimate of cost required or authorized in this article shall not constitute a limitation upon such cost nor a limitation upon the rights and powers of the city council or of any officers, agents or employees of the city, except as otherwise specifically stated in this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 8-5-4.)  
Sec. 22-19. - By petition. 
(a)  Generally. A public work or improvement, the costs of which, in whole or in part, are to be assessed by the city, may be initiated on petition of property owners. 
(b)  Standing to petition: conditions. The owners of land to be assessed for not less than fifty-one percent of the entire cost of any public work or improvement, including all incidental expenses, constituting at least a majority in frontage, in area or in whatever other property constituting the basis for the computation of assessments of the real estates so to be assessed, may by written petition initiate the acquisition of any improvement which the council is authorized to initiate, subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  The council may incorporate such improvement in any assessment unit and in any improvement district pursuant to subsection (d) of section 22-18 and all other provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  The council need not proceed with the acquisition of any such improvement or any part thereof after holding a hearing thereon, if the council determines that it is not in the public interest that the proposed project, or a part thereof, be constructed. 
(3)  Any particular kind of improvement, material therefor or part thereof need not be acquired or located, as provided in the petition, if the council determines that such is not in the public interest. 
(4)  The council need not take any proceedings or action upon receiving any such petition if the council determines by resolution that the acquisition of the designated improvement probably is not feasible for the reason stated in such resolution. If the resolution requires a cash deposit or a pledge of property in at least an amount or value therein designated and found by the council to be probably sufficient to defray the expenses and cost incurred by the city taken preliminary to, and in the attempted acquisition of, the improvement designated in the petition, and if such deposit or pledge is not made with the director of finance within twenty days after one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of a notice of the resolution's adoption and of its contents in summary form. An additional deposit or pledge may from time to time be similarly so required as a condition precedent to the continuation of action by the city. Whenever such deposit or pledge is made and the council determines that such acquisition is not feasible within a reasonable period of time, the council may require that all or any portion of the costs incurred in connection with investigation of such proposal by the city shall be defrayed from such deposit or proceeds of such pledged property, in lieu of such defrayment of costs by petitioners or other interested persons, within twenty days after the determination by resolution of such amount and upon publication of a notice thereof. 
(Code 1968, § 8-5-5; Ord. No. 602, § 1.)  
Sec. 22-20. - Proceedings of council after initiation by petition. 
Upon the filing of a petition as permitted by section 22-19, the council shall proceed in the same manner as is provided for by this article where proceedings are initiated by the city council, except as otherwise provided. 
(Code 1968, § 8-5-6.)  
Article III. - Plans. 
 
Sec. 22-21. - Resolution adopting preliminary plans, specifications and map. 
(a)  Generally. The council shall by resolution adopt the preliminary plans and specifications and the map of the director of public works for the proposed improvement when the council is satisfied with such proposals. 
(b)  Additional contents. The council shall by that resolution or a resolution subsequently adopted prescribe: 
(1)  The extent of the local improvement district to be assessed and of each assessment unit, if the district is so divided, by boundaries or other brief description. 
(2)  The kind of improvement proposed, without mentioning minor details. 
(3)  The number of installments and the time in which the cost of the improvement will be payable. 
(4)  The probable cost as shown by the total estimate of the director of public works, which estimate shall not constitute a limitation upon the cost of the project nor for any other purpose. 
(5)  The amount or proportion of the total cost to be paid by other than special assessments, if any. 
(6)  The method of levying assessments. 
(7)  The approximate amount or share of the portion of the total estimate to be assessed against property specially benefitted by the acquisition of the proposed improvement. 
(c)  Order to construct; setting of hearing date. The council in that resolution shall order that the project be made when the same has been authorized by ordinance, and shall fix a day upon which a hearing in respect to such project shall be had within thirty days after the adoption of the resolution prescribing the extent of the local improvement district. 
(Code 1968, § 8-5-7.)  
Sec. 22-22. - Notice to owners, etc. 
After the adoption of the resolution required by section 22-21 the city clerk shall give notice of such proposal by publication as required for other notices to the owners of real estate in the local improvement district and to all persons interested, generally, and without naming such owner or persons, of: 
(a)  The kind of improvements proposed, without mentioning minor details or incidentals. 
(b)  The number of installments and time in which the cost of improvements will be payable. 
(c)  The maximum rate of interest on unpaid installments. 
(d)  The extent of the district to be assessed, by boundaries or other brief description. 
(e)  The time when the council will consider the ordering of the proposed improvements and hear all complaints, remonstrances and objections that may be made in writing concerning the same by the owner of any real estate to be assessed or any person interested. 
(f)  The fact that all proceedings in the premises are on file and can be seen and examined at the office of the city clerk during business hours, at any time, by any person so interested. 
(Code 1968, § 8-5-8.)  
Sec. 22-23. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Right of owners to present views, etc. On the date fixed for the hearing on the proposed improvements any and all property owners interested in such improvement may, by written petition, remonstrance or otherwise, present their views in respect to the proposed improvements to the council. 
(b)  Adjournment. The council may adjourn the hearing from time to time. 
(c)  Consideration of arguments. After the hearing has been concluded, after all written complaints, remonstrances and objections have been read and duly considered and after all persons desiring to be heard in person have been heard, the council shall consider the arguments, if any, and any other relevant material put forth. 
(d)  Determination against proposal. If the council determines that it is not in the public interest that the proposed project, or a part thereof, be made, the council shall make an order by resolution to that effect and any proceedings for the project, or any part thereof determined against by such order, shall stop and shall not be begun again until the adoption of a new resolution. 
(e)  Waiver of claims not presented. Any objection to the regularity, validity and correctness of the proceedings and instruments taken, adopted or made prior to the date of the hearing on the proposed improvements shall be deemed waived unless presented by written remonstrance at the time and in the manner specified by this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 8-5-9.)  
Sec. 22-24. - Construction after protest. 
If within the time specified in such notice a written protest or remonstrance against the making of all the improvements proposed by initiation of the city council is filed with the city clerk and signed by the owners of property constituting a majority in frontage, in area or in whatever other property constituting the basis for the computation of assessments, as the case may be, of the real estate to be assessed in the district or in the assessment unit, if the district is divided into assessment units, the proposed improvements shall not be made, unless the city pays one-half or more of the total cost of the improvements with funds derived from other than the levy of special assessments. 
(Code 1968, § 8-5-9.)  
Sec. 22-25. - Modification, rescission, etc., generally. 
All proceedings may be modified or rescinded wholly or in part by resolution adopted by the council at any time prior to the passage of the ordinance adopted pursuant to sections 22-27 and 22-28 and authorizing the improvements to be made. No substantial change in the district, details, preliminary plans or specifications or estimates shall be made after the first publication or mailing of notice to property owners, whichever occurs first, except for the deletion of a portion of a project and property from the proposed program and district or assessment unit. The director of public works, however, shall have the right to make minor changes in time, plans and materials entering into the work at any time before its completion. 
(Code 1968, § 8-5-9.)  
Sec. 22-26. - Revision of preliminary plans. 
(a)  Duty of director of public works. After the hearing on the proposed improvement plans after the city council has disposed of all remonstrances, so filed, and after the council has determined to proceed with the local improvement district, as modified, if modified, the council, if there be modification, by resolution shall direct the director of public works to prepare and present to the council: 
(1)  A revised and detailed estimate of the total cost, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the cost of constructing and otherwise acquiring each proposed improvement and of each of the incidental costs, which revised estimate shall not constitute a limitation for any purpose except as provided in this section. 
(2)  Full and detailed plans and specifications for each proposed improvement designed to permit and encourage competition among the bidders, if the work is to be acquired or improved by contract. 
(3)  A revised map showing the location of each improvement and the real property to be assessed therefor. 
(b)  Combination or division of construction units. The resolution modifying the proposed plan for improvements may combine or divide the proposed improvement or improvements into suitable construction units for the purpose of letting separate and independent contracts, regardless of the extent of any improvement constituting an assessment unit and regardless of whether a portion of the cost of any improvement is to be defrayed other than by the levy of special assessments. Nothing, however, contained in this section shall be construed as not requiring the segregation of costs for assessment purposes. 
(Code 1968, § 8-5-10.)  
Sec. 22-27. - Ordinance adopting final plans, etc.—Generally. 
When an accurate estimate of cost, full and detailed plans and specifications and map are prepared and presented and are satisfactory to the council, it shall adopt an ordinance prescribing: 
(a)  The extent of the local improvement district to be assessed and of each assessment unit, if any, by boundaries or other brief description. 
(b)  The kind and location of each improvement proposed, without mentioning minor details. 
(c)  The amount or proportion of the total cost to be defrayed by special assessments, the method of levying assessments, the number of installments and the times in which the costs assessed will be payable. 
(d)  The character and extent of any construction units. 
(Code 1968, § 8-5-10.)  
Sec. 22-28. - Same—Revision and amendment; letting of contract exceeding revised estimates. 
(a)  The director of public works may further revise such cost, plans and specifications and map from time to time for all or any part of any project and the ordinance may be appropriately amended prior to letting any construction contract therefor and prior to any work being done other than by independent contract let by the city. The ordinance, if amended, shall order the work to be done as provided for by this chapter. 
(b)  No contract shall be let for any improvement nor an improvement ordered acquired under the direction of the director or otherwise for any amount exceeding the revised estimated cost of the project excluding incidental costs. 
(Code 1968, § 8-5-10.)  
Article IV. - Construction Contracts. 
 
Sec. 22-29. - Letting of contract generally. 
(a)  Competitive bidding—Lowest responsible bidder required where contract exceeds five thousand dollars. In accordance with section 5, article IX of the city Charter, any improvement of any nature made in any district where the entire cost, value or amount of such work including labor and materials shall exceed five thousand dollars, except such work done by employees of the city with supplies and materials purchased by it or supplied under agreement with the United States of America, the state or any federal or state agency, instrumentality or corporation, shall be done only under independent contract to be entered into by the city with the lowest responsible bidder submitting the lowest and best bid upon proper terms after due public notice has been given asking for competitive bids. 
(b)  Same—Notice of desire for. The notice asking for competitive bids shall state that bids will be received at a time and place designated therein and shall be published at least twice a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, the first publication to be not less than fifteen nor more than thirty days prior to the time specified in the notice for opening bids. 
(c)  Same—Right of city to reject bids and waive irregularities. The city shall have the right to reject any and all bids and to waive any irregularity in any bid. 
(d)  Contract may be on lump sum or unit basis. Any contract may be let on a lump sum or unit basis. 
(e)  Bond required. No contract shall be entered into for such work unless the contractor shall give an undertaking with a sufficient surety approved by the city council and in an amount fixed by the council for the faithful performance of the contract, substantially as required by state law, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(f)  Reletting and recovery upon default of contracts. Upon default in the performance of any contract, the proper official may advertise and relet the remainder of the work without further ordinance and deduct the cost from the original contract price and recover any excess cost by suit on the original bond, or otherwise. 
(g)  Contract to require payment of materials, etc. All contracts shall provide among other things that the person entering into the contract with the city will pay for all materials furnished and services rendered for the performance of the contract, and that any person furnishing the materials or rendering the services may maintain an action to recover for the same against the obligor in the undertaking as though the person was named therein; provided, that the action is brought within one year after the time of the cause of action accrued. Final settlement shall be effected substantially as required by state law. 
(h)  Construction of improvement by city. The city shall have the power to make any improvement, or portion thereof, in any district, directly by the officers, agents and employees of the city, with supplies and materials purchased or otherwise acquired therefor. 
(Code 1968, § 8-6-1.) 
 For state law as to bonds for faithful performance by contractors, see C.R.S. 1973, § 38-26-106.  
Sec. 22-30. - Purchase of supplies and material by city. 
Pursuant to section 2, article IX of the city Charter, all supplies and materials purchased by the city for any district, but not by a contractor, costing five hundred dollars or more shall be purchased only after due advertisement as provided in the preceding section. The city shall accept the lowest bid if the kind, quality and material are equal, but the city shall have the right to reject any and all bids, to waive any irregularity in any bid and to select a single item from any bid. The provision as to bidding shall not apply to the purchase of patented and manufactured products offered for sale in a noncompetitive market or solely by a manufacturer's authorized dealer. 
(Code 1968, § 8-6-1.)  
Sec. 22-31. - Interest of officers and employees of city in contracts. 
Pursuant to section 4, article IX of the city Charter, no councilman, other elected official or appointed officer, agent or employee of the city, except in such official capacity, shall either directly or indirectly be a party to, or be in any manner interested in, any contract or agreement with the city for any matter, cause or thing whatsoever where any liability, indebtedness or obligation shall in any way be created against the city for any district, except by competitive bidding. If any contract or agreement is made in violation of the provisions of this section it shall be voidable, and no action shall be maintained thereon by any party thereto against the city. To the extent that the city makes any payment thereunder, such contract or agreement shall be valid, and any such payment may be included in any cost defrayed by the levy of special assessments, unless theretofore the city elects to void the contract or agreement in its entirety and to recover any such payment from the party to whom made. 
(Code 1968, § 8-6-1.)  
Sec. 22-32. - Federal or state assistance generally. 
The city may enter into and carry out any contract or establish or comply with the rules and regulations concerning labor and materials and other related matters in connection with any project or portion thereof as the city may deem desirable or as may be requested by the United States of America, the state or any federal or state agency, instrumentality or corporation that may assist in the financing of any project or any part thereof. Any improvement, of which any portion of the cost may be defrayed by the city by the levy of special assessments, may be acquired with the cooperation and assistance of, under a contract let by or with labor, supplies and materials furnished by, the United States of America, the state or any federal or state agency, instrumentality or corporation. Advantage may be taken of any offer from any source to complete any improvement on a division of expense or responsibility. The department of public works under the direction of its director on behalf of and in the name of the city is authorized to make any such improvement in such a manner, when so authorized by an ordinance adopted pursuant to sections 22-26 to 22-28. 
(Code 1968, § 8-6-1.)  
Sec. 22-33. - Applicability of division to assigned or transferred contracts. 
The provisions of sections 22-29 to 22-32 shall not apply to any case in which the city has taken over by transfer or assignment any contract authorized to be assigned to it under the provisions of this chapter nor to any contract in connection with the construction or improvement of any project which the city may have had transferred to it by any person. 
(Code 1968, § 8-6-1.)  
Sec. 22-34. - Paving guarantees. 
In all cases of paving, any specifications and contracts may provide that bidders shall guarantee that the paving shall remain in good order and repair for a period of five years from and after the date of its acceptance by the council, or for such lesser period as may be determined by the council, and make all necessary repairs during such period without further compensation; provided, that in case of macadamizing, after two years the guarantee, if any, shall extend only to the maintaining of a perfect grade, surface and foundation and not to any diminution of the thickness of the original pavement by wear and tear; in case of concrete curb, gutter or sidewalk, the specifications and contracts may provide for a guarantee not in excess of two years; and the council may provide for a guarantee for a reasonable time, not to exceed two years of all other work. 
(Code 1968, § 8-6-2.)  
Sec. 22-35. - Reservation by city of power to impose conditions. 
The council, except as specifically limited by this chapter, may, in the letting of contracts, impose such conditions upon bidders with regard to bonds and securities, guarantees of good and faithful performance and completion of the work and keeping the same in repair and any further matter or thing in connection therewith as may be considered by the council advantageous to the city and to all interested. 
(Code 1968, § 8-6-3.)  
Article V. - Bonds Generally. 
 
Sec. 22-36. - Use permitted; manner of sale, etc. 
(a)  All local improvements may be paid for by public improvement bonds of the city. 
(b)  Any bonds issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be sold in such manner as may be approved by the city council for the payment of the contractor for defraying the reasonable costs for labor, supplies and materials incurred by the city or supplied under agreement with the United States of America, the state or any federal or state agency, instrumentality or corporation and for all proper incidental expenses. Such bonds may be also delivered to the contractor in payment for the amounts due such contractor. 
(Code 1968, § 8-8-1.)  
Sec. 22-37. - Interest—Generally. 
(a)  Repealed. 
(b)  Delivery to contractors. If delivered to the contractor, the bonds shall be accepted at par plus interest due thereon to the date of their delivery in payment of the amounts due under the contract and the contractor shall be required to accept delivery of the remainder of the authorized issue of bonds and to pay the principal amount of such bonds and accrued interest to the date of delivery, so that money will be available to the council to be expended in the payment of the incidental expenses for the payment of which the bonds were in part authorized. Delivery of such bonds to contractors shall always be on such terms that the consideration for the bonds, represented by amounts due contractors and money, shall be such as to result in a net interest cost on the bonds of not more than eight percent per annum computed to maturity according to standard tables of bond values. 
(c)  Rates relative to assessment interest rates. No bond interest rate shall at any time exceed the interest rate, the lower or lowest rate, if more than one, borne by the assessments, but any bond interest rate may be the same as or less than any assessment interest rate, subject to the limitation of this section, as the council may determine. 
(d)  Acceptance of bonds as condition in bidding. In advertising for construction bids as provided in section 22-29 the council may stipulate that the contractor must accept bonds in payment of the contract price as provided in this section. 
(Code 1968, § 8-8-1; Ord. No. 547, § 1.)  
Sec. 22-38. - Same—Coupons. 
(a)  Attachment; signature required. Except for such bonds which are registerable for payment of interest, interest coupons shall be payable to the bearer and they shall be attached to the bonds and shall bear the original or facsimile signature of the officers signing the bonds. 
(b)  Validity of signature. The bond and coupons, bearing the signatures of the officers in office at the time of the signing thereof, shall be the valid and binding obligations of the city, notwithstanding that before the delivery and payment, any or all of the persons whose signatures appear on such shall have ceased to fill their respective offices. 
(Code 1968, § 8-8-6.)  
Sec. 22-39. - Issuance and payment generally. 
(a)  Form; date; to be issued in name of city; to be payable to bearer at certain time; amounts. All local improvement bonds shall be of such form and of such date as may be prescribed by the council, shall be issued in the name of the city and bear the name of the district to be improved and shall be payable to bearer at a designated time in a sufficient period of years to cover the period of construction and payments provided for, but subject to call as provided by this article, in convenient denominations of not more than one thousand dollars each. All such bonds shall be issued by the director of finance upon estimates of the director of public works and order of the city manager, approved by the council. 
(b)  Records. The director of finance shall preserve a record of such bonds in a suitable book kept for the purpose. 
(c)  Signing and attesting. The bonds shall be subscribed by the city manager, attested by the city clerk with the seal of the city affixed thereto and countersigned by the director of finance. 
(d)  To be payable out of assessments only. The bonds, both principal and interest, shall be payable only out of monies collected on account of the assessments for the improvements in any district, except as provided by this article. Such assessments shall be applied to the payment of the bonds issued for the same district only, until all of such bonds have been paid. 
(e)  Pledge of special surplus and deficiency fund as security. The payment of such bonds shall be additionally secured by a pledge of and made from the special surplus and deficiency fund, and whenever four-fifths of the bonds of any public improvement district have been paid and cancelled, and for any reason the remaining assessments are not paid in time to take up the final bonds of the district and there is not sufficient money in such special surplus and deficiency fund, the city shall pay such bonds when due and reimburse itself by collecting the unpaid assessments due such district, all as authorized by section 4, article XIII of the city Charter. 
(f)  Additional security. The payment of any bonds, both as to principal and interest, may also be additionally secured as otherwise provided in and authorized by article XIII of the city Charter. 
(g)  Payment of incidentals with bonds. A sufficient number of such bonds or the proceeds therefrom may be used to pay for engineering and clerical service and supplies, inspection, collecting assessments, advertising, printing, accrued interest on outstanding bonds, fiscal services, legal services and other incidentals. 
(Code 1968, § 8-8-2.)  
Sec. 22-40. - Liability of city; to be paid out of assessments only. 
Bonds issued pursuant to this article shall not be a debt of the city and the city shall not be liable thereon, nor shall it thereby pledge its full faith and credit for their payment, nor shall the bonds be payable out of any funds other than the special assessments and other monies pledged to the payment thereof. Each bond issued under this chapter shall recite in substance that such bond and the interest thereon are payable solely from the special assessments and other monies pledged to the payment thereof. The payment of bonds shall not be secured by an encumbrance, mortgage or other pledge of property of the city, except for such special assessments and other monies pledged for the payment of bonds. No property of the city, subject to such exceptions, shall be liable to be forfeited or taken in payment of the bonds. 
(Code 1968, § 8-8-3.)  
Sec. 22-41. - Effect of irregularity in issuance, delivery or sale; status in hands of bona fide purchaser or holder for value. 
Bonds issued under this chapter shall not be invalid for any irregularity or defect in the proceedings for their issuance, sale or delivery and shall be incontestable in the hands of bona fide purchasers or holders for value. 
(Code 1968, § 8-8-4.)  
Sec. 22-42. - Terms; conditions generally. 
Except as otherwise provided, any special assessment bonds authorized to be issued shall bear such date, shall mature in such denomination at such time or term, or serially at such time, not exceeding the estimated life of the improvements acquired with the bond proceeds and in any event not more than twenty years from the date of issuance, shall bear interest payable annually, or at such lesser interval or as may be prescribed by ordinance, at such rate not greater than eight percent per annum, shall be payable in such medium of payment at such place within or without the state, and at the option of the council may be in one or more series, may be made subject to prior redemption in advance of maturity at such time with or without the payment of such premium not exceeding five percent of the principal amount of each bond so redeemed, except as provided by this division, may provide for the payment of interest thereon from the proceeds thereof for a period not to exceed three years from the date thereof, may be issued with privileges for registration for payment as to principal or interest, or both, and generally shall be issued in such manner, in such form, with such recitals, terms, covenants and conditions and with such other details as may be provided by the council in the ordinance authorizing the bonds, except as otherwise provided. Except for payment provisions specifically provided in this chapter, such bonds and any interest coupons attached thereto shall be fully negotiable within the meaning of and for all the purposes of the negotiable instruments law. 
(Code 1968, § 8-8-5.)  
Sec. 22-43. - Use of proceeds; validity not dependent on acquisition proceedings, etc. 
All monies received from the issuance of any bonds authorized by this article shall be used solely for the purpose for which issued, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the payment of preliminary expenses incurred in connection with such purpose, the payment of interest on such bonds for a period not to exceed three years from the date thereof and all other incidental expenses; provided, that any unexpended balance of such bond proceeds remaining after the completion of the acquisition or improvement of the project or service for which such bonds were issued shall be paid immediately into the fund created for the payment of the principal of such bonds and shall be used therefor. The validity of such bonds shall not be dependent on nor affected by the validity or regularity of any proceedings relating to the acquisition or improvement of the project or service for which the bonds are issued. The purchaser of the bonds shall in no manner be responsible for the application of the proceeds of the bonds by the city or any of its officers, agents and employees. 
(Code 1968, § 8-8-7.)  
Sec. 22-44. - Calling in by director of finance. 
Whenever considered advisable by the director of finance he may, and whenever funds may be in his hands to the credit of any local improvement district exceeding the amount of interest on the unpaid principal accruing on the next principal payment date and, if maturing serially, the principal accruing on the next principal payment date, he shall by publication at least once not less than fifteen days prior to the redemption date, in some newspaper of general circulation in the city, call in a suitable number of bonds of such district for payment of the principal amount thereof and accrued interest to the redemption date. After the redemption date so designated interest on the bonds so called shall cease. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as preventing the city from providing that such bonds shall be redeemed only on interest payment dates. The notice shall specify the bonds so called by number and all such bonds shall be paid in the order designated in the authorizing ordinance. The holder of any bonds may at any time furnish his post office address to the director of finance and in such case a copy of such advertisement shall be mailed by the director of finance to the holder of the bonds called, at such address, within three days of the date of such publication. 
(Code 1968, § 8-8-8.)  
Sec. 22-45. - Surplus and deficiency fund generally. 
(a)  Excess to be paid into fund. When all outstanding bonds have been paid in a public improvement district and any money remains to the credit of such district, it shall be transferred to the special surplus and deficiency fund. 
(b)  Deficiencies to be paid out of fund. Whenever there is a deficiency in any improvement district to meet the payment of outstanding bonds, money to cover such deficiency shall be paid out of such fund, pursuant to section 4, article XIII of the city Charter. 
(Code 1968, § 8-8-9.)  
Sec. 22-46. - Rights of holders generally. 
(a)  Enumerated. Subject to any contractual limitations binding upon the holders of any issue or series of bonds or trustee therefor including but not limited to the restriction of the exercise of any remedy to a specified proportion, percentage or number of such holders, any holder of bonds or trustee therefor shall have the right and power, for the equal benefit and protection of all holders of bonds similarly situated: 
(1)  By mandamus or other suit, action or proceeding at law or in equity to enforce his rights against the city and its council and any of its officers, agents and employees and to require and compel the city or its council or any such offices, agents or employees to perform and carry out its and their duties, obligations or other commitments under this article and its and their covenants and agreements with the bondholders. 
(2)  By action or suit in equity to require the city and its council to account as if they were the trustees of an express trust. 
(3)  By action or suit in equity to have appointed a receiver, which receiver may take possession of any accounts and may collect, receive and apply all revenues or other monies pledged for the payment of the bonds in the same manner as the city itself might do. 
(4)  By action or suit in equity to enjoin any acts or things which may be unlawful or in violation of the rights of the bondholders. 
(5)  To bring suit upon the bonds. 
(b)  Remedies not exclusive; failure to prosecute remedy not to relieve city, etc. No right or remedy conferred by this article upon any holder of bonds or any trustee therefor is intended to be exclusive of any other right or remedy, but each such right or remedy is cumulative in addition to every other right or remedy and may be exercised without exhausting and without regard to any other remedy conferred by the city Charter or by any other law. The failure of any bondholder to proceed as provided by this section shall not relieve the city, its council or any of its officers, agents and employees of any liability for failure to perform or carry out any duty, obligation or other commitment. 
(Code 1968, § 8-8-10.)  
Sec. 22-47. - Preliminary expenses. 
The city may provide for the payment of all necessary preliminary expenses actually incurred in the making of surveys, estimates of costs and revenues, the employment of engineers, architects, fiscal agents, attorneys at law, clerical help, other agents or employees, the making of notices, taking of options and all other expenses necessary or desirab1e to be made and paid prior to the authorization for or the issuance of such bonds; provided, that no such expenditures shall be made or paid unless an appropriation has been budgeted and made therefor in the same manner as is required by law, or unless other monies are available to defray such expenses. Any funds so expended by the city for preliminary expenses incurred in connection with the same purpose as that for which bonds are issued may be fully reimbursed and repaid to the city out of the proceeds derived from the issuance of such bonds, in which case such expenses shall be included as an incidental cost for assessment purposes. The amount so advanced by the city to pay such preliminary expenses may, by an ordinance authorizing the issuance of such bonds, be made a first charge against such bond proceeds until the same has been repaid, and, in such event, such amount shall be paid therewith before any other disbursements are made therefrom. 
(Code 1968, § 8-8-11.)  
Sec. 22-48. - Refunding. 
(a)  Permitted. Any bonds issued under this article may be refunded pursuant to an ordinance to be adopted by the council in the manner provided for the issuance of other bonds. 
(b)  Security. Refunding bonds so issued may be secured in such manner and may be made payable from such sources as was provided in the ordinance authorizing their issuance; provided, that the security for the payment of the refunding bonds shall not be greater than the security for the payment of the bonds refunded, nor shall there be pledged for the payment of the refunding bonds revenues which are not pledged for the payment of the bonds refunded. 
(c)  Sale or exchange. Refunding bonds so issued may be sold at public or private sale or may be exchanged dollar for dollar for the bonds to be refunded. 
(d)  Escrow for proceeds of sales. If sold, the proceeds of sale may be escrowed for the payment of the bonds to be refunded in such manner as may be provided in the ordinance authorizing the refunding bonds. 
(e)  When bonds are refundable. No bonds may be refunded under this article unless they either mature or are callable for redemption under their terms within twelve months from the date of issuance of the refunding bonds, or unless the holders thereof voluntarily surrender them for exchange or payment. 
(Code 1968, § 8-8-12.)  
Article VI. - Levy and Collection of Assessments Generally. 
 
Sec. 22-49. - Preparation of statement of costs and assessment rolls. 
(a)  Statement of costs. Upon the completion of any local improvement in any district, or in case of assessment units of sewers, upon completion from time to time of a project in any assessment unit or any part of sewers affording complete drainage for any part of the district, upon the acceptance thereof by the city council or whenever the total cost of such improvement, or any of such part of sewers can be definitely ascertained and upon the council's determination to assess all or a part of the cost thereof, the director of public works shall prepare a statement showing the total cost of the improvement, or of any part thereof, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the cost of constructing or otherwise acquiring such improvement, engineering and clerical service and supplies, cost of inspection, cost of collecting assessments, advertising, printing, interest on bonds until interest on assessments is available to defray such, fiscal services, legal services for preparing proceedings and advising in regard thereto and other incidental costs. 
(b)  Assessment roll. The director of public works also shall prepare an assessment roll which shall contain among other things: 
(1)  The names of the last known owners of the property to be assessed, or if not known that the name is unknown. 
(2)  A description of each tract or parcel of land to be assessed, and in the case of street or other railway company a general description of the franchise and property thereof assessed. 
(3)  The amount of the assessment thereon. 
The council shall order the director to certify, and he shall certify, the assessment roll to the city council by filing the same in the office of the city clerk when the roll is to prepared. 
(Code 1968, § 8-9-1.)  
Sec. 22-50. - Hearing upon assessment roll. 
(a)  Council to fix time and place. When the assessment roll is certified and filed, the city council shall fix a time and place when objections or remonstrances thereto by the owners of such real estate to be assessed, street or other railway companies and all interested persons will be heard. 
(b)  Notice. The city clerk shall, after the fixing of the time and place for such hearing, give notice of such hearing by publication once a week for two consecutive weeks by two weekly insertions, the first publication to be not more than thirty nor less than fifteen days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and by mailing notice, postage prepaid, as first class mail, at least fifteen days prior to such hearing, to the last known address of each last known owner of land within the district whose property will be assessed for the cost of the improvements, such addresses and owners being those appearing on the real property assessment rolls for general, ad valorem, taxes of the county where such property is located. The notice shall state: 
(1)  That such assessment roll is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(2)  The date of filing such assessment roll. 
(3)  The time and place, when and where the city council will hear and consider objections and remonstrances to the assessment roll and to the proposed assessments by the parties thereby aggrieved. 
(c)  Filing of objections by owners, etc. The owner of any property which is assessed in such assessment roll, such street or other railway company or other interested persons, whether named in such roll, may, within twelve days from the first publication of such notice, file with the city clerk any specific objections in writing. Any objection to the regularity, validity and correctness of the proceedings of such assessment roll, of each assessment contained therein and of the amount levied on each tract and parcel of land shall be deemed waived unless presented in writing at the time and in the manner specified by this chapter. 
(d)  Hearing of objections; consideration of objections, etc., by council; decision of council. At the time and place designated for hearing such objections, the city council shall hear and determine all written objections or remonstrances which have been filed by any party interested to the regularity of the proceedings in making such assessment, the correctness of such assessment or of the amount levied on any particular tract or parcel of land to be assessed. The council shall have the power to consider any other matter concerning the validity of any assessment and the power to adjourn such hearing from time to time. After the hearing has been concluded, after all written complaints, remonstrances and objections have been read and duly considered and after all persons desiring to be heard in person have been heard the council shall consider the arguments, if any, and any other relevant material put forth. Thereafter, the council by resolution shall have power, in its discretion, to revise, correct, confirm or set aside any assessment and to order that such assessment be made de novo. 
(Code 1968, § 8-9-2.)  
Sec. 22-51. - Ordinance levying assessment. 
(a)  Required. The council by ordinance shall, by reference to the assessment roll, if modified and as confirmed by such resolution, levy the assessments in such roll. 
(b)  To be final determination. Such decision, resolution and ordinance shall be a final determination of the regularity, validity and correctness of the proceedings of such assessment roll, of each assessment contained therein and of the amount levied on each tract and parcel of land. That determination by the council shall be conclusive upon the owners of the property assessed. 
(c)  Statement of provisions of section 22-52. The ordinance also shall state substantially the provisions in section 22-52. 
(Code 1968, § 8-9-2.)  
Sec. 22-52. - Statute of limitations on actions to correct or set aside assessment. 
Within the fifteen days immediately succeeding the publication after its final passage of any ordinance levying any special assessments, any person who has filed a written objection or remonstrance shall have the right to commence an action or suit in any court of competent jurisdiction to correct or set aside such determination. Thereafter all actions or suits attacking the regularity, validity and correctness of the proceedings of such assessment roll, of each assessment contained therein and of the amount levied on each tract and parcel of land shall be perpetually barred. 
(Code 1968, § 8-9-2.)  
Sec. 22-53. - Liens. 
(a)  Effective date. All assessments made pursuant to this chapter shall be a lien from the date of its publication after final passage in the several amounts assessed against each tract or parcel of land and the property of any street or railway company assessed from the date of the publication after final passage of the assessing ordinance. 
(b)  Persons, etc., exempted. A lien shall not, however, attach to any tract or parcel of land so assessed which is owned by the state or any agency, instrumentality or corporation thereof, any county, municipality, school district, special or quasi-municipal district, other political subdivision or private corporation operating a public utility. 
(c)  Attachment in subdivisions. As to any subdivision of any real estate assessed pursuant to this chapter, the assessments shall in each case be a lien upon all the subdivisions in proportion to their respective shares, except for real estate owned by such a public corporation or privately owned public utility. 
(d)  Priority. The lien for each such assessment shall be prior and superior to all other liens, claims, encumbrances and titles, whether prior in time or not, and shall constitute such a lien until paid except as follows: 
(1)  Any assessment lien shall be subordinate and junior to any lien for general, ad valorem, taxes and shall be subject to extinguishment by the sale of any property on account of the nonpayment of general taxes. 
(2)  Any assessment lien on any tract or parcel of land shall be prior and superior to any assessment lien thereon subsequently levied. 
(Code 1968, § 8-9-3.)  
Sec. 22-54. - Effect of delays, errors, etc. 
No delays, mistakes, errors, defects or irregularities in any act or proceeding authorized by this chapter shall prejudice or invalidate any final assessment, but the same shall be remedied by subsequent or amended acts or proceedings as the case may require, and when so remedied the same shall take effect as of the date of the original act or proceedings. 
(Code 1968, § 8-9-3.)  
Sec. 22-55. - Reassessments on finding assessment invalid. 
If in any court of competent jurisdiction, any final assessment made pursuant to this chapter is set aside for irregularity in proceedings, the council may, upon notice as required in the making of an original assessment, make a new assessment in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 8-9-3.)  
Sec. 22-56. - Completion and extension of assessment roll from assessment ordinance. 
The director of finance shall from the assessing ordinance complete and extend the assessment roll by showing, in suitable columns after each piece of real estate and railway company assessed and after the total amount of the assessment for each piece of real estate and railway company, the amounts of each installment of principal and interest, if pursuant to this article the same is payable in installments, and the date when such installments will become due, with suitable columns for use in case of payment of the whole amount or of any installment or penalty. 
(Code 1968, § 8-9-4.)  
Sec. 22-57. - Payments—When due; installment payments generally. 
All assessments made pursuant to this article shall be due and payable without demand within thirty days after its publication upon its final passage. 
All such assessments may at the election of the owner be paid in installments with interest. 
Failure to pay the whole assessment within such period of thirty days shall be conclusively considered and held an election on the part of all persons interested, whether under disability or otherwise, to pay in installments. All persons electing to pay in installments shall be conclusively considered and held as consenting to such improvements, and such election shall be conclusively considered and held as a waiver of any and all rights to question the power or jurisdiction of the city to construct or otherwise acquire the improvements, the quality of the work, the regularity or sufficiency of the proceedings of the validity or correctness of the assessment. 
The owner of any piece of real estate may at any time pay the whole unpaid principal with the interest accrued to the next interest payment date, together with penalties if any, and either without or with the payment of any prepayment premium not exceeding five per centum of the unpaid principal so prepaid, as the council may provide according to sections 22-50 and 22-51 of this Code. Subject to the foregoing provisions all installments both of principal and interest, shall be payable at such times as may be determined in and by section 22-50. 
(Code 1968, § 8-9-5; Ord. No. 497, § 3.)  
Sec. 22-58. - Same—Effect of failure to pay. 
Failure to pay any installment, whether principal or interest, when due shall, ipso facto, cause the whole amount of the unpaid principal to become due and payable immediately, and the whole amount of the unpaid principal and accrued interest shall thereafter draw interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction of a month until the day of sale, not exceeding, however, at any time a total interest amount due of thirty percent of the principal amount of the assessment, i.e., the time of the issuance of a delinquency certificate, plus two percent additional on unpaid principal and accrued interest as penalties, plus costs of collection. At any time prior to the day of sale, the owner may pay the amount of delinquent installments with accrued interest at one percent per month, or fraction of a month, and all penalties and costs of collection accrued and shall thereupon be restored to the right to pay in installments in the same manner as if default had not been made. 
(Code 1968, § 8-9-6.)  
Sec. 22-59. - Same—Payment by installment. 
(a)  Number and frequency. In case of such election to pay in installments, the assessment of the principal shall be payable in not less than two or more than fifteen substantially equal annual installments, or not less than four nor more than thirty substantially equal semi-annual installments. 
(b)  Payment of interest. The interest in all such cases on the unpaid principal shall be payable annually or semi-annually at a rate not exceeding eight percent per annum, but not less than the highest interest rate borne by the bonds of the local improvement district. The number of installments, assessments, period of payment and rate of interest may be determined by the council. 
(c)  Power of council to set first payment. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as limiting the discretion of the city council in determining the time the first installment of principal or interest, or both, shall become due. 
(Code 1968, § 8-9-7.)  
Sec. 22-60. - Same—Payment within thirty days without penalty or interest; notice of payment dates and places. 
(a)  Payments may be made to the director of finance at any time within thirty days after the final publication of the assessing ordinance without penalty or the payment of interest. 
(b)  The director of finance shall give notice by publication in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city, at least once a week for two consecutive weeks by two weekly insertions, the first publication to be at least twenty days before the end of such thirty-day period, of the place of payment and the time for it to close. Before any installment payment date such a notice shall also be so published. The failure of the director to publish such notice or to do any other act or thing required by this section shall not affect such assessment or any installment thereof, nor extend the time for payment thereof, but shall subject the director to liability to the property owner for any damage he may sustain by reason of such failure. Such other notice may be given as deemed desirable by the city council, city manager or director of finance. 
(Code 1968, § 8-9-8 )  
Article VII. - Collection of Delinquent Assessments. 
 
Sec. 22-61. - Notation of delinquency and interest thereon by director of finance. 
As soon as any assessment or installment thereof of any local improvement district becomes delinquent, the director of finance shall mark the same as delinquent on the assessment roll and, in addition to the amount of unpaid principal shown on such assessment roll and accrued interest thereon to the date of delinquency, shall note on the roll the accrual of interest at the penalty rate provided by this chapter plus the two percent penalty and costs of collection. 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-1.)  
Sec. 22-62. - Delinquency certificates—Preparation and issuance; effect; contents; records. 
Within ten days after a delinquency has been noted by the director of finance as provided in section 22-61, the director of finance shall prepare and issue to the city a delinquency certificate to the property included in each such delinquent assessment, which certificate shall have the force and effect of a sale of such property to the city for the amount thereof. 
Such certificate shall be dated as of the time such assessment or installment became delinquent and shall be for the amount of the unpaid principal and the accrued interest to the date of delinquency, plus any accrued interest after such date on such principal, and accrued interest at the penalty rate, as well as the penalty charged thereon, and collection costs. Such certificate shall contain besides the description of the property sold, the name of the person assessed, if known, or if unknown, that fact, the amount of the unpaid principal of the assessment and the accrued interest to the date of delinquency, plus the rate of penalty interest and the penalty thereon, the number of the assessment, the name of the improvement district in which assessed and the date when such certificate will go to deed. 
Such certificate shall be made in duplicate, bound together in books in numerical order and filed in the office of the director of finance. 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-1.)  
Sec. 22-63. - Same—Local improvement district delinquency certificate register. 
(a)  Entry of delinquency certificates. Within twenty days after preparing and issuing any delinquency certificate for any tract or parcel of land the director of finance shall enter the same in a book to be kept by the director known as "Local Improvement District Delinquency Certificate Register." 
(b)  Contents. Such register shall contain, in proper columns, the number of the assessment, the name of the district in which assessed, the name of the person to whom assessed, if known, the description of the property sold, corresponding with the description in the certificate and the assessment roll, the amount of assessment and interest and the rate of penalty interest and penalty. The director must regularly number each entry in such register on the margin of such book and put a corresponding number on cach original and duplicate delinquency certificate. Such register must contain blank spaces following each entry of a delinquency certificate therein, in which may be entered the name of an assignee thereof, the date of such assignment and the amount paid the assignee, the name of a redemptioner thereof, the date of such redemption and the amount paid by such redemptioner. 
(c)  To be part of records of director of finance. Such book or register shall be retained by the director of finance and become a part of the records of his office. 
(d)  Period in which purchase of certificate may occur. From and after entry in such register and until two years from its date, any such certificate, unless redeemed, may be purchased from the director in the manner provided by this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-2.)  
Sec. 22-64. - Same—Purchase and assignment generally. 
Whenever any person tenders to the director of finance in cash the amount of any delinquency certificate, i.e., the unpaid principal and accrued interest to the date of delinquency, and interest thereon at the rate of one percent per month from date of such certificate to the end of the month in which such purchase is made, not exceeding, however, at any time a total interest amount due of thirty percent of the principal amount of the assessment, together with penalties and costs of collection, the director shall assign such delinquency certificate to the purchaser by making and executing for and on behalf of the city the blank assignment on both the original and duplicate thereof and shall deliver the original certificate so assigned to the purchaser. Thereafter the director shall immediately make the proper entries showing such assignment in the local improvement district delinquency register. 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-3.)  
Sec. 22-65. - Same—Form of assignment. 
The assignment of delinquency certificates as provided by section 22-64 must be substantially in the following form and endorsed on the certificate: 
ASSIGNMENT BY 
DIRECTOR OF 
FINANCE 
	
State of Colorado 	) ss. 
City of Cortez 	) 
	
For and in consideration of the sum of $ ____________ paid to said City, the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, I do hereby assign to ____________ whose post office address is ____________ all the right, title and interest of the said City in and to the within and foregoing delinquency certificate. 
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand at Cortez, Colorado, this ____________ day of_ ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
 
	____________ 
	Director of Finance 
	City of Cortez, Colorado 
 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-4.)  
Sec. 22-66. - Same—Assignment by purchaser. 
(a)  A delinquency certificate purchased pursuant to the provisions of this article may be assigned by the purchaser; provided, that such assignment must be attached to the original delinquency certificate and a duplicate of such assignment must be delivered to the director of finance who must attach the same to the duplicate delinquency certificate in his office. 
(b)  The assignment of any delinquency certificate by the purchaser thereof or any assignee of such purchaser must be executed in duplicate and acknowledged as provided by law in the conveyance of real property. Such assignment must be substantially in the following form: 
	
For value received, I hereby assign to ____________ whose post office address is ;daterule;, all my right, title and interest in and to delinquency certificate No. ____________ , issued by the Director of Finance of Cortez, Colorado, on account of delinquent local improvement district assessments for the year 19 ____________ , on the property described in said certificate. 
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand this ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
	
	_____
(acknowledgment) 
 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-4.)  
Sec. 22-67. - Redemption of property generally. 
(a)  Payment required. At any time within two years from the date of any delinquency certificate, the owner of the property described therein, or anyone on his behalf, may redeem such property by paying to the director of finance the amount stated in such certificate, i.e., the unpaid principal and accrued interest to the date of delinquency, together with interest thereon or thereafter at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from date thereof to the last day of the month in which such redemption is made, not exceeding, however, at any time a total interest amount due of thirty percent of the principal amount of the assessment, plus the two percent penalty and any costs of collection. 
(b)  Issuance of redemption certificate. Thereupon the director of finance shall issue to the redemptioner a certificate of redemption which shall state the name of the redemptioner, the date of redemption, the number of the certificate so redeemed, the description of the property contained therein and the name of the district for which such certificate was issued. 
(c)  Notations to be made by director of finance. In case such certificate has not been assigned, the director shall note upon the original and duplicate delinquency certificate and, if assigned, upon the duplicate certificate the fact that the same has been redeemed and the date of redemption. The director shall also note the redemption upon the local improvement delinquency certificate register. 
(d)  Disposition of monies received. The money received from the redemption of any property described in a certificate which has been assigned shall be deposited by the director of finance to the credit of the person named in the last assignment of such certificate. 
(e)  Notice to assignees; reimbursement of assignees. The director shall thereupon give notice to such person, at the address shown by the record, of such deposit. Such person shall thereafter be paid the same by the director upon surrender of such certificate to the director who shall mark the same "paid" and hold it as a voucher. 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-5.)  
Sec. 22-68. - Issuance of deed on unredeemed property. 
If the property described in any delinquency certificate is not redeemed within two years from the date thereof, the director of finance, after having given the notice required by this article, shall issue a deed thereto to the city or, if the same has been assigned, to the person holding the original delinquency certificate under assignment upon request therefor and upon the delivery to the director of such original certificate and filing proof of having given the notice as required by the director before making a deed to the city. Such deed shall recite substantially the matter contained in the certificate and that no person redeemed the property within the time allowed by law for its redemption. It shall be signed and acknowledged by the director of finance in the manner required by law to entitle the same to be recorded under the laws of this state. 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-6.)  
Sec. 22-69. - Notice before expiration of redemption period—Required; contents. 
(a)  The director of finance shall, at least one month and not more than three months before the expiration of the time of redemption of any property, serve or cause to be served, a written, printed or partly written and partly printed notice on the person in the actual possession or occupancy of such land or lots, and shall also, within the same time, serve upon or mail postage prepaid by first class, to the person in whose name the same stands upon the real property assessment rolls for general, ad valorem, taxes of the county where such property is located, at the address stated therein, a copy of such notice. 
(b)  Such notice shall state when the delinquency certificate was made, in whose name the property was assessed, the description of the land or lots, the name of the local improvement district for which assessed and the amount of the unpaid principal and accrued interest to the date of delinquency, plus the rate of interest thereafter, the maximum amount of unpaid interest, the two percent penalty and any costs of collection. Such notice shall also state when the time of redemption will expire. 
(c)  The director of finance shall at the same time send a similar notice by mail to each mortgagee or other holder of a recorded lien against such land in each case where such mortgagee or lien holder has previously filed in the office of the director of finance a written request for such notice and paid the fee therefor. Such request shall include the name and address of the mortgagee, the name of the reputed owner of the land, a description of the land and the date of the expiration of the mortgage or lien. No notice need be sent after the date of expiration, unless a further request therefor is duly filed. If the mortgagee or lien holder furnishes a duplicate request form for that purpose the director shall certify thereon to the filing of the request and deliver the same to the party filing it. 
(d)  If there is no person in the actual possession or occupancy of such land or lot and if the person in whose name it stands, upon diligent inquiry, cannot be found in the state, the director shall, within the same time, post or have posted, in a conspicuous place upon such land or lots and in a substantial manner, a copy of such notice. 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-7.)  
Sec. 22-70. - Same—Affidavits of compliance required. 
The director of finance shall, before issuing any deed to the city, make and file his affidavit showing full compliance with the requirements of the preceding section as to giving notice of the expiration of the period of redemption. 
Before issuing a deed to the holder of any delinquency certificate, the director shall require that affidavits be filed showing a complete compliance with the provisions of the previous section as to giving such notice. Such proof shall be filed in the office of the director of finance and remain a permanent record in such office. Any person making a false affidavit as to any fact required by this section shall be guilty of perjury. 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-8.)  
Sec. 22-71. - Recitation of delinquency certificate matters in deed; evidentiary status of acknowledged or proved deed. 
The matters recited in the delinquency certificate must be recited in the deed and such deed duly acknowledged or proved and shall be prima facie evidence that: 
(a)  The improvement district was created, the assessment made and the work and improvement done in the manner provided by law. 
(b)  All notices were given, all hearings were had, orders were made and ordinances were passed and adopted as required by law and that all proceedings up to the execution and delivery of such deed were done in the manner required by law. 
(c)  The assessments were not paid, that the delinquency entries were properly made and delinquency certificate properly issued, as prescribed by law, and by the proper officer. 
(d)  The property was not redeemed, the notice required to be given before deed was taken was properly given as required by law and the person who executed the deed was the proper officer. 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-9.)  
Sec. 22-72. - Fees to be received by director of finance. 
(a)  The director of finance shall receive the following fees which, when paid, shall be credited to the general fund of the city: 
(1)  For issuing any delinquency certificate, twenty-five cents, to be included in the amount of the certificate. 
(2)  For making any deed, one dollar, to be paid by the person to whom made. 
(3)  For giving notice to a mortgagee or lien holder, fifty cents, to be paid by such person. 
(4)  For giving notice of expiration of period of redemption, one dollar. 
(b)  In all cases where the property is deeded to the city the fees shall be charged to the amount for which the deed is taken and upon the sale of the property, or the sale of the delinquency certificate, shall be paid. 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-10.)  
Sec. 22-73. - Quiet title actions. 
Whenever the necessary costs and attorney's fees have been advanced by the holders of the bonds of the district or any prospective purchaser or other person, it shall be the duty of the council to cause the city attorney to commence suit to quiet title to the property described in such deed in the name of the city and to secure the possession of the property; provide property described in any number of tax deeds made to the city and against any number of owners of property may be included in the same suit. 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-11.)  
Sec. 22-74. - Sale of property acquired by city under article—Generally. 
(a)  Authority of city. At any time after acquiring title and possession of any property as provided by this division, the city may sell such property to any purchaser upon receiving therefor a sum not less than the amount for which the property was sold to the city. 
(b)  Purchaser to take subject to taxes and assessments. The purchaser shall take such property subject to any unpaid general taxes and assessments. 
(c)  Execution and issuance of deed. When such purchase is made and the money paid therefor, the city shall issue a deed to the purchaser signed by the mayor, attested by the city clerk and countersigned by the director of finance. Such deed shall be executed and acknowledged in the manner required by law to entitle the same to be recorded under the laws of this state. 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-12.)  
Sec. 22-75. - Same—Procedures. 
(a)  Time for appraisal and sale; notice required. Within thirty days after the maturity of the last installment of any issue of bonds of a local improvement district, if any such bonds or interest coupons remain unpaid, any property remaining unsold, to which the city has taken title by reason of assessments of such improvement district, shall be appraised and immediately after such appraisement such property shall be offered for sale by giving notice of the time and place of sale by publication of such notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, at least once a week for three consecutive weeks by at least three weekly insertions therein, the date of sale to be not less than twenty-five days from the date of the first publication of such notice. 
(b)  Offer for sale; minimum price required for sale. At the time and place designated in the notice the director of finance shall offer such property for sale to the highest bidder, but no sale shall be made for less than the appraised value. 
(c)  Readvertisement on receipt of inadequate bids. If no bid is received for a sum equal to or greater than the appraised value, the sale may be postponed for not to exceed thirty days. Such property shall be readvertised and, at the time to which such sale was postponed, shall again be offered for sale and sold to the highest bidder. 
(d)  Issuance of deed. Upon the sale of any property and the payment therefor a deed shall be executed to the purchaser in the same manner as provided for the execution of deeds in section 22-74. 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-13.)  
Sec. 22-76. - Same—Disposition of money received generally. 
All money received by the director of finance on account of the payment of assessments or installments thereof, the assignment or redemption of delinquency certificates, for rents, issues and profits, from the sale of any property, title to which is held by the city for the benefit of any local improvement district, less any expenses of securing possession of such property or for the care, operation and sale of the same shall be deposited to the credit of the interest and bond fund of the local improvement district in the same proportion as the assessment or installments for which the property was taken. Any money left in a local improvement district bond fund or any money derived from the rental or sale of any real property acquired by the city through sale for delinquent assessments or installments shall, after all warrants, bonds and coupons of such district have been paid in full, be credited to the special surplus and deficiency fund of the city. 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-14.)  
Sec. 22-77. - Same—Payment of liens. 
The city may use any available funds for the satisfaction of any lien prior in right to any special assessment lien created by the city. In the resale of any property to which the city has acquired title, the city shall use its best efforts to sell the property for an amount at least equal to the funds so used plus the amount necessary to satisfy the special assessment lien created by the city, principal, interest penalties and collection costs. The monies received from such a resale in payment for the property shall be used first to satisfy such special assessment lien and thereafter to restore to the fund from which any such prior lien was satisfied. Pursuant to section 5, article XIII of the City Charter, and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the city is authorized to acquire and dispose of property on which there are delinquent taxes, special assessments or both. 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-15.)  
Sec. 22-78. - Same—Prohibited while court suit pending. 
No certificate of delinquency as provided for by this article shall be assigned nor any property to which the city has a deed sold, on account of any assessment or installment thereof, during the pendency of any proceedings in court affecting the validity of such assessment. 
(Code 1968, § 8-10-16.)  
Article VIII. - Construction and Design Standards. 
 
Sec. 22-79. - Adoption by reference. 
There is adopted by reference, pursuant to article III, section 11 of the Charter of the city, a certain construction design standards ordinance prepared by the Cortez planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 1.)  
Sec. 22-80. - Summary. 
Said ordinance provides in part for definitions, abbreviations, symbols, plans and specifications, plan revisions, as-built plans, general construction criteria, permits, excavation, backfilling and restoration, underground warning tape, protection of existing improvements, inspection and testing, and design materials, and methods for streets, water systems and sewer systems. 
(Ord. 546, § 2.)  
Sec. 22-81. - Copies on file. 
Three true, official, complete and full copies of this ordinance are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city, and may be examined, copied or reproduced by any interested person during regular business hours of the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 3.)  
Sec. 22-82. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter or repair any item listed in the construction design standards ordinance in violation of any provision of this ordinance or any amendment thereof, or who interferes in any manner with any person in the performance of a right or duty granted or imposed upon him by the provisions of this ordinance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 4; amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 27, 9-25-12)  
Article IX. - Alternate Method of Constructing Public Improvements. 
 
Sec. 22-82.1. - Alternate method. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, the council may establish public improvement districts, construct improvements, issue special assessment bonds, and levy and collect special assessments in accordance with this article. The provisions of this article shall apply without regard to the provisions of articles I through VIII of this chapter 22; provided, however, that this article shall be an alternate method of accomplishing its objects, and shall not be deemed to impair or affect any other power or authority of the city, including without limitation articles I through VIII of this chapter 22. 
(Ord. No. 604, § 1.)  
Sec. 22-82.2. - Reimbursement agreements. 
The creation of a reimbursement agreement for the construction, installation, and acquisition of a public work or improvement therein, the costs of which, in whole or part, may be recovered by the initial developer of said improvement via a reimbursement agreement shall be as specified in the city of Cortez Land Use Code, chapter 6, section 27. 
(Ord. No. 1116.)  
Sec. 22-83. - Application of state law. 
The provisions of title 31, article 25, part 5, Colorado Revised Statutes, and all future amendments thereto, pertaining to special improvement districts in municipalities, and the provisions of title 11, article 57, part 1, Colorado Revised Statutes, and all future amendments thereto, pertaining to the issuance of public securities, shall apply to public improvement districts within the city and to the issuance of special assessment bonds, and the city shall be vested with all the rights, powers, and authority conferred thereby; provided, however, that the provisions of said Title 31, Article 25, Part 5, Colorado Revised Statutes, and all future amendments thereto, shall be modified and supplemented by the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 604, § 1.)  
Sec. 22-84. - Initiation of public improvement district upon recommendation of director of public works. 
The creation of a public improvement district, and the construction, installation, and acquisition of a public work or improvement therein, the costs of which, in whole or in part, are to be assessed against property owners by the city, may be initiated by the council on recommendation of the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 604, § 1.)  
Sec. 22-85. - Initiation of public improvement district by property owner petition. 
(a)  The creation of a public improvement district, and the construction, installation, and acquisition of a public work or improvement therein, the costs of which, in whole or in part, are to be assessed against property owners by the city, may be initiated by the council on petition of the property owners to be assessed for not less than a majority of the entire costs estimated to be assessed. A petition shall not be held invalid solely because actual costs to be assessed differ from estimated costs in the petition so that the petition was signed by less than the property owners to be assessed for a majority of the actual costs. If the property is owned by a corporate, governmental, or other such entity, the person or persons with the authority to contractually bind such entity shall be considered the property owner for the purpose of signing a petition. 
(b)  If a proposed public improvement district initiated by property owner petition includes two or more noncontiguous parcels, the petition must be subscribed by the property owners in each such parcel in accordance with subsection (a) hereof. 
(c)  A property owner petition for a proposed public improvement district should contain the signature of the property owner, the percentage of the cost to be borne by the property owner, the requested method of assessment, a description of the improvement petitioned for, a description of the property to be included within the district, and any other matters which may be necessary or appropriate; provided, however, that the council may accept a petition not in conformance with this subsection (c) where it is determined that the petition complies with subsections (a) and (b) hereof. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a property owner petition, the council may elect to proceed, at its sole discretion, either under this Article or under Article II of this Chapter 22, regardless of any provision in the petition to the contrary. 
(e)  The council need not proceed with the creation of a public improvement district initiated by property owner petition or the acquisition of any improvement or any part thereof after holding a hearing thereon, if the council determines that it is not in the public interest that the proposed improvement or part thereof, be constructed. Any particular kind of improvement, material therefor, or part thereof need not be acquired or located, as provided in the petition, if the council determines that such is not in the public interest. The council need not take any proceedings or action upon receiving any such petition if the council determines by resolution that the acquisition of the designated improvement probably is not feasible for the reason stated in such resolution. 
(f)  Upon receipt of a property owner petition, the council may, in its sole discretion, require the petitioners to make a cash deposit or pledge other security to defray the costs incurred by the city in connection with the improvement set forth in the petition. Failure to provide such security shall be grounds for rejection of the petition. Additional security may from time to time be similarly required as a condition precedent to continuation of action by the city. The cash so deposited or security so pledged may be nonrefundable at the council's option. 
(Ord. No. 604, § 1.)  
Sec. 22-86. - Limitation of actions. 
Any person filing with the council prior to or at the time of the hearing on the creation of the district, a written complaint, protest, or objection, shall have the right, within thirty days after final passage of the ordinance creating the district, to commence an action or suit based on such complaint, protest, or objection, in any court of competent jurisdiction, to correct or set aside any determination of the council, or to question or challenge the authority or proceedings taken by the council relating to the creation of the district, the issuance of bonds, the method of assessment, the estimated amount of any particular assessment, or the construction of improvements. Thereafter, all actions, suits, or proceedings challenging or questioning the validity of the creation of the district, the issuance of bonds, the method of assessment, the estimated amount of any particular assessment, or the construction of improvements, shall be perpetually barred. 
(Ord. No. 604, § 1.)  
CHAPTER 22A. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLES. 
 
Sec. 22A-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Motor vehicle. Any self-propelled vehicle which is designated primarily for travel on the public highways and which is generally and commonly used to transport persons and property over the public highways. 
(b)  Racing of motor. Sudden acceleration or deceleration of recreational vehicle. 
(c)  Recreational vehicle. A self-propelled wheeled or tracked vehicle primarily designed to be operated for recreational purposes on land, or on land and water, other than roads or highways. This definition shall include, but is not limited to, motorcycles, motor bikes, motor scooters, motor bicycles, trail bikes, minibikes, tote-goats, dune buggies, go-carts, snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles. 
(d)  Stunting. Operating a vehicle in a manner causing it to weave or suddenly change course or the loss of body contact with the seat by a driver or passenger and which is not for the purpose of safe operation of such vehicle. 
(e)  Touring. Any repetitious driving in the same area which causes a disturbance or is done with the intent of calling attention to an operator or recreational vehicle. 
(f)  Written permission. A letter on official stationery of the jurisdiction involved, which sets out the authorization to use specific property for the operation of certain recreational vehicles within the city or a written letter of authorization signed by the owner of private property for the operation of such vehicles on said private property. 
(Ord. No. 538, § 1.)  
Sec. 22A-2. - Operation of motorcycles and other recreational vehicular devices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a recreational vehicle in any of the following places without first obtaining written permission or authorization hereinafter required: 
(a)  On any property owned by the city, other than public streets and parks, except where such operation is specially permitted by written order of the city manager or his designated representative; 
(b)  Upon or within any city park property or other publicly held or controlled park or recreational property within the city except where such operation is specifically permitted by written order of the director of parks and recreation or his designated representative; 
(c)  On any Montezuma Valley Irrigation Ditch, right-of-way or easements unless such operation is specifically permitted by written order of the Montezuma Valley Irrigation Company manager or his designated representative; 
(d)  On any private property within the city except by the property owner only unless specific written permission has been given by the owner or designated representative of the owner of such property to the individual operating said vehicle. In this case, said property must be conspicuously posted at least every two hundred fifty feet designating said property as recreational vehicle area; 
(e)  Nothing in this section is intended to prevent the lawful operation of any motor vehicle or recreational vehicle on any public street, highway or alley in accordance with other applicable ordinances of the city or statutes of the state. 
(Ord. No. 538, § 2.)  
Sec. 22A-3. - Written permission—Specifically. 
When written permission is given for a recreational vehicle area as outlined in subsections (a) to (e) of section 22A-2, said written permission shall set forth the effective date of the use, hours of the use, the name of the property owner or his agent, and any specific conditions attached to the written permission. A copy of the order is to be delivered to the Cortez police department prior to the effective date of the authorization, together with a telephone number where the property owner or his agent may be reached on a twenty-four-hour basis. 
(Ord. No. 538, § 3.)  
Sec. 22A-4. - Parent responsibility. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the parent or legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen to permit such minor to act in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The parent or guardian shall be deemed equally liable for any violations of any person under the age of eighteen under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 538, § 4.)  
Sec. 22A-5. - Creating disturbance prohibited. 
No motorcycle or recreational vehicle shall be operated in any manner so as to cause a disturbance in any area of the city. Touring, stunting or the racing of motors is prohibited in any hospital or nursing home area and in residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 538, § 5.)  
CHAPTER 22B. - REFUSE COLLECTION.  
Article I. - In General. 
 
Sec. 22B-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings hereinafter set forth. 
Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or other combustible material. 
Bag means a closed container of moisture-resistant plastic, paper or other pliable material which is waterproof and capable of holding solid wastes during normal handling conditions and which is of sufficient strength to contain the contents put into it without breaking or rupturing. 
Biodegradable means the natural breakdown of materials within one year or less when placed in a biologically active compost project by the action of living organisms which may be bacteria, fungi and actinomycetes. 
Biologically active means an environment of a managed compost project containing the elements of heat, moisture and oxygen. 
Brush means a voluntary growth of bushes or similar matter growing out of place in the location where such material is growing, and shall include all cuttings from trees and bushes, as well as high vegetable growth which may conceal filthy deposits. 
Combustible trash means paper, cardboard, leaves, straw, grass clippings, sawdust, shavings, small tree and shrub clippings and all similar flammable or combustible material which has been discarded. 
Commercial user means any person, firm, or corporation performing any business, occupation or profession. It shall also include buildings or structures used for residential occupancy for three or more families or groups of individuals living independently of each other in separate apartments. 
Garbage means decomposed animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food of any kind or character. 
Hazardous waste means any chemical, compound, substance or mixture that state or federal law designates as hazardous because it is ignitable, corrosive, reactive or toxic, including, but not limited to, solvents, degreasers, paint thinners, cleaning fluids, pesticides, adhesives, strong acids and alkalis and waste paints and inks. 
Hazardous waste shall also be interpreted to include those chemicals, compounds, substances or mixtures defined as such under the subtitle D regulations issued by the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency in 1988 and amendments thereto if effective, and those defined as such under the environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (ERCLA). 
Litter means scattered refuse or rubbish. 
Recyclable material includes, but is not limited to, metals, glass, plastic, and paper products, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture or reconstitution. Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with applicable state health and safety regulations. 
Refuse means, but shall not be limited to, all decomposed and nondecomposed solid wastes, except sewage and body waste, such as garbage, rejected or waste food, offal, swill, carrion, ashes, dirt, slop, waste cement, waste paper, trash, rubbish, waste or unwholesome material of any kind, street cleanings, litter, dead animals, and industrial wastes except those substances defined as hazardous waste. 
Residential user means a dwelling or structure used for residential purposes and containing not more than two families or groups of individuals living independently of each other in separate apartments. 
Rubbish means, but shall not be limited to, all nondecomposed solid wastes, excluding ashes, such as vehicle bodies, and solid wastes, combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, cans, wood, yard clippings, leaves, dirt, grass, bedding material, weeds, litter, crockery, glassware, glass and similar materials. 
Ruins means the remains of something collapsed, dilapidated or destroyed. 
Sanitation supervisor means any person appointed by the public works director or city manager to perform the duties imposed upon such person by the city code. 
Solid waste means solid or semisolid discarded material including, but not necessarily limited to, ashes, combustible trash, garbage, refuse and rubbish. 
Weed means an unsightly, useless, troublesome or injurious herbaceous plant when such plant is out of place at the location at which it is growing, and includes all rank vegetable growth which emits unpleasant or noxious odors, as well as high and rank vegetable growth that may conceal filthy deposit. 
Wreckage means the broken, disrupted and disordered parts or material from a disabled, collapsed, destroyed or dilapidated structure, vehicle, or other object. 
Yard waste means grass clippings, lawn rakings, leaves, garden vegetation, brush and other woods, free of other debris or refuse. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Article II. - Collection.  
Division 1. - Generally. 
 
Sec. 22B-2. - Responsibility of city. 
The city shall make refuse collection and disposal service available to all residents of the city. 
Nothing within this article shall preclude such services from being offered to city residents by private businesses involved in the hauling of trash or refuse; provided, however, such private businesses shall comply with the provisions of Section 22B-3, 22B-6, and 22B-9 and such other rules and regulations that the city council may adopt from time to time upon recommendation of the public works director or city manager. Any user charges authorized by the city council pursuant to resolutions enacted under the authority of Section 22B-8 shall not compel industrial or commercial establishments or multifamily residences of eight or more units to use or pay user charges for waste services provided by the city in preference to those services provided by private businesses involved in the hauling of trash or refuse. 
The city may make collection of specified recyclable goods available to all residences of the city. At such time as this ser-vice is made available by the city, it shall be unlawful for anyone to remove from any container labeled as a "recycling" container, any material of any value, except that city employees may collect that material on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Sec. 22B-3. - Regulations. 
(a)  All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected and disposed of by the city or by private trash haulers. 
(b)  No person shall collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the city, or dispose of any refuse accumulation within the city except as provided in this article. 
(c)  The public works director or city manager shall have the authority to make regulations with respect to collection and disposal of refuse by the city, which regulations may pertain to the days of collection, type and location of pickup, and conveyance and disposal of refuse. The public works director or city manager shall have the authority to modify and revoke such regulations, from time to time, subject to review and approval of the city council. When the public works director determines that it is appropriate to do so, he may require the placement of recyclable materials in containers of a specific design and placed at appropriate locations for collection. The public works director shall have the authority to make regulations with respect to the purchase of containers, type of recyclable materials to be collected, frequency of collection or other items related to the collection of recyclable materials. 
(d)  Nothing within this article shall prohibit the actual producers of refuse or the owners of premises upon which refuse has accumulated from personally collecting, conveying and disposing of such refuse; provided, however, such producers or owners shall comply with the provisions of this article and with any other governing laws, ordinances or regulations, and provided further that such actual producers or owners shall not be exempt from the payment of refuse collection fees unless otherwise specifically provided herein. 
(e)  Nothing within this section or this article shall prohibit refuse collection outside the city from being transported over city streets to designated landfills for refuse disposal; provided, however, such collectors and transporters shall comply with the provisions of this chapter regarding the transportation of refuse as well as applicable state and federal law, including requirements relating to the "transportation of hazardous wastes." 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Sec. 22B-4. - Junk and appliances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or leave outside any building or dwelling in the city any dilapidated furniture, appliance, machinery, equipment, building material, vehicle or portions thereof, or other items which are either wrecked, junked, dismantled or in inoperative condition, and which are not completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. All such substances shall be prohibited and abated in conformance with Chapter 12 of this Code. This section shall not apply to authorized junk dealers or establishment engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning or salvage of equipment. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Sec. 22B-5. - Hazardous goods. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance having an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing the lock or door from such appliance or container. This section shall not apply to any appliance or container which has been placed adjacent to a building and is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof. Any such appliance or container shall be kept from public view. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Sec. 22B-6. - Hazardous wastes. 
No person shall place hazardous waste in refuse containers for collection or bury or otherwise dispose of hazardous waste in or on private or public property within the city. Residents may contact the County Health Department for recommendations on disposal of hazardous waste. Highly flammable or explosive materials shall be stored and disposed of in accordance with Cortez Fire Protection District regulations at the expense of the owner or possessor of such materials. In no event shall toxic or flammable liquid or any waste liquid containing crude petroleum or its products be disposed of by discharge into or upon any gutter, street, alley, highway, storm drain, canal, ditch flood control channel, or detention pond, lake or other watercourse or upon the ground. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Sec. 22B-7. - Refuse disposed by actual producers. 
(a)  The actual producers of refuse or the owners of premises upon which refuse is accumulated who desire to personally collect and dispose of such refuse shall do so in compliance with regulations of the city. 
(b)  The public works director shall promulgate rules and regulations subject to the approval of the city council concerning individual collection and disposal. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt actual producers of refuse or the owners of premises upon which refuse is accumulated from the fees for refuse collection which are provided for in this article unless otherwise specifically exempted from payment of such fees. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Sec. 22B-8. - Responsibility of owner of premises. 
The owner of the premises, as well as the occupant thereof, shall be responsible for compliance with the terms of this article and liable for any violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Sec. 22B-9. - Fees. 
(a)  The fees to be charged and collected by the city for refuse collection, the frequency of pickup service to be offered by the city, and the fees to be charged by the city for special services concerning the collection and transportation of refuse shall be determined by the city council. The schedule of fees and frequency of pickups shall be determined and enacted by resolution adopted by the city council, which resolution shall also specify an effective date for the fees and charges specified in the resolution. Such resolution may also specify a minimum residential user charge which charge may be imposed and collected whether the residential property owner actually uses city sanitation services or not. Such charges are hereby determined to be necessary in order to allow the city to provide basic sanitation and trash collection service to the residents of the city, which service promotes the public health, safety and welfare. Said fees shall be subject to any limitation imposed by C.R.S. 30-15-401(7), as amended. 
(b)  The fees determined by council action in the form of a resolution are hereby assessed against the properties within the city receiving and benefitting from basic refuse collection service. If such fees are not paid within thirty days after normal city billing such services, the amount so assessed shall become a lien upon the property receiving or benefitting from such service or upon the property which is subject to a user charge as determined by resolution of the council. Collection of such assessment shall be in the manner provided by law. 
(c)  Any interruption of sanitation service due to the request of the customer lasting less than twenty-one days shall be deemed to be a continuation of service for the entire month for billing purposes and shall not be subject to a credit against the customer's billing. Interruptions of service requested by the customer in excess of twenty-one days may be adjusted on a customer's billing on a pro rata basis; provided, however, a request for discontinuation of service shall not exempt the owner or occupant of residential premises from any user charges imposed by the city pursuant to the fee resolution duly adopted by the city council. 
(d)  Fees determined by council action in the form of a resolution may be set so as to encourage the reduction, reuse and/or recycling of materials through a structure which allows for the charging of higher rates or charging of penalties for the collection of more than two container per residential dwelling unit per week. Fees or penalties may be set and collected in a manner established by resolution of the city council. 
(e)  In the event that any assessment for refuse collection shall be unpaid within five days after the scheduled due date of such assessment, a penalty of ten percent of the total amount of delinquent assessment shall automatically be added to the account and shall become an additional charge against the person to whom such assessments are made. In the event there is more than one delinquent amount due, no more than twenty percent of each delinquent amount may be assessed regardless of the period of time during which the amount due remains in default. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part); Ord. No. 895, § 3.)  
Sec. 22B-10. - Transportation. 
(a)  Any vehicle used to transport refuse, trash, tree or shrubbery trimmings must have suitable covers to prevent the loss of contents on property or roadways. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move any vehicle upon any public way unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom; provided, however, sand or other abrasives may be dropped for purposes of securing vehicle traction and provided, further, that water, salt or other substances may be sprinkled upon roadways in the course of cleaning, clearing or maintaining such roadways by appropriate city departments. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Sec. 22B-11. - Dead animals. 
(a)  No person shall deposit or otherwise place for collection any carcass or portion of any animal, bird, or reptile. 
(b)  Any person in the city having knowledge of the existence or location of a dead animal, bird, or reptile, shall immediately notify the animal control officer of the location of such dead animal, bird, or reptile and shall provide such additional information as the animal control officer or his designated agent may require. 
(c)  These provisions shall be interpreted so as to be harmonious with the provision of Chapter 5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Sec. 22B-12. - Construction sites and transportation of materials. 
(a)  All persons having secured a building permit from the city shall, prior to the commencement of any construction activity, furnish or place on the premises upon which construction is to occur, a container or fenced-in area of suitable size and design to contain all refuse which might be removed or disturbed from the premises by wind or other elements. 
(b)  If such container or fenced area is filled, the person securing the building permit shall cause such container or fenced area to be emptied and its contents removed to an appropriate sanitary landfill. 
(c)  No person shall allow refuse, rubbish or other waste to blow or be carried from the premises for which the building permit is secured. 
(d)  Persons obtaining proper building permits in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section and complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be exempt from the payment of a refuse collection fee during the period of construction. 
(e)  The city shall not be responsible for the collecting or hauling of building materials originating from private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of new buildings or from the demolition of existing structures. Such materials shall be removed by the owner of the property or by the contractor. Neither a new certificate of occupancy nor a signed final inspection shall be issued or granted by the department of public works until scrap building materials and other refuse have been removed from the premises by the owner or contractor. 
(f)  Persons engaged in demolition who have obtained a permit from the city must remove the debris and structural parts resulting from such demolition and contain such materials from scattering in the same manner as set forth above with regard to construction site. The conveyance or transporting of such materials from the site shall be in accordance with existing city ordinances. The removal of demolition debris shall be exempt from refuse collection fees. 
(g)  Persons mixing concrete or transporting concrete on city streets shall not drop or leave waste concrete upon such streets or upon any property within the city, unless permission of the property owner has first been obtained. No persons shall transport concrete upon the public streets of the city except in a proper truck or vehicle which prevents spillage or leakage of concrete upon the public streets. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Division 2. - Containers. 
 
Sec. 22B-14. - Preparation for collection. 
(a)  All owners, occupants or other persons in charge of any premises within the city from which refuse is collected, whether by the city or by private collection firms, shall place all garbage, trash, waste or refuse in tied disposable bags or in watertight cans which shall: 
(1)  Be of sufficient size to hold not less than five gallons (nineteen liters) nor more than thirty-three gallons (one hundred twenty-five liters); 
(2)  Contain not in excess of fifty pounds (twenty-three kilograms) of garbage, trash, waste or refuse in any one bag, can, or container; 
(3)  Have close-fitting covers and be rodent-proof; 
(4)  Have handles on the sides of adequate size and strength for the container; 
(5)  Have no ragged or sharp edges or other defects likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents; and 
(6)  Be containers/dumpsters provided by the city of Cortez. 
(b)  All bags, cans and containers which are used for holding combustible or noncombustible garbage, waste, rubbish or refuse shall be furnished and maintained by the owner, occupant or other person in charge of the premises, in good condition. 
(c)  All cans or containers which do not conform to the requirements of this section or which have ragged or sharp edges or other similar defects which hamper or which may injure the person collecting the contents thereof must be replaced by a proper can, container or receptacle within ten days subsequent to notice to that effect from the sanitation supervisor of the public works department. Any such can or container which is not so replaced by the owner or occupant of the premises within ten days after such written notification may be collected and disposed of as rubbish by the sanitation department. 
(d)  All waste material deposited in any refuse bag or container shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Garbage shall be strained of all liquids. 
(2)  Dangerous trash items and all waste material of an injurious nature such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes and television tubes shall be securely wrapped to prevent injury to the collection crews. 
(3)  Such waste materials shall not be of a flammable or explosive nature. 
(4)  Incinerated items shall be completely free of combustion. 
(e)  No building materials, sod, rocks, large pieces of hard metal, concrete blocks or concrete shall be placed for city collection. 
(f)  The removal and disposal of wearing apparel, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and according to the rules and regulations of the state health department. Such refuse shall not be placed in bags, cans, or containers for regular city sanitation collection. 
(g)  No hazardous waste or refuse such as poison, acids, caustics, chemicals, infected materials or explosives shall be placed in any receptacle for collection by the city, nor shall the same be collected by the city. Hazardous waste must be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  All trash, such as boxes, cartons, and crates shall be collapsed and secured at the collection site. 
(i)  Tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar material shall be cut to length not to exceed four feet and securely tied in bundles not more than two feet thick before being deposited for collection. All such refuse may be placed beside normal refuse containers. Tree and shrubbery branches and limbs and trimmings cut by landscape service, tree service contractors, commercial workmen or resulting from the clearing of land, shall not be the responsibility of the city. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Sec. 22B-15. - Accumulation of refuse. 
It shall be unlawful, and no person shall permit or allow the accumulation of refuse upon any property within the city except in bags, cans, or containers provided for the disposal of such refuse. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Sec. 22B-16. - Mobile homes. 
(a)  Each mobile home lot shall have suit-able garbage cans as defined in this chapter. 
(b)  Mobile home parks. Handled in accordance with Section 22B-19(4). 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Sec. 22B-17. - Certain businesses to provide receptacles. 
Each fast-food or drive-in restaurant, convenience store or other business generating refuse disposed of by customers shall provide at least one appropriate trash receptacle at or near each door from which a customer may exit the business establishment. Such trash receptacles shall be kept free of grease and other matter that may attract insects or create offensive odors. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Sec. 22B-18. - Trash receptacles furnished by city—Determination of necessity. 
(a)  When the public works director determines that it is more feasible to furnish service to a residence or business through the use of a bin or container provided by the city, the occupants or owners of such residential or business property shall use the container provided by the city. 
(b)  When it is determined by the public works director that service is more feasible through the use of individual receptacles and a container is not provided by the city, the occupants or owners of the premises shall furnish receptacles meeting requirements of Section 22B-14. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Sec. 22B-19. - Specifications of use of receptacles. 
The provisions of this section shall apply to bins and containers which are provided by the city for either residential or commercial refuse collection furnished by the city or which are provided pursuant to agreement for the use thereof by the owner, occupant or other person in charge of premises within the city which utilizes city sanitation services. 
(a)  The public works director may require owners, occupants or other persons in charge of premises within the city who conduct commercial operations, shopping centers, mobile home parks or apartment complexes which generate quantities of refuse greater than that of the average resident or household within the city to utilize bins or containers furnished by the city for refuse collection and to pay the fees therefor established by resolution duly adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The public works director may furnish refuse collection service through bins or containers provided by the city to persons other than commercial users under appropriate agreements with the city, provided the director finds that such service is economically feasible and city bins and containers are available for such service. 
(c)  The public works director may require individual residents or businesses utilizing city sanitation services to utilize a city-provided bin or container in lieu of individual receptacles if such bin or container is not located an unreasonable distance from the individual residence or business and collection from such bin or container is reasonably required by conditions encountered in the operation of the city refuse collection and disposal system. 
(d)  The public works director may require the owner of any apartment building, shopping center, mobile home park or similar property having separate units which generate refuse to: 
(1)  Provide and maintain suitable refuse facilities; 
(2)  Utilize city bins or containers; 
(3)  Deposit or cause to be deposited all refuse in such receptacles or containers; 
(4)  Place all receptacles in a place convenient and safe for removal; and 
(5)  Make payment directly to the city of all such city services rendered to such apartment. 
(e)  All persons receiving refuse collection service through bins or containers provided by the city shall comply with rules and regulations established by the public works director for the use, care, and location of such containers and shall keep the lids and covers furnished for such containers on such containers in a tight or closed position at all times except when they are being filled or emptied. 
(f)  All persons receiving refuse collection service through bins or containers provided by the city shall, if required by the public works director, as a condition to receive collection service, provide suitable level ground, cement or an asphalt pad constructed to specifications of the city engineer, upon which to locate city bins and containers and shall further provide any appropriate safety devices for use in connection with such bins and containers which may be reasonably required by the public works director. 
(g)  It is unlawful for any person or entity other than such persons as are required and authorized by this section to receive refuse collection service through bins and containers provided by the city, to deposit refuse or any other material in such bins and containers provided by the city. The public works director or his designated agent is authorized to place on all bins or containers provided by the city for refuse collection, a notice that unauthorized dumping is prohibited by this section. The prohibitions of this section shall also apply to unauthorized dumping within bins or containers provided by the city at public parks or upon other public property. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Sec. 22B-20. - Location; time of placement. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all owners, occupants and other persons in charge of premises in the city, excluding those whose bins or containers are provided by the city. 
(b)  Refuse bags, cans and containers, including cans or bags, shall be placed out for collection on the designated pickup day at ground level at the edge of the right-of-way of a street or alley. Such placement shall not be within any fenced or enclosed area. Containers may be placed for collection at other than ground level in case of hardship when approved by the sanitation supervisor, and in such case shall be subject to payment of a special charge. If the public works director finds that service from a right-of-way is hazardous or otherwise not feasible because of weather conditions, he may notify the owner or occupant of the premises in question of the hazardous condition and shall specify within such notification the location to be utilized for the placement of a receptacle for collection purposes. 
(c)  Refuse bags, cans and containers shall at all times be kept in such manner as to preclude the scattering of garbage, trash, and refuse. If such spilling or scattering does occur, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant to remove and properly dispose of such spillage. No refuse shall be stored in the city right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part).)  
Sec. 22B-21. - Violation penalty. 
Any person firm, association or corporation, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, whether he does so willfully or otherwise, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person, firm, association or corporation convicted of violating any of said provisions of this chapter shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code Section 17-16A as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 742 (part); amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 28, 9-25-12)  
CHAPTER 23. - SEWERS. (Reserved for future legislation.)  
CHAPTER 23A. - SHOPLIFTING. 
 
Sec. 23A-1. - Taking merchandise. 
Any person who knowingly takes possession of any goods, wares, or merchandise owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or other mercantile establishment, with the intention of unlawfully converting such goods, wares, or merchandise to his own use, without paying the purchase price therefor, is guilty of the crime of shoplifting. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1.)  
Sec. 23A-2. - Concealing merchandise. 
If any person knowingly conceals unpurchased goods, wares, or merchandise owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or other mercantile establishment, whether such concealment is on his person or otherwise, and whether on or off the premises of the store or mercantile establishment, such concealment shall constitute prima facie evidence that such person intended to convert same to his own use without paying the purchase price therefor within the meaning of section 23A-1. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 2.)  
Sec. 23A-3. - Questioning offender. 
If any person commits the offense of shoplifting, as defined in section 23A-1, or if any person knowingly conceals upon his person or otherwise any unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise held or owned by any store or mercantile establishment, the merchant or any employee thereof or any peace or police officer, acting in good faith and upon probable cause based upon reasonable grounds therefor, may question such person in a reasonable manner for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not such person is guilty of shoplifting as defined in section 23A-1. Such questioning of a person by a merchant, merchant's employee or peace or police officer shall not render such merchant, merchant's employee or peace or police officer civilly liable for slander, false arrest, false imprisonment, malicious prosecution or unlawful detention. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 3.)  
Sec. 23A-4. - Chapter application. 
The provisions in this chapter pertaining to the crime of shoplifting within the city are subject to the following: 
(a)  That the summons and complaint issued pursuant to this chapter shall specify whether the alleged offense occurred within the city of Cortez, county of Montezuma, state of Colorado; 
(b)  That the summons and complaint shall specify the name of the person, store or other mercantile establishment whose property was allegedly taken or concealed; 
(c)  That the summons and complaint shall specify, describe or name the goods, wares or merchandise allegedly taken or concealed as well as the value thereof; 
(d)  That the provisions of this chapter regarding shoplifting are limited to products, items or merchandise having a value not exceeding one thousand dollars. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 4; Ord. No. 915; Ord. No. 1097 (part).)  
CHAPTER 24. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS. 
 For state law as to authority of city relative to streets and public grounds generally, see C.R.S. 1973, §§ 31-15-701 to 31-15-713. 
 As to the numbering of buildings, see §§ 6-7 to 6-11 of this Code. As to motor vehicles and traffic generally, see ch. 16. As to loitering generally, see § 18-28. As to obstructing sidewalks or other public places by vendors, see § 18-49. As to public improvements generally, see ch. 22.  
Article I. - In General. 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Permission required for excavations, storage of material, etc.; excavations to be guarded and lighted. 
No person shall without the written permission of the city engineer make an excavation of any kind in any street, alley or public place; remove from or deposit upon any street or alley any dirt, earth or rock; or store or pile in any such place any hay, straw, manure, boxes, barrels, building material or other matter, within the corporate limits of the city. 
All excavations herein specified shall be safely guarded, and if left open at night shall be provided with red lights. 
(Code 1968, § 8-1-1.)  
Sec. 24-2. - Unguarded openings prohibited. 
No person shall keep or permit to be left open or unguarded any cellar door, grating or other covering of any coal hole, cellar or vault in any street or sidewalk, or shall permit any such covering or door of any premises owned, used or occupied by him to be left open, out of repair or in any manner to be insecure. 
(Code 1968, § 8-1-2.)  
Sec. 24-3. - Permission required for the staging of construction materials and/or equipment on city rights-of-way. 
(a)  Statement required. A written statement indicating the applicant's intentions for staging of construction material and/or equipment within the public rights-of-way shall be submitted and approved prior to use of public rights-of-way use for these purposes for any required building permit (i.e., location of porta-johns, location of office trailer if in right-of-way, storage of materials, etc.). 
(b)  Approval. Approved shall be given by the city building official. 
(c)  Penalty. A violation of this section shall be punishable as set forth in the Cortez City Code at Section 17-16A. Fines; jail time; deferred judgment as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1110.)  
Secs. 24-4 to 24-6. - Reserved.  
Sec. 24-7. - Permission required for curb cuts. 
No person shall make or cause to be made any curb cut at any point within the city without first having obtained permission therefor from the city describing the location and purpose of such curb cut. 
(Code 1968, § 14-2-7.)  
Sec. 24-8. - Reserved.  
Article II. - Street Lighting System. 
  Editor's note: Ordinance number 247 setting up the agreement between the city and the Empire Electric Association governing the street lighting system of the city is not set out herein but may be found on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Article III. - Street Grades. 
 
Sec. 24-10. - Base. 
The official base or plan of reference is mean sea level as established by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey. 
(Code 1968, § 8-3-2.)  
Sec. 24-11. - Primary bench mark. 
The official primary bench mark is the aluminum tablet set on the third course of masonry in the corner of the building at the North East corner of Main and Market Streets by the U.S. Geological Survey and stamped 6198. The elevation of the center of this tablet is that given as the adjusted and compensated elevation by the U.S. Geological Survey or 6199.35 feet above base. 
(Code 1968, § 8-3-3.)  
Secs. 24-12 to 24-14. - Reserved.  
Sec. 24-15. - Conformity of sidewalks to adopted grades. 
Sidewalks in the city shall be made in accordance with and in conformity to all grades adopted by the city, unless otherwise provided by the city council. 
(Code 1968, § 8-3-7.)  
Article IV. - Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter Construction. 
For state law as to authority of city relative to sidewalk construction, see C.R.S. 1973, § 31-15-301(g). 
 
Sec. 24-16. - Permit required. 
No curbs, gutters or sidewalks shall be installed or work commenced thereon until a permit has been secured from the city engineer. The permit shall set forth the construction requirements and shall be issued without charge. 
(Code 1968, § 8-4-2.)  
Secs. 24-17 to 24-19. - Reserved.  
Sec. 24-20. - Removal of snow and ice. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant and occupant of any commercial premise abutting or adjoining any public sidewalk to remove all snow and ice from such sidewalk by 12:00 noon of the second day following the last measureable snowfall on Main Street from Maple to Highway 145, North and South Broadway and businesses on the side streets in the area from Maple to Harrison between North Street to First Street in order to give safe passage to pedestrians. For snow/ice deposited on sidewalks by snow removal operations of the city or the state of Colorado an additional twenty-four hours will be granted for removal. Other streets/routes may be made subject to these ordinance provisions by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  If the city determines that a certain person is in violation of this section, and a hazardous condition exists, the city may remove any snow and ice where necessary. For any work completed by the city then the property involved shall be assessed the actual cost thereof plus an additional amount of up to twenty-five dollars to cover administrative costs; provided, that before so proceeding the city shall inform any person responsible for and present at the property or premises of the violation and request that the violation be immediately corrected. 
(c)  Whenever the city accomplishes any snow removal under this section, within thirty days thereafter a notice shall be sent to the owner of the property at his last known address stating that snow removal work under this section has been performed and an assessment for the same shall be made. When a lien is created by a nonpayment of snow/ice removal, the city shall certify the unpaid snow/ice removal bill to the county treasurer for collection with property taxes. It may be foreclosed on in the manner of a mechanic's lien and shall be a perpetual lien until such time as such snow/ice removal bill has been paid in full. 
(d)  No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any public street, alley or roadway in the city, snow taken or removed from property privately owned or occupied, excluding snow taken or removed from public sidewalks. 
(e)  Any person or persons guilty of violating any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor for each day that a violation occurs and shall be punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1109.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 29, 9-25-12)  
CHAPTER 25. - SUBDIVISION OF LAND.* 
*  Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 814 repealed Chapter 25, and adopted the Land Use Code by reference. See Chapter 29, Zoning, for provisions regarding subdivisions.  
CHAPTER 26. - TAXICABS. (Reserved for future legislation.)  
CHAPTER 26D. - TREES AND SHRUBS. 
 
Sec. 26D-1. - Trees and shrubs—Generally. 
(a)  Trees and shrubs on public grounds. The intent of this chapter is to provide the city with a long-term, well planned program of tree care and beautification for its citizens and visitors and the intent is to establish an attractive and healthy environmental setting within the community through a closely supervised treatment of tree care. This chapter shall pertain specifically to public grounds and to public rights-of-way within the city limits as well as commercial, industrial and parking areas. It shall be applicable to thoughtful planning, placement, and maintenance of trees and shrubs. 
(b)  Authority. The city parks and recreation department shall have the power to promulgate rules, standards and specifications concerning the trimming, spraying, removal, planting, pruning and protection of trees, shrubs, vines, hedges and other plants upon the right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the city as well as commercial and parking areas as provided herein. Rules, regulations and specifications promulgated by the parks and recreation department are subject to review and approval by the city council. 
(c)  Definitions. 
(1)  City forester is defined as the city staff member in the city parks and recreation department designated to enforce this chapter. 
(2)  Commercial and/or industrial uses are as defined in the Cortez Zoning Code now adopted or hereinafter amended. 
(3)  Cut area is defined as any area where the existing grade is lowered. 
(4)  Public grounds are defined as grounds owned by the city of Cortez. 
(5)  Public right-of-ways are defined as streets or alleys owned by the city of Cortez. 
(6)  Street trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land located within the right-of-way of any street or alley within the city. 
(Ord. No. 763 (part).)  
Sec. 26D-2. - Cortez tree commission. 
(a)  A commission to be known as the Cortez tree commission is hereby created as an advisory board to the city council. The commission shall consist of five members. In addition to the tree commission, an ex officio board of advisors consisting of the following: a member of the city council, a member of the city staff, and a representative from the Colorado State Forest Service shall be appointed. The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall appoint the commission. No compensation shall be paid to members of the commission. 
(b)  The duties of the commission shall be to study, investigate, plan, advise, report and recommend to the city council any action, program, plan or legislation which the commission shall find or determine to be necessary or advisable for the care, preservation, trimming, planting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in public ways, streets and alleys. To assist the city council and the citizens of Cortez in the dissemination of news, educational material and information regarding the selection, planting and maintenance of trees within the corporate limits, whether the same are on private or public property, and to make such recommendations from time to time to the city council as to desirable legislation concerning the tree program and activities for the municipality, such as an annual Arbor Day program. 
(Ord. No. 763 (part).)  
Sec. 26D-3. - Tree protection and disease control. 
(a)  Tree protection. It is unlawful for any person, not the owner thereof, or without lawful authority to do so, to injure, wilfully deface, disfigure, or destroy any tree or shrub, or to injure, destroy, cut or pick any vegetation located on any public place. 
(b)  Disease control. Upon the discovery of any destructive or communicable disease or other pestilence which endangers the growth, health, life or well-being of trees or plants in the city, or which is capable of causing an epidemic spread of communicable disease or insect infestation such as Dutch elm disease, the city forester shall at once cause written notice to be served upon the owner of the property upon which such diseased tree is situated, which notice shall require such property owner to eradicate, remove or otherwise control such condition within reasonable time, which time period shall be not more than thirty days. If the owner, agent, or occupant of the property fails to comply within the time period specified, the city shall correct such condition and assess the cost of such correction to the owner or agent, and such costs shall constitute a lien against the property until paid. 
(Ord. No. 763 (part).)  
Sec. 26D-4. - Tree and shrub planting and spacing. 
(a)  Spacing. The spacing of street trees shall be thirty feet to fifty feet apart. The city forester shall approve the planting distance for all street trees. The distance trees may be planted from curbs, curblines, sidewalks, sidewalk lines and property lines will be in accordance with the species size at maturity. Trees shall be centered in the space between the sidewalk and street. Approval for planting street trees must be obtained by permit from the city forester. No street tree shall be planted closer than twenty feet from any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersection curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet from any fire hydrant. 
(Ord. No. 763 (part).)  
Sec. 26D-5. - Trees and shrubs—Trimming responsibility—City to perform work when. 
(a)  In general. Any tree growing over a public alley, street or highway, or so located as to extend its branches over a public alley, street or highway, shall be trimmed by the owner, agent or occupant of the property on which the tree stands so that there shall be a clear height of fourteen feet above the surface of the street, alley or highway, and eight feet above the surface of the sidewalks unobstructed by the branches. Such owner or agent or occupant shall remove all dead branches and stubs on such tree, or trees, which are or may become a menace to travelers on public highways, streets or alleys of the city. If a tree or its parts in any way cause a hindrance to the general public, or in any way endanger the security or usefulness of any public street, right-of-way, highway, alley, sewer or sidewalk as determined by the city forester, it is declared to be a public nuisance. If the owner of such property does not correct or remove such nuisance within thirty days after written notification by the city forester, the city forester shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed and the cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner or agent of the property in question and shall be a lien on the property if not paid. 
(b)  Owner to maintain or city to correct deficiencies at owner's expense. Any owner or occupant of any real property shall maintain all hedges and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks so that no part of such hedges or shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public sidewalk of the city. If a hedge, shrub, or its parts in any way causes a hindrance to the general public, or in any way endangers the security or usefulness of any public street, right-of-way, highway, alley, sewer or sidewalk, as determined by the city forester, it is declared to be a public nuisance. If the owner of such property does not correct or remove such nuisance within thirty days after written notification by the city forester, the city forester shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed, and the cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner or agent of the property in question, and the costs shall constitute a lien on the property until paid. 
(Ord. No. 763 (part).)  
Sec. 26D-6. - Approved tree species. 
A list of recommended tree species for a variety of settings and uses shall be obtainable from the city forester. The city forester will also supply a list of trees not suitable for planting as street trees. No conifer trees shall be permitted to be planted between the sidewalk and the street as specified by the city forester. 
(Ord. No. 763 (part).)  
Sec. 26D-7. - Utilities. 
No street trees other than those species of small trees approved by the city forester may be planted in any city right-of-way under or within ten feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line, or other utility. In addition, it is encouraged that the same guidelines be followed for the planting of trees on private property. 
(Ord. No. 763 (part).)  
Sec. 26D-8. - Commercial/industrial landscaping developments. 
(a)  Intent—Exemptions. The intent of requiring landscape treatment for open space is to improve the appearance and layout of commercial development in the community. These requirements shall apply to commercial development of vacant lands, as well as new development on land where existing structures are removed to provide commercial development property. The central business district is exempted from these regulations except for zones overlapping the central business district which shall meet the following regulations: 
(1)  Landscaping plans pertaining to city rights-of-way shall be submitted as part of the site development plans submitted with the building plans. In all cases where a project is subject to review by the planning and zoning commission, the city forester shall provide a statement as to the conformance of the submitted plan. 
(2)  Landscaping plans pertaining to commercial private property shall be submitted together with the site development plan in building permit process. They shall be processed concurrently. 
(b)  Submission of landscaping plans. All landscaping plans shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Location of existing improvements (curbs, gutter, sidewalk, building, etc.) and existing vegetation including all trees with a diameter of one and one-half inches or greater; 
(2)  Location of proposed structures, parking areas, circulation ways, pedestrian way, signs, and landscaping areas; 
(3)  A minimum of ten percent of the commercial area to be developed must be landscaped. A statement pertaining to percentages of lot coverage of building, parking areas and landscaping area; 
(4)  A statement pertaining to preservation and disposition of existing vegetation; 
(5)  Proposed landscaping showing the location, size, species and spacing of trees and shrubs, and the identification of the type of ground cover or ground treatment in all areas not covered by building or pavement; 
(6)  Size, species and spacing shall be by direct labelling or by a clearly understandable legend; 
(7)  When phasing of the project is proposed, a phasing program for the landscaping may also be proposed; 
(8)  Flower and shrub bed definition must be clearly indicated; 
(9)  A schematic drawing of any proposed irrigation system; 
(10)  Identification of the method of reclamation for repair of cut-and-fill areas and other land form disruptions caused by construction; 
(c)  Landscape plan design criteria. 
(1)  Plants must be sized according to the following table: 
Type 	Minimum Size 
	
Standard deciduous trees 	1-½? caliper 
	
Small ornamental and flowering trees 	1-½? caliper 
	
Evergreen trees 	4 feet 
	
Shrubs/ground covers 	Adequate size to be consistent with design intent 
 
(2)  All plant material must meet specifications of the American Association of Nurserymen (AAN) for No. 1 grade; 
(3)  Trees, as identified in guidelines promulgated by the city representative, shall be placed in the city rights-of-way at intervals no greater than fifty feet on center and be at least of one and one-half inch caliper (minimum size); 
(4)  In areas where commercial and/or industrial uses are proposed, landscaping shall be required within the city right-of-way (exclusive of area necessary for sidewalks) which shall serve as a visual buffer to screen parking areas. In areas where such a landscaping area is not available, cuts shall be made in the sidewalk for the placement of street trees. This will be considered part of the total ten percent landscape retirement. In cases where city rights-of-way border state-controlled roads, then landscaping requirements shall meet any state requirements in addition to these requirements; 
(5)  The owner, agent or developer of the commercial property shall provide a written statement of the provisions being made for the maintenance and replacement of landscaping, to include mandatory replacement of any vegetation which dies within a one-year period from the time of planting. The city forester shall approve the plan; 
(6)  Ground cover shall be planted on exposed cut areas. The proposed ground covers shall be approved by the city forester and shall include various species which are selected for their ability to stabilize the slope and prevent erosion. 
(d)  Arborist License and Bond. 
(1)  Definitions 
Award of permit is awarded to a person who takes the arborist test and passes, but who is not licensed or does not require a license. A permit is only valid when used under the auspices of a valid license. 
License means a document that is provided by the city to any person, firm or corporation that meets all the requirements of obtaining an arborist's license. Any person issued a license does not need to obtain an award of permit for themselves. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of cutting, trimming, pruning, treating, or removing trees for compensation within the city without first applying for and procuring an arborist's license. Such a license shall be issued in the name of an individual person, a firm or a corporation and, when so issued, shall permit such person, firm or corporation or any person employed by the person, firm or corporation to engage in the business of cutting, trimming, pruning, treating or removing trees within the city. 
Licensee means a person, firm or corporation that procures an arborist's license to engage in the business or occupation of cutting, trimming, pruning, treating, or removing trees for compensation. 
(2)  Application—License. The application for every license shall contain the name of the person making such application, the business address of the applicant, as well as the mailing address of such application, if the mailing address varies from the business address. The application shall also require a summary of the experience and training, if any, that the applicant has had in the cutting, trimming, pruning, or removing of trees, as well as a summary, number, and identification of persons employed by the applicant, as well as at least three (3) references from former places of employment for the applicant, if any. All applicants shall be given a practical test prior to licensing by the director of parks and recreation or his authorized agent. Each crew working within the city on behalf of such firm or corporation must have a person who is licensed or has an award of permit, on site, exercising supervisory control over crew members. 
(3)  Application—Award of Permit. The application for every permit shall contain the name of the person making such application, the business address of the applicant's licensed employer, as well as the mailing address of such employer if the mailing address varies from the business address. The application shall also require a summary of the experience and training, if any, that the applicant has had in the cutting, trimming, pruning, or removing of trees, and at least three references from former places of employment for the applicant, if any. All applicants shall be given a practical test prior to the awarding of a permit by the director of parks and recreation or his authorized agent. 
(4)  Examination. Before any license or permit may be issued under this section, the application therefore shall be submitted to the director of parks and recreation for processing pursuant to the provisions of this section. Within ten days after receipt of an application for the license or permit, the director of parks and recreation or his authorized agent, shall examine the applicant for purpose of licensing or award of permit. Such examination shall be in writing and shall consist of a written examination. The examination, for purposes of licensing or award of permit, shall, in the director's discretion, require an actual demonstration of the applicant's ability. Corporate applicants may submit multiple applications for licenses or award of permit for more than one employee. 
(5)  Fee; transfer; employees; insurance coverage. 
(a)  The city clerk, prior to granting a license, shall first collect from the applicant an annual license fee. The license, when issued, shall show upon its face the name of the applicant, the applicant's business address, the date of issuance, the fact that the license fee has been paid, and the fact that the licensee is entitled to engage in the business of cutting, trimming, pruning or removing trees within the city. The license issued shall be nontransferable. 
The applicant may, if more stringently licensed in another community, obtain an arborist license upon receipt of a nominal fee as approved by the director of parks and recreation. 
(b)  If multiple applications have been made by a corporate applicant, the license shall also reflect the names of the employees of the applicant who will be licensed. The licensee shall pay an annual license fee on a calendar year basis and there shall be no prorated fees for licenses issued for only a portion of the calendar year. 
(c)  Prior to granting any license, the city clerk shall require the filing with the clerk an insurance policy or certificate of insurance with coverage for personal injury and property damage, including coverage for damage to trees, in amounts of not less than twenty-five thousand dollars for each person, fifty thousand dollars property damage and aggregate limits of one hundred thousand dollars for each incident or occurrence. The city shall be named as an additional insured on any such policies of insurance and the licensee shall agree, as part of the license application to indemnify the city against any loss, liability or damage resulting from the operations of the licensee. 
(d)  There shall be no fee assessed for the issuance of an award of permit. Awards of permit shall require the same testing requirements as for licensing. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any licensed firm or corporation to fail to have at least one license or award of permit employee within each crew when operating within the city limits. The head of the firm or corporation shall be responsible for any crew working as part of his employment staff. 
(f)  Fees shall be set by council. 
(6)  Rules and regulations. The director of parks and recreation shall, subject to review by the Cortez tree commission and subsequent approval by the city council, promulgate such rules and regulations, including safety regulations, as may be necessary for the protection of the public in connection with the manner in which licensed tree trimmers shall operate within the city. The violation of any such regulation shall constitute grounds for revocation or suspension of a license or award of permit issued pursuant to this section in addition to any other penalties provided for in this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall become effective upon their adoption by the city council after recommendation from the parks and recreation department and the Cortez tree commission. 
(7)  Identification of equipment. Any firm, corporation, or individual licensee under this section shall cause his name and address to be prominently displayed upon all vehicles and equipment utilized in connection with the activities authorized by the license to be issued pursuant to the terms of this section. All automobiles, trucks, trailers, and other vehicles operated by any licensee for the transportation of equipment used by any licensee in such business shall have the name and address of such licensee displayed upon both sides thereof in plain and legible figures and letters not less than three inches in height, which lettering shall be kept in sufficient condition to permit the same to be readily distinguished and read at a distance of at least sixty feet. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to operate any such vehicles or equipment upon streets, alleys or other public ways or places within the city without such identification being legibly displayed thereon and such conduct upon any part of any licensee may be grounds for revocation or suspension of the license granted pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 763 (part); Ord. No. 811, § 1.)  
Sec. 26D-9. - Parking areas in commercial or industrial developments. 
(a)  The developer of every new commercial or industrial parking area, whether on or off-site, shall be required to obtain a parking area development permit from the building official. 
(b)  Existing parking areas are exempt, until they are improved with the construction of an impermeable surface. Maintenance of existing surfaces is not considered improvement. When parking areas are improved, they will be reviewed as to whether they meet existing regulations pertaining to the required number of parking spaces. If, after the required parking space is subtracted from the total parking area, and additional space is available, the parking area shall be developed according to the ten percent landscape requirement, or if less than ten percent is available, then the remaining space will be landscaped. 
(c)  Every commercial or industrial parking area shall be adequately screened from contiguous residential uses by a fence, wall, earth berm, or trees and shrubs in combination. These screening materials in landscaped areas shall be not less than three and one-half feet above grade level or placed in a strip less than four feet wide. They shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
(d)  At least ten percent of the total parking area, including access, shall be devoted exclusively to landscaping with trees, shrubs, and ground cover designed to reduce the visual impact and assist in defining on-site traffic movement. This will be considered part of the total ten percent landscaping requirement. 
(e)  A landscaping lighting plan shall be submitted with the site/development plan or with the application for a parking area permit when landscape lighting is part of the improvement. Landscape lighting shall not be directed towards any adjacent residential uses or public streets. 
(Ord. No. 770, § 1.)  
Sec. 26D-10. - Enforcement. 
The city forester shall have the power to enforce rules, regulations and specifications concerning the trimming, spraying, removal, planting, pruning, and protection of trees, shrubs, vines, hedges and other plants upon the right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place in the city. 
(Ord. No. 763 (part).)  
Sec. 26D-11. - Penalties. 
Any person or persons guilty of violating any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor for each day that a violation continues and punished as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 763 (part); amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 30, 9-25-12)  
CHAPTER 27. - WATER. 
 For charter provision as to authority of city to acquire and regulate waterworks, see Char., art. X, § 6. As to control, sale and regulation of rates of water from city utility generally, see Char., art. XI, §§ 3, 4, 5. 
 For state law as to construction, repair, etc., of water mains, see C.R.S. §§ 31-15-709, 31-35-301 to 31-35-303. As to authority of city relative to watercourses, see C.R.S. § 31-35-101. As to authority of city relative to water pollution control, see C.R.S. § 31-15-710. As to authority of city to acquire and maintain waterworks and supply water, see C.R.S. §§ 31-15-708, 31-35-101, 31-35-103. As to water rights and waterworks of city generally, see C.R.S. § 31-35-101 to 31-35-111. As to city water systems generally, see C.R.S. §§ 31-35-401 to 31-35-417. As to authority of city to regulate city water supply, see C.R.S. § 31-15-708. 
 As to health and sanitation generally, see Ch. 14 of this Code. As to plumbing generally, see Ch. 21. As to public improvements generally, see Ch. 22.  
Article I. - In General. 
 
Sec. 27-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Mobile home space. An area designated for use by a wheel mounted dwelling unit, which space is provided with a connection to the water system of the city for use by the dwelling unit. The space may, or may not, be physically occupied by a dwelling unit. 
Nonresidential unit. All other types and classes of units. 
Residential customer. The occupant and/or owner of a single-family dwelling unit (detached or attached such as a condominium or townhouse) or mobile home space, wherein title to land or the right to occupy in the case of a condominium, is conveyed. In the case of two or more multiple family dwelling units, such as duplexes, triplexes, apartments, or mobile home spaces rented or leased, each shall be a residential customer. 
Water tap. Any connection to existing water lines, municipal or private, for the purpose of receiving water. Each separate dwelling or business shall have and shall be considered to have separate taps. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 1, § 4.)  
Sec. 27-2. - Administration of water system by council. 
The city council shall administer the use, distribution and sale of water to the users thereof; be entrusted with the responsibility of operating the city water system, promulgating such rules and regulations in such connection as may be recommended by the chief water engineer; and provide for the collection of charges from consumers and the delegation of administrative powers and functions of and to the chief water engineer. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 2, § 1.)  
Sec. 27-3. - City manager to be chief water engineer; powers and duties of city manager generally. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city council and is hereby designated chief water engineer. 
He shall be responsible to the city council for such administration, with the power to regulate and operate the city water system and to employ for that purpose such deputies or other assistants and employees as may be necessary or required in the administration of this chapter, and to recommend to the council such reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to the use of water and the operation of such system as may be necessary or in his opinion required for a fair and efficient administration of such water system. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 2, § 2.)  
Sec. 27-4. - Council—Adjustment of rates. 
Nothing in this chapter concerning rates, tap fees or meter deposits shall be construed, nor is it intended as preventing the city council from adjusting rates prescribed by this chapter by resolution of the council at any regular or special meeting whenever, in the judgment of the city council, such water rates are insufficient to defray the costs of furnishing water to the inhabitants of the city and the costs of providing debt service, reserve for depreciation, obsolescence and all other costs. Such authority is hereby expressly conferred upon the city council. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 2, § 3.)  
Sec. 27-5. - Same—Establishment of rates for new water use. 
When any use for water shall arise in the city for which no rate is established by the Code or ordinances of the city, council may by resolution fix rates for such uses so arising. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 2, § 4.)  
Sec. 27-6. - Imposition of emergency or conservation restrictions. 
(a)  Daytime watering restrictions. 
(1)  Watering of yards will not be allowed between the hours of 10.00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M. 
(2)  These watering restrictions will be enforced between May fifteenth and September fifteenth of each year. 
(3)  Anyone violating the ordinance codified in this chapter, will be given a warning notice upon observation of the first offense. 
(4)  Upon a second observed offense, the person who is violating the ordinance codified in this chapter shall have his/her water shut off. 
(5)  After water service has been shut off, there shall be a re-connect fee set by the current fee resolution, to restore service to the offending home or business. 
(b)  Lawn watering permits. 
(1)  Any person installing a new lawn that needs to be watered every day and during the restricted time of 10:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. needs to obtain a "new lawn permit" from the public works department. 
(2)  The permit will be valid for twenty-one days of watering for newly-seeded lawns and fifteen days of watering for sod. 
(3)  The city strongly recommends using alternative grass types such as fescues, wheatgrasses, and Blue Grama in-lieu of Kentucky Bluegrass. 
(4)  The "new lawn permit" fee will be set according to the current fee resolution. The permit shall be displayed in a prominent, visible area in the front lawn. Watering violations will be enforced for new lawns that do not have a permit. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 2, § 5; Ord. No. 1013.)  
Sec. 27-7. - Reservation of right to shut off water. 
The city reserves the right to cause the water to be shut off from the mains when necessary for repairs, making connections or extensions or doing any other necessary work. No claim shall be made against the city on account of shutting off the water from the mains or for the breaking of any service pipe or fixtures connected thereto. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 2, § 6.)  
Sec. 27-8. - Disclaimer of liability upon failure of water supply. 
The city shall not be responsible to any person entitled to use water from the city waterworks under any license for use by reason of the failure of water supply from any cause. No claim for damage shall be maintainable against the city by any person by reason of such failure of supply or by reason of any damage of service pipe or connection with mains and a stipulation to that effect shall be deemed to be contained in every application for a water tap. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 2, § 7.)  
Sec. 27-9. - Disposition of revenue. 
All monies received from any water rents or other source of revenue in connection with the waterworks system, except in connection with the bonds or interest thereon, and including all fines and penalties for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be placed and kept by the city council in a separate fund to be known as the water fund. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 8.)  
Sec. 27-10. - Extension of water lines. 
No additions, extensions or improvements to the city's water system, or any part thereof, shall be made or caused to be made by any private person, firm or corporation, excepting contractors employed by the city for that purpose, except upon the following conditions: 
(a)  The person requesting any addition, extension or improvement of the city's water system shall first submit a written application upon forms to be furnished by the city to the city engineer. If the application is approved by the city, the applicant then may at his expense add, extend or otherwise improve such system as specified in the application according to city's specifications. 
(b)  Upon final acceptance by the city engineer of the improvement, extension or addition, title to such improvement shall then pass and devolve to the city and the applicant shall by proper instrument of conveyance convey title thereof to the city, together with rights-of-way or easements over any private land that such extension or addition might cross. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 1.)  
Sec. 27-11. - Water service installations—Generally. 
After a contract for the new water service installation has been entered into and the necessary extension of city mains or lines are made, the city will make all street excavations and bring the water service line from the main to the property line. The city will furnish and install the corporation valve, the curb valve, meter and meter box and all necessary apparatus. All connections and water taps shall be made under the immediate direction and supervision of the chief water engineer or his delegated representative. For the purpose of this section, the water main shall be considered as being in the middle of the street and the city will extend water service pipe from the main to the property line for a distance of not to exceed one hundred feet without any reference to any provision requiring an extension of water mains. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 3, § 1.)  
Sec. 27-12. - Reserved.  
Sec. 27-13. - Prohibited uses enumerated. 
The following uses of water shall be considered as unlawful and punishable: 
(a)  Hoses with overflow or nozzle greater than 5/8 of an inch in diameter. 
(b)  Open hoses. 
(c)  Watering after hours or during water use restrictions. 
(d)  The use of booster pumps upon the user's premises. 
(e)  Unattended hoses. It shall be deemed unlawful for any householder or user of water to permit water to run through hoses when such householder is away from such premises, and it shall be the duty of each user to turn all water hoses off at the time such user leaves the premises; provided, that no other responsible person is left in charge. 
(f)  The use of any type of any inflow and outflow air conditioner. Such type is defined as that type which does not have a recirculating pump or device mounted on such cooler and which permits the water to run from such cooler onto the ground or back into the city sewage system. 
(g)  Cooling water for refrigeration units. 
(Code 1968, § 7-8-1.)  
Sec. 27-14. - Use of water during fire. 
In case of fire in the city or upon the sounding of the fire bell or alarm it shall be unlawful for any person to open or permit to remain open on his premises any hydrant or connection with the water main for the purpose of irrigating or sprinkling from the time the fire alarm is sounded until the signal has been given that the fire is out. 
(Code 1968, § 7-8-2.)  
Sec. 27-15. - Tap permit required. 
No person shall take water from any source supplied from the city water works without having first obtained and paid for a tap permit therefor. 
(Code 1968, § 7-8-3.)  
Sec. 27-16. - Deposit of debris, filth, etc., into water supply intake prohibited; swimming, etc., in reservoir prohibited. 
No person shall put or throw or cause to be thrown any filth, debris, offal or unwholesome or deleterious matter whatsoever into the stream or source from which the water for the waterworks is taken for five miles above the intake thereof on such stream or ditch, or into any reservoir, well or ditch so that such substance of the wash or drainage therefrom might be liable to fall or be carried by natural causes into such stream, well, reservoir or ditch. No person shall bathe or swim in any such ditch or reservoir or cause any animal to bathe or swim therein or water any animal therein. 
(Code 1968, § 7-8-4.)  
Sec. 27-17. - Use and placement of hydrants generally. 
There shall not be any hydrant, hose bib or attachment located outside of the premises for which such license is issued, nor in any place easily accessible from the adjoining premises; provided, that hydrants upon public streets may be placed subject to the order of the city council, but all such hydrants shall have detachable keys and be kept locked and such keys shall not be left with the hydrant or where the same may be used by the public or by those not entitled to the use thereof. 
(Code 1968, § 7-8-5.)  
Sec. 27-18. - Tampering with fire hydrant prohibited. 
No person other than members of the fire department of the city for the purpose of such department, and those especially authorized by the chief water engineer, shall open or attempt to open any fire hydrant to draw water from such hydrant; in any manner tamper or interfere with such hydrant; have in his possession any wrench for any such hydrant; or open, close, tamper, interfere with or damage any fire plug, stop cock, valves or other fixtures, main conduit, pipe or apparatus connected with such works. No person having the charge or custody of any such wrench, other tool, implement or property of the city in connection with such works shall allow the same to be taken from the place where they belong by any person not authorized to have the same. 
(Code 1968, § 7-8-6.)  
Sec. 27-19. - Wasting water prohibited. 
No person shall: 
(a)  Waste the water at any hydrant or faucet or permit the water to be wasted through such source. 
(b)  Leave or permit the water to be left running through such to prevent freezing or for any other purpose except under the direction of the superintendent. 
(c)  Make use of any form of water closet which necessitates the constant running of water. 
(d)  In any manner waste or permit the waste of water from any pipe, fixtures or appliances under his control. 
(Code 1968, § 7-8-7.)  
Sec. 27-20. - Metered service required. 
Service to all consumers of water from the municipal water system shall be by meter only at the applicable meter rates set forth herein or as the same may be altered from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 452, art. 2.)  
Article II. - Rates, Charges and Bills. 
 
Sec. 27-21. - Minimum charges and rate computation generally. 
The minimum monthly charges for each billing month of approximately thirty days are hereby fixed and shall be determined by the number of "service units" services through a single meter or the size of the meter installed, whichever is the greater, subject to the provisions of this section. 
No vacancy credit will be allowed unless water is turned off by the city and credit for less than one month will be allowed on the first one thousand gallons of water usage. 
A fee for reconnecting or turning a service back on or both shall be established by the city council by resolution. 
All new taps shall be metered at the applicable rates. 
(Ord. No. 765, § 2 (part).)  
Sec. 27-22. - Reserved.  
Sec. 27-23. - Same—Special and miscellaneous uses. 
The following users of water within the city shall be charged the following rates for water: 
Swimming pools. All residences with swimming pools shall be metered at residential rates. 
Active members of the city volunteer fire department. Active and retired members of the volunteer fire department as of November 1, 1986, who reside within the limits of the city, shall receive their water through a meter to be installed upon their residential premises; except, that they shall not be required to pay the minimum fee for residential use and shall only pay for such gallonage used at the applicable rates. Individuals who become members of the volunteer fire department of the Cortez Fire Protection District after November 1, 1986, shall not be eligible to receive the benefit described above, and shall be required to pay the applicable rates and charges, including the minimum fee, for water usage. 
Miscellaneous service. For miscellaneous and tank water sales not delivered to a service connection attached to the municipal waterworks distribution system, all water so delivered at rate of fifty cents per one thousand gallons or fraction thereof; provided, that delivery of any such sales shall be made only at such stations within the corporate limits of the city and under such rules and regulations as may be established by the city manager; provided, however, that the minimum charge for any such sale shall be fifty cents. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 6, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 687, § 1.)  
Sec. 27-24. - Water deposits. 
Persons establishing water service after August 24, 1993 will not be required to make a water deposit. Persons who have established water service prior to August 24, 1993 and have been required to make a water deposit will have their water deposit refunded to them. This refund will be made either by crediting the person's water utility account or directly by check with the method of refund to be determined by the city finance director. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 4, § 1; Ord. No. 683, § 1; Ord. No. 724, § 2; Ord. No. 781, § 2.)  
Sec. 27-25. - Water bills—When due. 
All water bills ordered by estimated rate or metered use shall be due and payable on or before the thirtieth day after billing date. 
(Ord. No. 765, § 2 (part).)  
Sec. 27-26. - Same—Assessment of penalty. 
In the event that any assessment for water rents shall be unpaid within five days after the scheduled due date of such assessment, a penalty of ten percent of the total amount of delinquent assessment shall automatically be added to the account and shall become an additional charge against the person to whom such assessments are made. In the event there is more than one delinquent amount due, no more than twenty percent of each delinquent amount may be assessed regardless of the period of time during which the amount due remains in default. 
(Ord. No. 895, § 2.)  
Sec. 27-27. - Same—Owner to be primarily liable; charges to constitute lien on property. 
(a)  The owner of any premises served by water after December 8, 1970 shall be primarily responsible for the payment of all water bills arising out of the use of such water at such premises, or by any lessee or tenant occupying and using the same. Such charges shall constitute a perpetual and continuing lien on such property until such water bill shall have been paid in full. No water will be furnished to any property or premises against which any charge remains unpaid. 
(b)  The city may refuse new service to any person who owes the city a delinquent water bill, and wishes water service at a new location, if the person applying does not pay the water bill owed at the old location. 
Nothing in this section will prevent the city from having a valid lien against the property owner in accordance with this section. 
(c)  When a lien is created by the nonpayment of a water bill, the city shall certify the unpaid water bill to the county treasurer for collection with property taxes. It may be foreclosed on in the manner of a mechanic's lien and shall be a perpetual lien until such time as such water bill has been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 13, § 1; Ord. No. 959; Ord. No. 1107.)  
Sec. 27-28. - Same—Disconnection for failure to pay; restoration of service. 
In the event that any water user in the city or any user outside the corporate limits of the city should fail to pay the water bill at such premises when the same is due, such user shall be subject to immediate cut-off by the city manager or one of his representatives. In the event water is cut off for nonpayment of a water bill or for violation of any of the rules and regulations of the water department or of the terms and provisions of this chapter, such water service shall not be restored until such delinquent water user or violator has applied to the director of finance to have such water service restored and has paid such delinquent water bill in full and an additional charge as established by the city council by resolution for restoring service to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 2.)  
Sec. 27-29. - Same—Failure to receive not to affect liability to pay. 
The obligation to pay water bills when the same are due shall not be affected by the failure of the owner or occupant of the premises to receive a bill for such service. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 13, § 3.)  
Article III. - Meters. 
 
Sec. 27-30. - Installation—Generally. 
The metering devices of zero inches through two inches shall be supplied and installed by the city and shall remain the property of the city. The city reserves the right to repair such meters in accordance with rules of the department. 
Metering devices for measuring service in excess of two inches shall be installed at the expense of the owner, but the city reserves the right to furnish or approve any such meter. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 10, § 1.)  
Sec. 27-31. - Same—Residential meters generally. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or taken as preventing any unmetered residential consumer in the city from applying to the city for the installation of a meter upon such residential premises; provided, however, that persons desiring a water meter for residential premises shall apply to the director of finance for such meter upon such form as shall be provided by the director of finance. Such residential user shall in addition pay a deposit prior to the installation of such meter and all rules and regulations affecting water users shall apply with equal force to such water meter use. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 2.)  
Sec. 27-32. - Same—Location generally. 
Water meters shall be installed by the department in a vertical position in a location protected from freezing and easily accessible for reading. The department reserves the right to designate the location of all meters and when installed outside a building, they shall be placed in a suitable meter box of materials furnished by or approved by the department. All meter boxes or vaults shall be installed by the city or in accordance with specifications approved by the department. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 10, § 4.)  
Sec. 27-33. - Same—Accessibility. 
All meters installed must be put in an accessible place for reading and servicing. The building inspector, water superintendent or city manager shall have authority to cause to be moved to an accessible place within thirty days any meters that are in an inaccessible location. Any of such persons shall also designate the location of any meter to be installed. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 10, § 2.)  
Sec. 27-34. - Same—Right of city to install upon violation of chapter. 
The city council reserves the right to have a meter attached to any service pipe of any unmetered user at any time upon violation of such unmetered user of the provisions of this chapter and to charge for water used at meter rates. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 10, § 3.)  
Sec. 27-35. - Same—For commercial and institutional service. 
All commercial and institutional properties in the city, desiring water service, shall have installed on their service line a water meter which shall record the gallons of water used or passing through such service line. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 10, § 7.)  
Sec. 27-36. - Election of metered service to preclude switch to flat rate. 
Once a user has elected to obtain water through a meter as provided by this article, such user may not thereafter obtain water service on a flat-rate basis by requesting that such meter be removed. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 10, § 9.)  
Sec. 27-37. - Repair and replacement generally. 
Water shall be supplied by the city and two inch and lesser meters shall be furnished by the department and shall remain the property of the city. The department shall keep the meter in good repair, unless damaged or injured by some cause other than natural wear and usage. If the meter is damaged by hot water, steam, rough use or any cause other than from natural wear or use, the property owner or customer shall be charged the amount of the repair. The amount shall be placed upon the water bill of the customer for the succeeding month and shall be due and payable within the time provided for the payment of bills. If the cost of repairs is not paid within the time provided for the payment of such bill, the water service may be disconnected as in other cases. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 10, § 5.)  
Sec. 27-38. - Accuracy testing generally; replacement of inaccurate meters. 
The chief water engineer or his representatives shall from time to time have the right to test any meter to determine its accuracy in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and to replace any meter which, through ordinary wear and tear or mechanical failure, proves to be inaccurate, all at the city's expense; provided, that any meter found to be inaccurate by reason of any of the causes set forth in this chapter shall be replaced at the expense of the user. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 10, § 8.)  
Sec. 27-39. - Tampering prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except the chief water engineer or someone authorized by him, to unlock, interfere with or molest any meter belonging to the city. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 10, § 3.)  
Article IV. - Service Pipes and Fixtures. 
 
Sec. 27-40. - Compliance with chapter generally. 
Any person who shall lay any water pipes or introduce into or about any building or on any grounds any water or drain pipes or do any plumbing work in any building or on any grounds for the purpose of connecting such pipe or plumbing work with the city water mains or of preparing them for connection or who shall make any addition to or alterations of any water pipes, fixtures or apparatus for the supplying of any premises with water contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 9, § 9.)  
Sec. 27-41. - Separate service line required for each premise. 
All premises in the city shall be served from a separate service line connected to the city main. It shall be unlawful for more than one structure, business or premises to be served by the same service line and in cases where such situation exists, it shall be the financial responsibility of persons owning property not directly connected to the city water main to make such connection upon notice to them by the chief water engineer. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 9, § 1.)  
Sec. 27-42. - Additional service required when parcel subdivided. 
In the event of the subdivision of any parcel or piece of ground and the placing or construction of other dwellings or commercial buildings on such land, the service installed for the use of the original building and its appurtenances shall be deemed to have been installed only to supply water to such buildings or appurtenances immediately adjacent to the service connection. New water service shall be installed as in the case of any other original installation. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 9, § 2.)  
Sec. 27-43. - Specification and installation of pipes, cocks, etc. 
The department shall specify the kind of pipe to be used between the main and meter, service or curb cocks, curb boxes and all fittings and equipment therefor. The curb boxes shall in all cases, when practical, be placed upon public property and shall control the supply of water through only one meter. All such pipes, cocks and boxes shall be installed in accordance with the rules of the department. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 9, § 3.)  
Sec. 27-44. - Maintenance generally. 
(a)  The owner of any premises to which water shall be conducted shall keep all fixtures and pipes from the property line to the point of use inside the premises in good repair. Unless the owner shall promptly repair any fixtures or pipes inside the premises when notified by the Superintendent, the water shall be turned off and shall not be turned on again until such repairs are made. 
(b)  Within the city limits the city shall have the responsibility to repair or replace the service line from the property line of the user to the city main, not exceeding, however, one hundred feet of such service line, and such repair or replacement shall be at the city's expense. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 9, § 4; Ord. No. 486, § 2.)  
Sec. 27-45. - Access to premises for inspection. 
The chief water engineer and his authorized representative shall have the right to enter all private premises and buildings in which water is used to examine the pipes and fixtures, to ascertain whether there is any unnecessary waste of water and to see that houses and other buildings are properly classified as to rates and as to use made of water. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 9, § 5.)  
Sec. 27-46. - Laying of service pipes. 
All service pipes shall be laid not less than three feet six inches below the established grade of any avenue, street, alley or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 9, § 6.)  
Sec. 27-47. - Repair or replacement of faucets; extension of irrigation pipes. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any owner or occupant from repairing or replacing any faucet, either in or outside any building, or from extending any irrigation pipes on any property. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 9, § 7.)  
Sec. 27-48. - Closure of abandoned service pipes. 
All service pipes that may become useless because of the laying of larger or new services or because water will no longer be used through them must be permanently closed off at the water main at the expense of the owner of the premises by a licensed plumber or authorized city employee and shall be reported to the waterworks superintendent and the office of the director of finance. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 2.)  
Article V. - Service Outside City Limits. 
 
Sec. 27-49. - Application and contract—Execution. 
Before any water may be furnished to any user outside the corporate limits of the city such user and owner of premises for which service is sought shall, before delivery of any water by the city, execute an application and contract upon such form as shall be provided by the city manager. 
Upon the execution of such application and contract by the user, the user shall be deemed to have consented to have all delinquent water rents or charges become a lien upon all real property owned or held by such user. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 11, § 1.)  
Sec. 27-50. - Same—Approval and authorization. 
Water may be furnished through city-owned or privately owned lines from the city water system to users outside the corporate limits as shall be approved and authorized upon written application to the city council upon the execution of a contract for each use as set forth by this article for domestic and related purposes and upon the conditions of use set forth by this article. The approval and authorization by the city of Cortez shall be executed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 11, § 2.)  
Sec. 27-51. - Same—Refusal. 
Any application for water extensions and sale of water from the city system to be outside the corporate limits of the city may be refused if, in the opinion of the city council, the area to be served does not have adequate provision for streets or alleys for public convenience, or if for any other reason in the opinion of the city council it should not be to the best interest of the city to furnish such user or area. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 11, § 3.)  
Sec. 27-52. - Denial of service to areas eligible for annexation. 
Areas deemed eligible for annexation to the city from time to time determined by the city council, shall be denied further water service and further extension until such area shall be annexed to the city. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 11, § 4.)  
Sec. 27-53. - Metered service required. 
Water will be served to out of city limits users only through a meter to be installed by the city and under no circumstances on a flat-rate basis. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 11, § 5.)  
Sec. 27-54. - Service to business selling products within city. 
No further extension of the water system or sale of water shall be made to any retail or service establishment outside the corporate limits of the city if such business shall deal in or sell any product or service upon which a tax is being exacted by the city unless such establishment first executes a pre-annexation agreement with the city. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 11, § 6; Ord. No. 683, § 2.)  
Sec. 27-55. - Rates. 
Rates and development fees for water service outside the corporate limits of the city shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 427, art. 11, § 7; Ord. No. 683, § 3.)  
Article VI. - Water Conservation Program. 
 
Sec. 27-56. - Adoption by reference. 
(a)  Intent. 
It is the intent of the city to promote water conservation in such way as to have efficient consumption of all water usage by residents, businesses, and local governments, and to provide beneficial uses of our water resources. 
The following items are the basis for providing a Water Conservation Program: 
(1)  Conservation of water and the promotion of efficient usage is important to the city; 
(2)  Implementation of a water conservation plan will help extend existing water supplies to serve more uses; 
(3)  Reduction of summer water usage with lower demands can result in deferring future capital expenditures; 
(4)  The state of Colorado has determined that each water supplier that treats two thousand acre feet or more of water must have a water conservation plan adopted in 1996. 
(b)  Adoption of a Water Conservation Plan. 
(1)  There is adopted by reference as though the same were fully printed herein, the city of Cortez Water Conservation Plan. Updated copies of the plan are on file in the public works department and copies are available to the public for the cost of reproduction. 
(2)  The city of Cortez Water Conservation Plan is designed to be a dynamic document intended to be modified and added on to on a regular basis. Modifications to the plan may be done by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 819, §§ 1, 11.)  
Sec. 27-99. - Penalty. 
Any violation of this chapter as codified shall upon conviction be punishable as set forth in Cortez City Code section 17-16A as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 972, § 1; amended by memo 3519.) 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 31, 9-25-12)  
CHAPTER 28. - Repealed by Ord. No. 995.  
CHAPTER 29. - ZONING. 
 Ord. No. 1125, Arts. II-VIII, adopted June 9, 2009, amended Ch. 29, §§ 29-1—29-12, in its entirety to read as herein set out §§ 29-1—29-6. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 29, pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
 
Sec. 29-1. - Adoption by reference. 
The City of Cortez 2009 Construction Design Standards and Specifications are hereby adopted by reference in accordance with the provisions of Article III, Section 11, of the Cortez City Charter and shall have the same force and effect as if the City of Cortez 2009 Construction Design Standards and Specifications were recited in their entirety. The text of the City of Cortez 2009 Construction Design Standards and Specifications in its entirety is available for public inspection and acquisition in the office of the city clerk and the office of the of public works department. 
(Ord. No. 1125, Art. II)  
Sec. 29-2. - Summary. 
In summary, the construction design standards and specifications provides in part for definitions, abbreviations, symbols, plans and specifications, plan revisions, "as-built plans," general construction criteria, permits, excavation, backfilling and restoration, underground warning tape, protection of existing improvements, inspection and testing, and design materials, and methods for streets, water systems, storm sewer systems, and storm water management, together with their administration and method of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1125, Art. III)  
Sec. 29-3. - Copies on file. 
Three true, official, complete, and full copies of the City of Cortez 2009 Construction Design Standards and Specifications are on file in the office of the city clerk of the City of Cortez, 210 East Main Street, Cortez, Colorado 81321, and may be examined, copied or reproduced by any interested person during regular business hours of the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 1125, Art. IV)  
Sec. 29-4. - Administration. 
All decisions implementing the construction design standards and specifications shall be made by the city engineer, the public works director or their designees as provided for in the City of Cortez 2009 Construction Design Standards and Specifications. 
(Ord. No. 1125, Art. V)  
Sec. 29-5. - Appeals. 
Final decisions of the Cortez city engineer and/or the director of public works and/or their designees in administering or applying the City of Cortez 2009 Construction Design Standards and Specifications may be appealed through the board of adjustments and appeals as set forth in the Cortez Land Use Code Sections 6.15, 6.16, and 6.17 as now in effect or as maybe amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1125, Art. VI) 


CITY OF CORTEZ LAND USE CODE 
2005 
____________ 
A Codification of the Land Use Code of 
the City of Cortez, Colorado 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 4, 3-10 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 

PREFACE 
    The Cortez, Colorado Land Use Code, originally published by Four Corners Planning, Inc., has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, 3-10, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
    During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff under the direction of the city. 
    In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 4, 3-10, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
    A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
    This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ord. No. 1239 , passed March 27, 2018. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
    This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 2 is numbered 2.01 and the ninth section of Chapter 4 is 4.09. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 9.05 and 9.06 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 9.05.1, 9.05.2 and 9.05.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 6 and 7, it will be designated as Chapter 6.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Tables of Contents. 
    There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
    At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, 3-10, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
    To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, 3-10, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, 3-10, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
    If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
    The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Insertion Guide. 
    Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. This guide will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
    When originally published, this code was numbered with consecutive page numbers. As it is amended, new material may require the insertion of new pages that are numbered with periods. (Example: 31, 32, 32.1.) Backs of pages that are blank are left unnumbered but the number is "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
    In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send one copy of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
    If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord./Res. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 1140  5-25-2010 Include 5 1141  4-13-2010 Include 5 1150  6-28-2011 Include 5 1155  2-28-2012 Include 6 1166  5-22-2012 Include 6 1167  9-11-2012 Include 6 1186  1-14-2014 Include 7 1191  9- 9-2014 Include 7 1192  8-26-2014 Include 7 1197 11-25-2014 Include 8 1201  8-25-2015 Include 8 1205  3-22-2016 Include 9 1212  8- 9-2016 Include 9 1220  3-28-2017 Include 10 1239  3-27-2018 Include 11  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

1.01 - Enactment and repeals. 
(a)  Upon the adoption of this code, the following are repealed in their entirety: The zoning ordinance of the city of Cortez, Colorado ("city") originally adopted on March 7, 1946 with Ordinance No. 184, Series 1946, together with all amendments thereto; and the City of Cortez Subdivision Regulations, passed and approved on May 24, 1983, with Ordinance No. 600, Series 1983, together with all amendments thereto; and any other ordinance, resolution or regulation inconsistent with this code. 
(b)  This land use code is adopted pursuant to the powers granted and limitations imposed by Article 23, Chapter 31 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, as amended. 
(c)  The following is adopted as the Land Use Code of the city of Cortez, Colorado. It may be referred to herein as " the code," or as the "land use code." 
1.02 - Purpose. 
    The regulations of this chapter have been established in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the city. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, to promote energy conservation and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of the districts, and their peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city consistent with a comprehensive plan. 
1.03 - Jurisdiction. 
    All development of land within the corporate limits of the city, and all land outside the corporate limits of the city that the city council finds capable of being petitioned to include within the corporate limits of the city, by an extension of said corporate limits, shall conform to the following rules and regulations unless specifically exempted herein or by law. 
1.04 - Minimum standards-Conflict with private restrictions. 
    The provisions of this chapter are the minimum standards necessary to accomplish its stated purposes. It is not the intent of this chapter to interfere with, abrogate or annul any private easement, covenant, deed restriction or other agreement between private parties. When the provisions of this chapter impose a greater restriction than imposed by such private agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control. When private agreements impose a greater restriction than imposed by this chapter, such private agreements shall control. 
1.05 - Consistency with comprehensive plan. 
    The regulations of this code are intended to implement and be consistent with the city's official comprehensive plan, as such may be amended from time to time. A copy of the plan shall be kept in the office of the city clerk with the original ordinance adopting it and it shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
1.06 - Municipal services outside of city boundaries. 
    (Reserved) 
1.07 - Proposed subdivisions within three miles of the city boundaries. 
    Any subdivision proposed on county land and located within three (3) miles of the city shall be referred to the city for consideration by the planning commission. Within 24 days of such referral, the planning commission should make its recommendations to the county. If these recommendations are not forthcoming within 35 days, the proposed subdivision shall be considered approved by the city. 
1.08 - Nonconforming provisions. (Note: These provisions only apply to legal, nonconforming uses and structures, and do not apply to illegal, noncomplying uses and structures.) 
(a)  Nonconforming Uses and Structures. 
(1)  Nonconforming Status. The use of land, use of a structure, or a structure itself shall be deemed to have nonconforming status when each of the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.  The use or structure does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the district in which such use or structure is located and was in existence and lawfully constructed, located and operating prior to, and at the time of, the event that made such use or structure nonconforming. 
b.  The event that made such use or structure nonconforming was one of the following: annexation into the city; adoption of this code or a previous zoning ordinance, or, amendment of this code or a previous zoning ordinance. 
c.  The nonconforming use or the use occupying the nonconforming structure has been operating since the time that the use or structure first became nonconforming without abandonment, as abandonment is defined in subsection (a)(4) of this section. 
(2)  Change in Use. A nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use and once such a change is made, the use shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
(3)  Maintenance and Repairs. The following changes or alterations may be made to a nonconforming building provided that such changes or alterations do not exceed fifty (50) percent of its assessed valuation, excluding the value of the land, for tax purposes at such date unless such building or structure is changed to a conforming use. 
a.  Repair to a building that has been officially declared unsafe to restore it to a safe condition provided no structural alterations shall be made except as required by law or ordinance, or authorized by special exception pursuant to Section 6.18 of this code. 
b.  Maintenance repairs that are needed to maintain the good condition of a building. 
c.  Any structural alterations that would not increase the degree of nonconformance or which would change the use to a conforming use. 
(4)  Abandonment. Whenever a nonconforming use or a conforming use in a nonconforming structure is abandoned, all nonconforming rights shall cease and the use of the premises shall henceforth conform to this code. Abandonment shall involve the actual act of discontinuance, regardless of the intent of the user or owner to discontinue a nonconforming operation. Any nonconforming use that is discontinued for, or that remains vacant for a period of six (6) months, shall be considered to have been abandoned. Any nonconforming use that is moved from the premises shall be considered to have been abandoned. 
(5)  Destruction. If a nonconforming structure or a structure occupied by a nonconforming use is destroyed by fire, the elements or other cause, it may be rebuilt to conform to the provisions of this code except as follows. 
a.  In the case of partial destruction of a structure occupied by a nonconforming use not exceeding fifty (50) percent of its replacement value, reconstruction may be permitted subject to the approval of a special exception pursuant to Section 6.18 of this code and the following standards: 
1.  The size and function of the nonconforming use shall not be expanded; and 
2.  Work on the restoration of the use must begin within twelve (12) months of the time of the calamity. 
b.  A residential structure that is destroyed (50 percent or more of its replacement value) and is nonconforming only because it does not meet the minimum required dwelling unit floor area, may be reconstructed subject to the following standards: 
1.  The replacement residential structure may be the same size or it may be larger than the destroyed structure provided that the new structure conforms with all other requirements of the zone district; and 
2.  The replacement residential structure conforms to all adopted building codes, including but not limited to: currently adopted city construction codes, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Mechanical Code and National Electrical Code; 
3.  HUD manufactured housing must comply with the requirements of Section 3.08(e) of this code. 
(6)  Expansion or Construction of Nonconforming Structures. Except for certain residential structures within the R-1 district, as described in subsection (a)(7) of this section, a nonconforming structure may not expand. A nonconforming structure may be allowed to reconstruct a portion of the building subject to the conditions in Section 6.18 of this code. A nonconforming single-family residence in certain areas of the R-1 district may be constructed for the purpose of in-fill development subject to the conditions contained in Section 6.18 of this code. 
(7)  Expansion of Nonconforming Single-Family Residences in the R-1 District. Single-family dwellings in the R-1 district, which are nonconforming as to the required minimum building square footage at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, shall be allowed to construct additions, expansions, and remodels without having to come into full compliance with the minimum square footage requirement. In any such addition, expansion or remodel shall in all other ways fully comply with the requirements of the R-1 district. 
(b)  Nonconforming Lots. 
(1)  General. A single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be developed on a lot that has less area than the minimum required by the underlying zone district and was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of the city's original Zoning Ordinance No. 184 (adopted March 7, 1946), if: 
a.  The "lot of record" is in separate ownership or contiguous to lots in the same ownership; and 
b.  The proposed single-family dwelling can be located on the lot so that the yard, height, and other dimensional requirements of the underlying zone district can be met, or a variance is obtained from said dimensional requirements pursuant to Section 6.17 of this code. 
(2)  Undivided Lot. If two or more lots or combinations of contiguous lots in a single ownership (including husband and wife as, in all cases, a single owner) are of record at the effective date of the adoption or amendment of this code, regardless of time of acquisition, on all or parts of the lots which do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lots shall be considered an undivided parcel, and no portion shall be used or occupied which does not meet the width and area requirements of this code. 
(3)  Lot Reduction. 
A.  No lot or interest therein shall be transferred, conveyed, sold or subdivided so as to create a new nonconforming lot, to avoid, circumvent or subvert any provision of this code, or to leave remaining any lot in violation of the dimensional requirements of this code. 
B.  No lot or portion of a lot required as a building site under this code shall be used as a portion of a lot required as a site for another structure. 
C.  No building permit shall be issued for any lot or parcel of land which has been conveyed, sold, or subdivided in violation of this subsection. Any transferee who acquires a lot in violation of this subsection without knowledge of such violation, and any subsequent transferee, shall have the right pursuant to Colorado law to rescind and/or receive damages from any transferor who violates the provisions of this paragraph. 
(C)  Nonconforming Signs. Any sign that is permitted to remain in place as a nonconforming use may be continued in use until the sign, or a substantial part of it, is blown down or otherwise destroyed or dismantled for any purpose other than maintenance operations or for changing the letters, symbols, or other matter on the sign. 
(1)  Abandonment. Abandonment of a nonconforming sign shall immediately terminate the right to maintain such a sign. 
(2)  Violation of this Section. Any violation of this section shall immediately terminate the right to maintain such a sign. 
(3)  Destruction, Damage or Obsolescence. A sign, or a substantial part of it, shall be considered to have been destroyed or dismantled if the cost of repairing the sign is more than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location. 
(4)  Time Limit. It is reasonable that a time limit be placed upon the continuance of nonconforming signs and that the district in which the nonconforming sign exists will eventually benefit from a substantial uniformity of permanent signs. Therefore, the right to maintain a sign which was legally nonconforming on April 8, 1980 and has continually remained legally nonconforming through January 1, 1989 shall automatically terminate on January 1, 1999. 
(Ord. 1024 (part), 2004) 
1.09 - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this code or who shall fail to comply with any provisions hereof within the corporate limits of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine and imprisonment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this code shall be fined not more than three hundred dollars ($300) upon conviction, or imprisoned for a period of up to ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any violation or noncompliance continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  Any person, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within a subdivision, who transfers or sells, agrees to sell, or negotiates to sell any land by reference to or exhibition of or by use of a plat of a subdivision before such plat has been approved by the city council and recorded or filed in the office of the Montezuma county clerk shall pay a penalty to the city of five hundred dollars ($500) for each lot or parcel so transferred, or sold, or agreed or negotiated to be sold. Each day any violation or noncompliance continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(c)  The penalties provided herein shall be cumulative of other remedies provided by state law as provided in Colorado Revised Statutes 31-23-216.5 or 31-23-308 and the power of injunction may be exercised in enforcing this code whether or not there has been a criminal complaint filed. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by a violation or apparent violation of the provisions of this ordinance may file a written complaint with the zoning administrator, who shall investigate such complaint and take the appropriate action to have the violation penalized or removed, if such violation is found to exist. 
(e)  When it is determined that there has been a violation of any provision of the land use code, written legal notice of violation shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  Determine and include a list of violations, refer to the section or sections of the code violated; 
(2)  Determine and specify a time for compliance with relevant land use code provisions thirty (30) days from the service of the notice; and 
(3)  Serve the notice on the owner, occupant, operator, lessee, agent or other responsible party in person, provided that such notice and requirement shall be deemed to be properly served on such responsible party if a copy thereof is delivered to, posted on, or sent by registered or certified mail to his/her last known mailing address, residence or place of business. 
(f)  Right of Entry. When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or when the zoning administrator or a duly appointed representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition that is contrary to or in violation of this code that makes a use or building nonconforming or unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the zoning administrator or a duly appointed representative, may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises is unoccupied, the zoning official or a duly appointed representative shall first make a reasonable effort to locate and contact the property owner(s) or other person(s) having charge or control of the building premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the zoning official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
1.10 - Fees. 
(a)  Fees for the processing of land use applications for proposed developments shall be set by ordinance of the city council commensurate with the level of service. Such fees may include all costs occasioned to the city, including publication of notices, public hearing and review costs, planning, engineering, legal and other professional review costs. 
(b)  No person or entity owing money to the city, in any amount or for any purpose, including delinquent taxes certified by the county treasurer or any land use application fees, may be granted any development permit or any other development approval and the city and any of its boards, commissions, departments, officers or agents will take no action on a zoning development permit or other land use application until all moneys owed the city by an applicant are paid. This provision shall not prohibit the city or any of its designees from conducting a pre-application conference or determining application completeness. 
1.11 - Vested property rights. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Pursuant to the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., a property right shall be deemed vested with respect to any property, following notice and public hearing, when required, upon the approval or conditional approval, of a final plat by the city council. 
(2)  A final plat shall be defined as the plat itself, as well as all necessary submittals and attendant improvement agreements. 
(3)  A vested property right shall attach to and run with the applicable property and shall confer upon the landowner the right to undertake and complete the development and use of said property under the terms and conditions of the approval. 
(4)  The city council may approve a subdivision plat or grant other final approval upon such terms and conditions as may reasonably be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Such final approval shall result in a vested property right, although failure to abide by such terms and conditions will result in a forfeiture of vested property rights. 
(b)  Vested Property Right Term. A property right that has been vested as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall remain vested for a period of three (3) years. However, the city council may enter into development agreements with land owners specifying that property rights shall be vested for a period exceeding three (3) years when warranted in light of all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the size and phasing of development, economic cycles and market conditions. Such development agreements shall be adopted as legislative acts subject to referendum. 
(1)  Issuance of a building permit or a development permit shall guarantee vested rights to use the property in compliance with the terms and conditions of final plat, although failure to comply with such terms and conditions shall result in forfeiture of the vested property rights. 
(2)  Should no building permit or development permit be issued within said three (3) years, the plan shall be terminated and the vested property right shall automatically expire. 
(c)  Extension of Vested Property Right Term. The affected landowner may request that the city council grant an extension of the final plat for up to three (3) years, provided that: 
(1)  A written request for an extension is submitted by the affected landowner no less than sixty (60) days prior to the date of expiration of the vested property right; 
(2)  Such extension request shall be considered by the board in a public hearing, notice of which shall be advertised not less than 30 days prior to such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the county; 
(3)  There is no conflict with the land use code or any conflict shall be corrected by an amendment to the final plat, which shall be presented with the request for extension; 
(4)  The applicant has demonstrated that the final plat continues to be compatible with adjacent properties and the surrounding area, or that compatibility may be established by an amendment to the final plat, which shall be presented with the request for extension; 
(5)  The applicant has demonstrated that the final plat is consistent with the comprehensive development plan; and 
(6)  Such extension, if granted, shall be valid only for the period approved by the city council. 
(d)  Further Reviews. Following approval or conditional approval of a subdivision plat or other final approval, nothing in this section shall exempt such a plan or plat from subsequent reviews and approvals, including, but not limited to, construction drawings, drainage plans, building permit and certificate of occupancy to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the original approval, provided that such reviews and approvals are not inconsistent with said original approval. 
(e)  New Regulations. The establishment of a vested property right shall not preclude the application of land use regulations which are general in nature and are applicable to all property subject to land use regulation by the city, including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, mechanical codes, and other public health, safety and welfare codes. 
(f)  Natural or Manmade Hazards. A vested property right shall automatically terminate upon the discovery on or in the immediate vicinity of the subject property of natural or man-made hazards which could not reasonably have been discovered at the time of site-specific development plan approval, and which, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(g)  Vested Property Rights Inconsistent with State or Federal Law. A vested property right shall automatically expire upon the discovery that a subject property is burdened by a state or federal law inconsistent with that right. 
(h)  Public Improvements. The vested property rights provided herein shall in no way diminish or alter the requirement for public improvements, or other requirements, as provided in city regulations. 
(i)  Approval-Effective Date-Amendments. A site specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the date of the council approval action relating thereto, as set forth in this section and Section 2.02 of this code, Definitions, Site Specific Development Plan. In the event amendments to a site specific development are proposed and approved, the effective date of such amendments, for purposes of duration of a vested property right, shall be the date of the approval of the original site specific development plan, unless the council specifically finds to the contrary and incorporates such findings in its approval of the amendment. 
(j)  Vested Rights Language. Each map, plat, or site plan or other document constituting a site specific development plan shall contain the following language: "Approval of this plan may create a vested property right pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended." Failure to contain this statement shall invalidate the creation of the vested property right. In addition, a notice describing generally the type and intensity of use approved and the specific parcel or parcels of property affected and stating that a vested property right has been created shall be published once, not more than fourteen (14) days after approval of the site specific development plan, in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. 
(k)  Other City Rules. Approval of a final plat shall not constitute an exemption from or waiver of any other provisions of the city's regulations pertaining to the development and use of property. 
(l)  Application for Vested Rights Consideration. No site-specific development plan shall be approved until after a public hearing, preceded by written notice of such hearing. Such notice may, at the city's option, be combined with the notification requirements of any other required notice. 
(1)  Notification Requirements for Vested Rights. 
a.  The city clerk shall publish notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall include the nature of the matters to be considered; the time, date, and place of the hearing; and the name, address, and phone number of the applicant. The city clerk shall also cause the notice of hearing to be posted in at least one public place within the city. 
b.  The city clerk shall mail the written notice of public hearing to all owners of real property lying within three hundred (300) feet of the property on which the change is requested. The notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date set for hearing by depositing in the mail such notice properly addressed and postage paid to each such owner as the ownership appears on the last approved county tax roll. 
(m)  Other Provisions Unaffected. Approval of a site-specific development plan shall not constitute an exemption from or waiver of any other provisions of this code pertaining to the development and use of property. 
(n)  Limitations. Nothing in this code is intended to create any vested property right, but only to implement the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended. In the event of the repeal of said article or a judicial determination that said article is invalid or unconstitutional, this code shall be deemed to be repealed, and the provisions hereof no longer effective. 
1.12 - Severability. 
    It is declared to be the intention of city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Chapter 2 - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION, DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS 
Sections: 

2.01 - Rules of construction. 
(a)  Meaning and Intent. All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this chapter shall be construed in order to accomplish the purposes stated in Section 1.02 of this code. 
(b)  Text. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this zoning code and any illustration or figure, the text shall control. 
(c)  Computation of Time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by including the first and including the last day. In the computation of time for public hearing notice, both the first day (day of the advertisement) and the last day (day of the hearing) shall be included. Notwithstanding the above, if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday declared by the city, that day shall be excluded. The following time-related words shall have the meanings ascribed below. 
(1)  "Day" means a calendar day unless working day is specified. 
(2)  "Week" means seven (7) calendar days. 
(3)  "Month" means a calendar month. 
(4)  "Year" means a calendar year, unless a fiscal year is indicated. 
(d)  Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply; and 
(2)  "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(e)  Delegation of Authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize professional-level subordinates to perform the required act or duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
(f)  Nontechnical and Technical Words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
(g)  Public Officials, Bodies and Agencies. All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which reference is made are those of the city, unless otherwise indicated. 
(h)  Mandatory and Discretionary Terms. The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. 
(i)  Tense, Number and Gender. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past or present, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. The singular number shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular, as the context and application of this code may reasonably suggest. Words of one gender shall apply to persons, natural or fictitious, regardless of gender as the context and application of this code may reasonably suggest. 
( Ord. No. 1205 , 3-22-2016) 
2.02 - Definitions. 
    Words defined in this section shall be given the meanings set forth here. All other words shall be given their common, ordinary meanings, as the context may reasonably suggest. In case of a dispute over the meaning of a term not defined here or over the application of a definition set forth here, the zoning administrator shall give a written interpretation in accordance with Section 2.03 of this code. 
    "Accessory use or structure" means a use or structure naturally and normally incidental to, subordinate to, and devoted primarily to the principal use or structure of the premises. 
    "Adult entertainment establishment" means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult novelty store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, clothing optional club, sexual encounter establishment, or other similar business and includes any of the following: 
(a)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(b)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(c)  The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(d)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or other similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. Specific definitions for the above mentioned businesses are found in Section 4A-1 of the Cortez City Code. The definition does include those stores that rent or sell adult videos or adult publications, which are in excess of fifteen percent (15%) of the total stock available to the public for consumption. 
    "Antenna" means any structure or devise used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting electromagnetic waves including but not limited to directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas. 
    "Apartment" means a dwelling unit or suite of rooms, which is an accessory use to a commercial or nonresidential structure in a non-residential zoning district. 
    "Applicant" means a person who submits an application for development to a local government. 
    "Application for development" means an application for a preliminary or final plat for a subdivision, a planned unit development, or any other similar land use designation that is used by a local government. "Application for development" includes applications for zoning, rezoning, general development plans, and special use permits where such applications are in anticipation of new surface development, but does not include building permit applications. 
    "Auto repair garage" means a building or place arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for the purpose of providing general repair and servicing of motor vehicles. Such repair or servicing may include reconditioning of engines, air conditioning systems and transmissions; wrecker service; collision services, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; painting, undercoating and dust proofing; replacement or repair of brakes, shock absorbers, tires, batteries, mufflers, or upholstery; and other similar services. 
    "Block" means an area enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings; or if such word is used as a term of measurement, it shall mean the distance along a side of a street between the nearest two (2) streets that intersect such street. 
    "Building height" means the vertical distance as measured from the average finished grade of the building line to the highest peak of the roof. 
    "Building inspector" means the official designated by the building official to enforce the provisions of the city building codes. 
    "Building line" means a line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at a specified distance therefrom establishing the minimum distance from the street line that a building may be erected. 
    "Building official" means the building inspector charged with the responsibility of issuing permits and enforcing on behalf of the city the currently adopted city construction codes, or other building code adopted by the city, and land use code, including any amendments, or that person's designee. 
    "Building permit" means a permit issued by the building official, after approval of a zoning development permit, that allows a developer to erect, construct, reconstruct, grade, excavate for a foundation, alter or change the use of a building or other structure or improvements of land. 
    "Building setback" means an imaginary line extending across the full width or side of a lot, parallel with the street right-of-way line or the property line and outside of which no building shall be constructed. 
    "Building" means any structure built for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind. When subdivided in a manner sufficient to prevent the spread of fire, each portion so subdivided may be deemed a separate building. "Building" includes yurts, removable sheds, and similar uses, but does not include signs or fences. 
    "Caretaker or guard residence" means dwelling facilities located on a premise occupied by a permitted main use for the housing of persons and their families who are employed on the premises as guards, caretakers or in similar custodial capacity. 
    "Certificate of occupancy" means an official certificate issued by the city through the enforcing official that indicates conformance with or approved conditional waiver from the zoning regulations and authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued. 
    "Character (of a developed area)" means the density, height, coverage, setback, massing, fenestration, materials and scale of materials. 
    "Child care facility" means a family care facility licensed by the State Department of Human Services and in compliance with state rules and regulations. 
(a)  "Small home based facility" means one that serves six or less children in accordance with state rules and is not required to limit hours of operation. 
(b)  "Large home based facility" means a child care facility that serves twelve (12) or less children in accordance with state rules and shall be permitted to operate between the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. daily. 
(c)  "Commercial facility" means a facility that is not attached to a residence and shall be permitted to operate between the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. daily. 
    "Church or place of worship" means a site used primarily or exclusively for religious worship and related religious services operated by a bona fide religious group for religious activities. 
    "City" means the city of Cortez, Colorado. 
    "City council" means the governing and legislative body of the city. 
    "City manager" means the chief administrative officer of the city. 
    "City planner" means an administrative officer designated by the city manager and charged with the responsibilities of planning, leading, analyzing, preparing, negotiating, and commenting on the process of development applications and presenting staff review of applications to decision making boards. The city planner is responsible for the daily administration of the land use code and comprehensive plan and leads and participates in complex current to long range planning assignments. The city planner or his or her duly-authorized representative shall be the zoning administrator. 
    Clinic, Medical. "Medical clinic" means a medical services facility where patients are examined and may include in-house clinical laboratory services and x-ray facilities for surgery or obstetrical care or other definitive medical treatment of similar extent. This shall include physician and dental offices, physical or massage therapy but not be construed to mean central service facilities such as pharmacies, medical laboratories, or other related uses. 
    "Cold frame" means an unheated outdoor structure consisting of a wooden or concrete frame and a top of glass or clear plastic, used for protecting seedlings and plants from the cold. 
    "Commercial development" means and includes, but is not limited to: expansion or construction of office, retail, wholesale, warehouse, manufacture, commercial recreation, restaurant/bar and/or service commercial operations by the addition of square footage. 
    "Commercial wireless telecommunication services" means licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication services ("PCS"), specialized mobilized radio ("SMR"), enhanced specialized mobilized radio ("ESMR"), paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public. 
    "Commissioners" means the board of county commissioners of Montezuma County, Colorado. 
    "Common element" means in a condominium or cooperative, all portions of the condominium other than the units. 
    "Common interest community" means real estate described in a declaration with respect to which a person by virtue of such person's ownership of a unit, is obligated to pay for real estate taxes, insurance premiums, maintenance, or improvements of other real estate described in a declaration. "Ownership" does not include a leasehold interest of less than forty years, including renewal options, as measured from the commencement date of the initial term. 
    "Common open space" means a parcel of usable land, area of water, or a combination of land and water within the site designated for a planned unit development designated and intended primarily for the use or enjoyment of residents, occupants and owners of the planned unit development. "Common open space" may include, but is not limited to, areas devoted to recreation, courts, gardens, parks and walkways. The term shall not include space devoted to streets, parking and loading areas. 
    "Community center" means a building and grounds owned and operated by a governmental body or homeowners' association, for the social, recreational health or welfare of the community served. 
    "Community garden" means privately or publicly owned land used for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers, or herbs by multiple users. Community gardens may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group and may include common areas maintained or used by group members. 
    "Compatible" means consistent with, harmonious with, similar to and/or enhancing the mixture of uses, siting and/or complimentary architectural styles, either of an individual structure or the character of the surrounding structures. 
    Complete Application. An application shall not be considered complete unless and until: (1) all of the required information and submittal materials in the amounts and dimensions required by this code have been submitted to and received by the city department or official specified in this code; and (2) the city planner or a duly-appointed representative, has certified the application as "complete." The decision of the city planner with respect to completeness and applicability of submittal requirements shall be final. This requirement pertains to all applications for preliminary and/or final plats of a subdivision, a planned unit development, zoning, rezoning, general development plans, and special use permits where such applications are in anticipation of new surface development, or any other similar land use designation that is used by a local government, but does not include building permit applications. 
    "Comprehensive plan" means the comprehensive plan of the city and adjoining areas adopted by the planning commission and city council, including all of its revisions. The plan indicates the general locations recommended for various land uses, transportation routes, public and private buildings, streets, parks and other public and private developments and improvements. 
    "Condominium" means a common interest community in which portions of the real estate are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of the separate ownership portions. 
(a)  Condominium, Attached. "Attached condominium" means a residential dwelling unit in a structure containing two or more such units, the living spaces of which are individually owned; the balance of the property (both land and building) is owned either in common by the owners of the individual units or by an association consisting of such owners. 
(b)  Condominium, Detached. "Detached condominium" means one of at least two individually owned, unconnected residential dwelling units located on property owned either in common by the owners of such units or by an association consisting of such owners. 
    "Cooperative" means a common interest community in which the real property is owned by an association, each member of which is entitled by virtue of such member's ownership interest in the association an exclusive possession of a unit. 
    "Constructive notice" means notice that shall be deemed given as a result of actual notice or any action by the city recorded in the public record maintained by the county clerk. 
    "Council" means the city council of the city. 
    "Custom personal service" means barber shop, beauty shop, tailor, dressmaker, shoe shop or similar shop offering custom service. 
    "Cut area" means any area where the existing grade is lowered. 
    "Density" means the maximum number of dwelling units per gross acre of land permitted in a zone district, as set forth in Section 3.06 of this code. 
    "Developer" means any public or private person, partnership, association or agency that prepares raw land for the construction of buildings or causes to be built physical building space for use primarily by others, during which preparation of the land or the creation of the building space is in itself a business and is not incidental to another business or activity. 
    Development Permit. See "Zoning development permit." 
    "Development" means the physical extension and/or construction of urban land uses. Development activities include: subdivision of land; change in the intensity of use of land; construction, reconstruction, demolition or partial demolition or alteration of buildings, roads, utilities, and other facilities; commencement of drilling (except for a well or to obtain soil samples), mining, or excavation; installation of septic systems; grading; deposit of refuse, debris, or fill materials; and clearing of natural vegetation cover. 
    "Director of parks and recreation" means the city staff member in the city parks and recreation department designated to enforce this code. 
    "District" means a section of the city for which the regulations governing the height, area or use of the land and buildings are uniform. 
    "Dwelling" means a structure or portion of a structure, other than a manufactured home, that is designed, occupied or intended to be occupied as living quarters and includes facilities for cooking, sleeping and sanitation; but not including hotels, motels, clubs, boarding houses, or any institution such as an asylum, hospital, or jail where human beings are housed by reason of illness or under legal restraints. 
(a)  "Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)" means a dwelling incorporated within the living area or attached to the primary single-family residence on a parcel of land zoned for residential use, unless otherwise allowed in accordance with Section 6.10 of this code, Conditional use permits. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation and must be attached to the principal use structure. 
(b)  "Apartment. (See definition for "Apartment.") 
(c)  "Duplex dwelling" means two (2) residential dwelling units, other than manufactured homes, within a single building and under a single roof. 
(d)  "Manufactured home dwelling" means a HUD-approved structure designed to be transported after fabrication and equal to or exceeding fourteen (14) feet in width and seven hundred (700) square feet in area, excluding towing gear and bumpers. Such a structure is suitable for human habitation on a year-round basis when equipped with required plumbing, heating and electrical facilities. The space and width requirements of this definition shall not apply to any manufactured home located within a previously existing manufactured home park. 
(e)  "Multi-family dwelling" means three (3) or more residential dwelling units, other than manufactured homes, within a single building and under a single roof, including apartments, townhouses and attached condominiums. 
(f)  "Single-family dwelling" means a dwelling unit located on a separate lot or tract that has no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract. 
    "Encroachment" means the authorized or unauthorized placement of a building or part of a building upon the land or easement of another or a public right-of-way. 
    "Engineer" means a person duly authorized under applicable provisions of Colorado Revised Statutes to practice the profession of engineering. 
    "Essential services" means the development or maintenance of public utilities or city-approved underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, telephone, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar equipment, and sewage pump stations. 
    "Excavation" means the formation of a cavity formed by cutting, digging or scooping earth. 
    "Face block" means the portion of a block facing the same street. 
    "Family" means two or more persons related by blood or marriage, or between whom there is a legally recognized relationship, or not more than four (4) unrelated persons occupying the same dwelling unit. 
    "Fence" means any structure intended for the use of confinement, prevention of intrusion, boundary identification, or screening of an activity. 
    "Finished grade" means the elevation of the ground surface, following development, next to the completed walls of a structure, prior to placement of any fill material. 
    Fitness Clubs or Recreation Centers, Private. "Private fitness clubs or recreation centers" means a privately-owned use, gym or building not listed elsewhere in this chapter, offering aerobic or weight-training or other physical activity for health and fitness. Recreation facilities that will be owned by a neighborhood association to provide recreation opportunities for a specific development shall be allowed as a part of the approval process for a subdivision, PUD, or similar large scale development. 
    "Floor area" means the total square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level, but excluding cellars, carports or garages. 
    "Greenhouse" means a temporary or permanent structure typically made of, but not limited to, glass, plastic, or fiberglass in which plants are cultivated. 
    "Gross acreage" means the total acreage of a project or subdivision including all land for building sites, interior public right-of-way and any new public or private open space. A gross acre is forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet in area. Public right-of-way on the perimeter of a project or subdivision is not part of the gross acre. 
    "Height" means the vertical distance as measured from the average finished grade of the building line to the highest peak of the roof. 
    "Home garden" means property used for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers, or herbs by the residents of the property, guests of the property owners, or a gardening business hired by the property owner. 
    "Home occupation" means a business, occupation, profession, trade, activity or use that is operated for compensation on a lot or site of a primary dwelling unit use. 
    "Hoophouse" means a temporary or permanent structure typically made of, but not limited to, piping or other material covered with translucent plastic, constructed in a "half-round" or "hoop" shape, for the purpose of growing plants. 
    "Hydric" means a habitat that has or requires abundant moisture; also an organism or group of organisms occupying such a habitat. 
    "Illegal nonconforming use" means a use or structure that did not exist prior to the date of adoption of this code on March 12, 1996, and was created without the required approval of the city or in violation of the applicable codes in effect at the time the use or structure was established. 
    "Industrial development" means nonretail, nonresidential uses including but not limited to: manufacturing, heavy equipment repair, fabrication, chemical and petroleum distillation and processing, warehousing, and assembly operations. 
    "Improvement" means the addition of street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, storm drainage or utilities facilities or street trees or any other required items on a vacant parcel of land. 
    "Kennel" means any premise on which five (5) or more dogs over ten (10) weeks of age are kept or housed for any reason and for any length of time. 
    "Landscaping" means trees, shrubs, ground cover, vines, walkways, ponds, fountains, sculpture, and other organic and inorganic materials used for creating an attractive appearance. Smooth concrete or asphalt surfaces are not considered landscaping. 
    "Legal nonconforming use" means a use or structure that was in existence prior to the date of adoption of the Cortez land use code on March 12, 1996, or when established/ constructed subsequent to that date, conformed to the applicable regulations in effect at that time and was rendered nonconforming by an amendment of the regulations, or as rendered nonconforming as a result of the annexation to the city. 
    "Limited common element" means a portion of the common elements allocated by the declaration for the exclusive use of one or more units but fewer than all of the units. 
    "Lot" means an undivided tract or parcel of land under one ownership having frontage on a public street and either occupied or to be occupied by a building or building group together with accessory buildings, which parcel of land is designated as a separate and distinct tract. Contiguous lots under one ownership used, or intended to be used, as a single unit of land shall be considered a single lot for purposes of this code. 
    "Lot area" means the net area of the lot, excluding portions of streets and alleys. 
    "Lot coverage" means the percentage of a lot or tract covered by the roof of buildings, including roof eaves. 
    "Lot lines" means the lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
(a)  Lot Line, Front. "Front lot line" means any lot line adjacent to a street. 
(b)  Lot Line, Rear. "Rear lot line" means a lot line opposite a front lot line and not adjacent to a street. 
(c)  Lot Line, Side. "Side lot line" means any lot line not defined as a front or rear lot line. 
    "Lot of record" means a lot that is part of a subdivision or the original city site, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk of Montezuma County or a parcel of land, the deed for which is recorded in the office of the county clerk of Montezuma County prior to the adoption of the city's original Zoning Ordinance No. 184 (adopted March 7, 1946). 
    Map, Condominium. "Condominium map" means a printed instrument depicting all or a portion of a common interest community in three dimensions. A map or a plat may be combined in one instrument. 
    "Manufactured home park" means a tract of land designed or being used to accommodate two or more manufactured homes, manufactured home sites, or other permitted dwelling units as defined in Section 3.05(b)(3), for dwelling or sleeping purposes, with lots available on a rental or lease basis. Manufactured home parks created after the date of enactment of the ordinance codified in this definition shall be laid out to accommodate manufactured homes of at least seven hundred (700) square feet and a minimum fourteen (14) feet in width. However, no manufactured home currently located within a previously existing manufactured home park shall be required to meet this square-foot and width requirement. Recreational vehicle units and/or park trailers shall be permissible so long as they meet the definitions found in Section 2.02 of this code. RV units shall be at least twenty (20) feet in length, and the total number of RV units shall not exceed ten (10) percent of all allowable units within an approved manufactured home park. 
    "Manufactured home park accessory building" means a building providing laundry facilities operated by the manufactured home park management, recreational facilities, storage and all other activities, facilities and uses authorized or approved by the city council under Section 6.10 of this code. 
    "Manufactured home subdivision" means a tract of land subdivided into lots, which are designed as sites for manufactured or relocatable homes and which are served by separate utilities and dedicated streets on a legally filed plat and are capable of being conveyed as separate lots. 
    Manufacturing, General. "General manufacturing" means an establishment engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominately from extracted or raw materials, excluding uses classified as "manufacturing, hazardous or objectionable." 
    Manufacturing, Hazardous or Objectionable. "Hazardous or objectionable manufacturing" means a use engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes utilizing, flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. Typical uses include chemical manufacturing and warehousing, dry ice manufacturing, fat rendering plants, fertilizer manufacturing, fireworks and explosives manufacturing and warehousing, petroleum refineries, pulp processing and paper products manufacturing, radioactive materials manufacture or use, steel works, slaughterhouses and tanneries. 
    Manufacturing, Light. "Light manufacturing" means an establishment or use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding activities classified in another land use category. Typical uses include apparel and garment factories, appliance and computer products assembly, bakeries engaged in large-scale production and wholesale distribution, boat building and repair, electrical and electronic equipment, furniture and fixtures, jewelry manufacturing, leather products, meat cutting and wholesale storage, monument and grave marker manufacturing, motion picture production lots, musical instrument manufacturing, pharmaceutical and toiletries manufacturing, printing and publishing, rubber and plastics products, sports equipment manufacturing, and toy manufacturing. 
    Manufacturing, Wood Products. "Wood products manufacturing" means an establishment engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominately from raw wood materials. These uses may be further subdivided into "light manufacturing" which includes small-scale production of cabinets, lath, grade stakes, furniture, wood art, moulding; and "heavy manufacturing" which includes such uses as prefabricated wall components, lumber mills, and log home manufacturing. 
    "Master plan" means the city comprehensive development plan. 
    "Mayor" means the chairperson of the city council. 
    "Medical marijuana centers" has the same meaning as set forth in C.R.S. § 12-43.3-104(8) "Medical marijuana center" now in effect and as may be amended from time to time. 
    "Medical marijuana centers" shall only be permitted in the commercial highway (C) and the central business district (CBD) zones. "Medical marijuana centers" shall not be allowed within any residentially zoned areas and shall not be allowed as a home occupation. 
    Micro-brewery means a facility for the production and packaging of beers, meads, hard ciders, and/or similar beverages on-site for distribution, retail or wholesale that produces less than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels per year and includes on-site consumption. 
    Micro-distillery means a facility for the production and packaging of alcoholic spirits for distribution, retail or wholesale that produces less than fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons per year and includes on-site consumption. 
    Micro-winery means a facility for the production and packaging of wine for distribution, retail or wholesale that produces less than one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons per year and includes on-site consumption. 
    "Mineral estate" means an interest in real property that is less than full fee title and that includes mineral rights as shown by the real estate records of the county in which the property is situated. 
    "Mineral estate owner" means the owner or lessee of a mineral estate underneath a surface estate that is subject to an application for development. 
    "Municipal facilities" means city-owned and operated institutions or facilities including but not limited to a library, museum, park, playground, recreational center, jail or correctional facility, police, fire or utility facilities. 
    "Neighborhood commercial uses" mean retail establishments primarily serving residents within the immediate neighborhood, oriented and designed toward pedestrian traffic such as bakeries, florists, drugstores and stationary stores. 
    "Occupancy" means the use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants. 
    "Occupied" means and includes arranged, designed, built, altered, converted, rented or leased, or intended to be occupied. 
    Office, Business or Professional. "Business or professional office" means a use where business, professional, or governmental services are made available to the public, including: (1) business office-an office for use by persons such as Realtors, travel, advertising or insurance agents and property managers providing both products and services, or the home office of a company that sells retail or wholesale products or provides professional services; (2) professional office-an office for use by persons such as lawyers, architects, engineers, accountants, physicians, dentists and other professionals who primarily provide services rather than products. 
    "Open space" means area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on the lot or tract that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projections of cornices, eaves, and plant material. 
    "Other public facilities" means public facilities, including but not limited to a library, museum, park, playground, recreational center, jail or correctional facility, police, fire or utility facilities that are public-owned and operated or under public control and jurisdiction, and subject to the provisions of this code. 
    "Owner" means any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or other person with sole or with concurrent legal and/or beneficial title to the whole or to part of a building or land. 
    "Parcel" means any quantity of land and water for which location and boundaries can be established that is designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit, or which has been used or developed as a unit. 
    "Park" means publicly owned land used for active or passive recreational purposes. 
    "Park trailer" means a unit that is built on a single chassis mounted on wheels and has a gross trailer area not exceeding four hundred (400) square feet in the set-up mode, as defined by the NFPA 70 National Electric Code. A park trailer is not intended for commercial uses such as banks, clinics, offices, or similar. A park trailer may be utilized as a dwelling unit within an approved manufactured home park, so long as it meets the criteria found within subsection 3.05(b)(3) of this code. 
    "Person" means an individual, proprietorship, trust, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    "Planned community" means a common interest community that is not a condominium or cooperative. 
    "Planned unit development" means a development provided for by the planned unit development zone district wherein certain uses, areas and related standards may be varied and a variety of land uses associated on a tract, the plan of which is subject to approval by the planning commission/city council. 
    "Planning commission" means the agency designated in this code and appointed by the city council as an advisory body to it. 
    Plat, Condominium. "Condominium plat" means a printed instrument that is a land survey depicting all or a portion of a common interest community in two (2) dimensions. A plat and map may be combined in one instrument. 
    Plat, Final. "Final plat" means a map of the subdivision showing accurate surveying by a registered surveyor. The map shall show all streets, alleys, blocks, lots and all other requirements listed in Section 6.05 of this code. 
    Plat, Preliminary. "Preliminary plat" means the plat of any lot, tract or parcel of land drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of adopted regulations listed in Section 6.04 of this code, that is not to be recorded of record, but is only a proposed division of land for review and study by the city. 
    "Principal use" means the primary use for which a parcel and any buildings thereon are developed. 
    "Public land" means land or interests in land owned by a governmental entity or held in trust for the benefit of the public by a not-for-profit organization. 
    "Public right-of-way" means any parcel of land unobstructed from the ground to the sky dedicated or appropriated to the general public. 
    "Public utility" means persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas, electric, transportation, water, sewer, or landline telephone service to the general public. For the purpose of this code, commercial wireless telecommunication service facilities shall not be considered public utility uses, and are defined separately. 
    "Radio, television or microwave tower" means structures supporting antennae for transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio spectrum, but excluding noncommercial antenna installations for home use of radio or television. 
    "Real property" means all real property within the city included within the boundaries of any lot approved and recorded in the plat records of Montezuma County, Colorado, or within the boundaries of any unplatted tract or parcel of land described and recorded in the real property records of Montezuma County, Colorado. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicular-type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The basic entities are travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, and motor home. 
    "Recreational vehicle park" means a plot of land upon which two (2) or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes. 
    Repair Services, Heavy Equipment. "Heavy equipment repair services" means an establishment engaged in the repair of trucks, buses, agricultural equipment, construction equipment or other heavy equipment. 
    Repair Services, Limited. "Limited repair services" means an establishment engaged in the repair of personal apparel and household appliances, furniture, and similar items, excluding repair of motor vehicles. Typical uses include apparel repair and alterations, small appliance repair, bicycle repair, lawn mower repair, clock and watch repair, and shoe repair shops. 
    "Replat" means the re-arrangement of any part or all of a previously platted subdivision, addition, lot or tract. 
    "Residence" means the same as "dwelling." 
    "Residential hotel/hostel" means a facility for residence, on a short-term basis, that provides simple dormitory or sleeping rooms and common rooms for cooking, meeting, recreational, and educational use; that is chartered and approved by the International Hostel Federation or its national or regional affiliates, or similar organizations; and that is supervised by resident house parents or managers who direct the guests' participation in the domestic duties and activities of the hostel. 
    "Retail commercial establishments" means business uses dealing primarily in new goods that are conducted entirely within an enclosed structure. 
    Retail, General (Indoors). "General retail (indoors)" means a retail establishment that does not fit the definition of any other land use classification and that does not entail any outdoor sales, service, display, storage or other activity. Typical uses include but are not limited to apparel and accessory stores, camera and photographic supply stores, clothing rental stores, consumer electronics stores, gift, novelty and souvenir shops, liquor stores, luggage and leather goods stores, jewelry stores, music stores and video tape rental stores. 
    Retail, General (Outdoors). "General retail (outdoors)" means a retail establishment that does not fit the definition of any other land use classification and that entails some outdoor sales, service, display, storage or other activity. Typical uses include but are not limited to boat dealers, snowmobile dealers, motorcycle dealers, hot tub dealers, auto and truck dealers, recreational vehicle dealers, and monument sales. 
    "Retail service establishments" means business uses including but not limited to plumbing or electrical shops, building contractors, computer sales and service facilities. 
    "Right-of-way" means the entire dedicated tract or strip of land that is to be used by the public for circulation and service. 
    "Roof" means the top covering structure of a building. 
    Sexually Oriented Business. See "Adult entertainment establishment." 
    "School" means the use of a site for instructional purposes on an elementary or secondary level, approved under the regulations of the state. 
    "Screen" means a fence or wall which is at least three and one-half (3.5) feet in height designed and erected to obstruct and eliminate the public view of a storage or other area. 
    "Setback" means open space at grade between a structure and the property line of the lot on which the structure is located, or, in some cases, the centerline of the adjacent right-of-way, measured by the horizontal distance between the lot line and the closest projection of the principal or accessory building. Each setback shall remain unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for permitted fences and landscaping. 
    "Severed" means that the surface owner does not own one hundred (100) percent of the mineral estate. 
    "Sign" means any object or device or part thereof situated outdoors or indoors which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, motion, illumination, or projected images. However, signs do not include the following: (a) flags of nations, or an organization of nations, states and cities, fraternal, religious and civic organizations; (b) merchandise, pictures or models of products or services incorporated in a window display; (c) time and temperature devices not related to a product; (d) national, state, religious, fraternal, professional, and civic symbols or crests; (e) works of art which in no way identify a product; and (f) scoreboards located on athletic fields. If for any reason, it cannot be readily determined whether or not an object is a sign, the zoning administrator shall make such determination. 
(1)  Alley Sign. A secondary sign located at the rear of the building and facing an alley. 
(2)  Animated Sign. Any sign or part of a sign that changes physical position by any movement or rotation. 
(3)  Billboard. A sign advertising goods and services available at a specified location within the city limits and on the same parcel or lot where the sign is located. 
(4)  Bulletin Boards. Bulletin boards not over twenty (20) square feet in area for public, charitable, or religious institutions where the same are located on the premises of such institutions. 
(5)  Canopy or Hanging Sign. A sign suspended from an extended roof structure. 
(6)  Directional Signs. Private signs directing the public within the boundaries of a private operation that do not exceed three (3) square feet in area. 
(7)  Display Surface or Face. The area made available by a sign structure for the purpose of displaying a message. 
(8)  Freestanding Sign. Any sign permanently affixed to the ground, supported by a standard or legs or other self-supporting structure used solely for that sign, and physically separated from any building or structure. 
(9)  Garage Sale Signs. Garage sale signs posted no more than five (5) days prior to the sale and removed within two (2) days following the sale. 
(10)  Ground Sign. A sign supported by poles, uprights, or braces extending from the ground or an object on the ground but not attached to any part of any building. 
(11)  Illuminated Sign. A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting either by lights on the sign or directed towards the sign. 
(12)  Joint Identification Sign. A sign which serves as a common or collective identification for two (2) or more uses-by-right on the same site. 
(13)  Memorial Signs. Memorial signs or tablets if not more than ten (10) square feet in area, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of the building when constructed of bronze or other non-combustible material and which are not illuminated. 
(14)  Occupant Signs. Signs limited in content to name of occupant, address of premises, and signs of danger or a cautionary nature which are limited to: wall and ground signs; no more than two (2) per street front; no more than four (4) square feet per sign in area; no more than ten (10) feet in height above grade; signs which may be illuminated only from a concealed light source which shall not flash, blink, chase, or fluctuate; and, signs which are not animated. 
(15)  Off-site Sign. A type of directional sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, attraction or product sold, offered or existing elsewhere than upon the same lot where the sign is located, including billboards. 
(16)  Political Signs. Political signs may be erected and maintained provided that such signs shall not be a banner of paper or cloth; shall not be posted more than sixty (60) days prior to the election to which the sign relates; shall be removed prior to ten (10) days following the election to which the sign relates; shall be of the wall, window, or ground type; shall not exceed two (2) signs for each front line of the lot; shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per face; shall not exceed a height more than twenty-five (25) feet above grade; shall be illuminated from only a concealed light source; shall not flash, blink, or fluctuate; and shall not be animated. No such sign shall be on any public right-of-way and the candidate and/or the election committee shall be solely responsible for the placement and removal of all signs. 
(17)  Professional. Nameplate signs not more than two (2) square feet in area that are fastened flat to the building. 
(18)  Projecting Sign. A sign (other than a wall sign) which projects from and which is supported by a wall of a building. 
(19)  Public Signs. Signs required or specifically authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute, or ordinance; which may be of any number, type, area, height above grade, location, illumination, or animation, authorized by the law, statute, or ordinance under which the signs are erected. 
(20)  Real Estate Signs. Signs not extending outside the property line and not more than five (5) square feet per face in area which advertise the sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon which such signs are located no more than one (1) sign per street frontage and no sign shall be on any part of the public right-of-way. 
(21)  Roof Sign. A sign or advertising object mounted on the roof of a structure. 
(22)  Sign With Backing. Any sign that is displayed upon, against, or through any material or color surface or backing that forms an integral part of such display and differentiates the total display from the background against which it is placed. 
(23)  Sign Without Backing. Any word, letter, emblem, insignia, figure, or similar character or group thereof, that is neither backed by, incorporated in, or otherwise made part of any larger display area. 
(24)  Sign, Nonconforming. (See "Nonconforming sign.") 
(25)  Signs in the Display Window. Signs in the display windows that are not permanently attached to the structure. 
(26)  Signs Within Buildings. Any sign placed inside a building may be erected without a permit but subject to the safety regulations of the building code. 
(27)  Temporary Sign. Any sign or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plywood, or other light material intended to be displayed for a short period of time. 
(28)  Wall Sign. A sign which is attached to, painted on, or erected against a wall of a building which extends no more than eight (8) inches from the wall surface upon which it is attached and whose display surface is parallel to the face of the building to which the sign is attached. 
(29)  Window Sign. A sign which is applied or attached to or located within three (3) feet of the interior of a window, which sign can be seen through the window from the exterior of the structure. 
    "Single-family equivalent" means a structure or part of a structure designed or capable of providing single-family household occupancy. For purposes of code administration, "single-family equivalent" shall be based on the average size of single-family dwelling units and average number of residents per occupied dwelling in the city-one (1) resident per 499 square feet of usable floor area (Sources: 1990 U.S. Census and the Montezuma County assessor). 
    "Site" means a parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions by legal description and abutting upon one (1) or more public streets or roads intended for use-by-right occupancy. 
    "Site specific development plan" can be called "final plan," the "final plat," the "final subdivision plan," "final site plan," the "final master plan," and "approved conditional use permits." Irrespective of its title, "site specific development plan" means the final approval step for all developments, which occurs prior to building permit application. However, if the landowner wishes such approval to have the effect of creating vested rights pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended, the landowner must so request such approval to be considered. Failure of the landowner to request vested property rights shall render the approval not a "site specific development plan," and no vested rights shall be deemed to have been created. 
    "Street" means a public way, other than an alley or driveway, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
(a)  "Arterial/highway street" means a thoroughfare ultimately designed for the movement of two (2) or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction, and designated as a major street by the comprehensive plan or the Cortez thoroughfare plan. 
(b)  "Collector street" means a thoroughfare ultimately designed for the movement of one or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction and designated as a secondary street. 
(c)  "Local street" means a street which has the primary function of providing access to abutting property and which does not normally carry through traffic. 
(d)  "Marginal access street" means a street which is parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways; and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
    "Street line" means a dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street, the right-of-way line or easement line. 
    "Street trees" means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land located within the right-of-way of any street or alley within the city. 
    "Street width" means the dimension of the shortest distance between the lines that delineate the right-of-way of a street, road or other way. 
    "Structural alterations" means any change in the supporting member of a building, such as a bearing wall, column, beam or girder. 
    "Structure" means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building or any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definitive manner. 
    "Subdivision improvements agreement" means one or more security arrangement(s) that may be accepted by the city to secure the construction of such public improvements as are required by this code as a condition of the approval of a subdivision. 
    "Subdivision" means the division of any parcel of land into two or more parcels, separate interests or interests in common, except when such division: (1) creates parcels of land each 35 or more acres, none of which is intended for use by multiple owners; (2) creates parcels of land, such that the land area of each parcel, when divided by the number of interests therein, results in 35 or more acres per interest; (3) could be created by any court in this state pursuant to the law of eminent domain, or by the operation of law, or by order of any court in this state if the city is given timely notice of any such pending action by the court and given the opportunity to join as a party in interest in such proceeding for the purpose of raising the issue of evasion of this code prior to entry of the court order; and if the city does not file an appropriate pleading within twenty days after receipt of such notice by the court, then such action may proceed before the court; (4) is caused by a lien, mortgage, deed of trust or any other security instrument subject to the conditions of subsection (3) of this section; (5) is caused by a security or unit of interest in any investment trust regulated under the laws of this state, or any other interest in an investment entity; (6) creates cemetery lots; (7) creates an interest or interests in oil, gas, minerals, or water that is now and hereafter severed from the surface ownership of real property; or (8) is caused by the acquisition of an interest in land in the name of a husband and wife or other persons in joint tenancy, or as tenants in common. 
    "Surface estate" means an interest in real property that is less than full fee title that does not include the mineral rights as shown by the real estate records of the county in which the property is situated. 
    "Surface owner" means the owner of the surface estate and any person with rights under a recorded contract to purchase all or part of the surface estate. 
    "Toxic and noxious matter" means any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter that is present in sufficient quantities to endanger health, safety and comfort of persons in the vicinity or that may injure or damage property. 
    "Tower" means any ground or roof-mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof taller than fifteen (15) feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, traces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade. 
(a)  Tower, Multi-User. "Multi-user tower" means a tower to which is attached the antennas of more than one commercial wireless telecommunication service provider or governmental entity. 
(b)  Tower, Single-User. "Single-user tower" means a tower to which is attached only the antennas of a single user, although the tower may be designed to accommodate the antennas of multiple users as required in this code. 
    "Urban agriculture" means the growing, processing, and distributing of food and other products through plant cultivation and animal husbandry in and around the city. 
    "Urban influence area" means an area identified in the Cortez thoroughfare plan surrounding the city that is suitable for urbanization. 
    "Usable floor area" means all of the floor area in a building or buildings including hallways, but excluding areas of floor devoted to structural or partition walls, stair wells, elevator shafts, storage, boiler rooms, and mechanical service rooms. 
    "Variance" means an adjustment in the application of certain zoning district regulations to a particular parcel of property that, because of special conditions or circumstances peculiar to the particular parcel, is necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the same vicinity and zoning district. 
    Vendor, Mobile. Definitions pertaining to mobile vendors are as follows: 
(a)  Arts and Crafts means any items handmade by the vendor that are new, original designs by the vendor/artist, copyrighted by the vendor/artist, and or thirty-five (35) percent of the surface decoration hand made by the vendor/artist. Acceptable items include: 
(1)  Drawings: in charcoal, pastels, chalk, pencil, wax, and crayon. 
(2)  Graphics. 
(3)  Paintings: in oil, acrylics, watercolor, etc. 
(4)  Paper: works using hand-made paper as the principal part of the object. 
(5)  Photography: photographic prints made from the artist's original negative. 
(6)  Printmaking: printed works for which the artist's hand manipulated the plates, stones or screens. 
(7)  Sculpture: three-dimensional original work done in any medium, including built up works in wood. 
(8)  Ceramics: wheel thrown, coil, slab, slip cast or modeled objects made from clay or porcelain. 
(9)  Fiber: all work crafted from fibers including basketry, embroidery, weaving, tapestry and papermaking. 
(10)  Glass: work that has glass as the principle component. 
(11)  Jewelry: all jewelry whether the work is produced from metal, glass, clay fiber, paper, plastic or other materials. 
(12)  Leather: work that has leather as the principal component. 
(13)  Metal: includes all nonsculpture, nonjewelry works crafted from metals. 
(14)  Toys: work made from single or multiple components. Includes stuffed animals, dolls, puzzles, kites, and wooden toys. 
(15)  Wearable fiber: hand-made and/or factory produced items with additional modifications, enhancements, or alterations done by the artist. 
(16)  Wood: original works in wood that are hand-tooled, machine-worked, turned or carved. 
(17)  Crafts: include candles, cottage edibles, dried flowers, soaps and folk crafts that are hand created and processed by the vendor. 
(b)  "Display apparatus" means a nonpermanent structure, table, basket, wagon, tray, or cart for the display and vending of food or nonalcoholic beverages, arts and crafts and other retail items. 
(c)  "Extraordinary circumstances" means occasions that are not usual, regular, or of a customary nature. 
(d)  "Mobile vendor" means a person engaged in vending activity on foot using a tray, wagon, or basket. 
(e)  "Public property" means all real property owned, leased or managed by the city, including, but not limited to, public rights-of-way, streets, sidewalks, parks and parking areas. 
(f)  "Vending activity" means the act of selling or offering for sale food, nonalcoholic beverages, arts and crafts or other items, from a display apparatus or on foot, from a location outside of a building, and which activity is not an accessory use as defined by this code. 
(g)  "Vending history" means the name(s) on the city-approved applications for mobile vendors. 
    "Vested property right" means the right to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of a "site-specific development plan." 
    "Vibration" means a periodic displacement of the earth measured in inches. 
    "Warehouse" means a facility where a service is rendered to a business for the purpose of storing a product(s). 
    "Wetlands" means those areas which are saturated or inundated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils conditions. These areas can be man-made or natural and, in addition to the vegetation types, the soils must be hydric (organic or mineral), and be saturated for five (5) percent or more of the growing season within twelve (12) inches of the ground. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, wet meadows and similar areas. Some typical plants found in wetlands include sedges, rushes, bulrushes, cattails and willows. 
    "Workforce housing" means housing constructed through private development that is intended to meet the needs of individuals in the employment of business owners located within the city. These types of jobs include, but are not limited to, full-time and part-time positions in retail food preparation, hotel and motel staff, general retail businesses, and other service types of employment. 
    "Wrecking or auto salvage yard" means a yard or building where automobiles or parts of automobiles or machinery are stored, dismantled and/or offered for sale in the open as whole units, as salvaged parts or as processed metal. 
    "Yard" means an open space on the lot that is not obstructed from any point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lot to the sky except as authorized obstructions. 
(a)  "Front yard" means a yard adjacent to a front lot line and extending from the lot line a uniform distance into the lot. 
(b)  "Rear yard" means a yard adjacent to a rear lot line and extending from the lot line a uniform distance into the lot. 
    Zoning Administrator. The city planner or his or her duly-authorized representative shall be the zoning administrator. If the city planner's position is vacated for an extended period of time, the zoning administrator shall be an officer designated by the city manager to enforce the provisions of this code. 
    "Zoning development permit" means a permit issued by the city planner that allows a developer to engage in development in compliance with all applicable sections of this code and further enables the developer to seek a building permit that would allow the developer to commence actual development. 
    "Zoning map" means the certified official zoning map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are drawn. 
(Ord. 1050 (part), 2005; Ord. 1037, 2005; Ord. 1026 (part), 2004; Ord. 1024 (part), 2004; Ord. 1015 (part), 2004; Ord. 982 (part), 2003; Ord. 973 (part), 2002; Ord. 971 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 1135, 1-12-2010; Ord. No. 1155, 2-28-2012; Ord. No. 1166, 5-22-2012; Ord. No. 1167, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 1212 , 8-9-2016) 
2.03 - Interpretations. 
(a)  Authority. The zoning administrator shall have the authority to make all interpretations of the text of this code, and the boundaries of the official zoning map. 
(b)  Initiation. An interpretation may be requested by any affected person, any resident or real property owner in the city, or any person having a contractual interest in real property in the city. 
(c)  Procedures. 
(1)  Submission of Request for Interpretation. Before an interpretation shall be provided by the zoning administrator, a request for interpretation shall be submitted to the zoning administrator in a form established by the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Determination of Completeness. Within a reasonable amount of time after a request for interpretation has been received, the zoning administrator shall determine whether the request is complete. If the zoning administrator determines the request is not complete, he shall serve written notice on the applicant specifying the deficiencies. The zoning administrator shall take no further action on the request for interpretation until the deficiencies are remedied. 
(d)  Rendering of Interpretation. After the request for interpretation has been determined complete, the zoning administrator shall render an interpretation within a reasonable amount of time. The zoning administrator may consult with the city manager and the city attorney; review this code and the official zoning map, whichever is applicable, before rendering an interpretation. 
(e)  Form. The interpretation shall be in writing and shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail. 
(f)  Official Record. The zoning administrator shall maintain an official record of all interpretations in the City Hall, which shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
(g)  Appeal. Any person who has made a request for interpretation may appeal the interpretation of the zoning administrator to the city council by filing an application within thirty (30) days of the zoning administrator's decision. The date of the decision shall be the postmark date of the certified mail notifying the applicant of the interpretation. The application shall be considered by the city council within thirty (30) days of its filing, and the interpretation of the zoning administrator affirmed or modified. 
Chapter 3 - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

3.01 - Scope and applicability. 
    The regulations of this chapter shall apply to all lands located within the corporate limits of the city. All land, buildings, structures or appurtenances thereon located within the city, that are hereafter occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished or converted shall be occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished or converted in conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located as provided in this chapter. 
3.02 - Districts established. 
    In order to implement the comprehensive plan and the other purposes and provisions of this land use code, the city, is divided into eight (8) zoning districts. The regulations as set out herein are uniform throughout each district. 
(a)  Purpose for Zone Districts. 
(1)  Residential Districts. In order to secure for the persons who reside there a comfortable, healthy, safe, and pleasant environment in which to live, sheltered from incompatible and disruptive activities and to encourage a diversity of housing options, the following residential districts are established: 
Abbreviated 
Designation Zoning Districts RE Residential estate district R-1 Residential single-family district R-2 Residential multi-family district MH Residential manufactured home district  
(2)  Open District. In order to preserve open space areas for active and passive open space and recreational uses, the following open district is established: 
Abbreviated Designation Zoning Districts O Open district  
(3)  Commercial Districts. In order to accommodate a wide variety of commercial activities, to make the city's core district a more attractive and energetic place to live, work and shop, to separate pedestrian oriented development from automobile dependent activities and to enhance the economic development of the city, the following commercial districts are established. 
Abbreviated Designation Zoning Districts CBD Central business district C Commercial highway district NB Neighborhood business district  
(4)  Industrial District. In order to encourage a diverse employment base, provide for the production of goods and services and minimize conflict with other land uses, the following industrial district is established. 
Abbreviated Designation Zoning Districts I Industrial district  
(Ord. 1024 (part), 2004) 
3.03 - Official zoning map. 
(a)  Map Adoption. The boundaries of the zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon the official zoning map of the city, such map being adopted as a part of this code as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail. 
(b)  Zoning Map Amendment. No changes or amendments to the district boundaries shown on the official zoning map shall be made except in compliance and conformity with all procedures set forth in Section 6.02 of this code, zoning map and land use code amendments. If, in accordance with these procedures, changes or amendments are made to district boundaries, such changes or amendments shall be made promptly after official adoption of the change or amendment as provided for herein. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for the physical updating and amendment of the official zoning map. 
(c)  Interpretation of District Boundaries. The district boundary lines shown on the official zoning map are usually along streets, alleys, property lines or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning maps, the following rules shall apply. 
(1)  Boundaries indicated, as approximately following streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow the centerline of such street, highway or alley. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated, as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated, as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of irrigation ditches or drainage ways shall be construed to follow such centerline. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in this subsection shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the original zoning map shall be determined from the graphic scale on the map. 
(6)  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the city council the zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley or way, and all area so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
(7)  Where physical features of the ground are at variance with information shown on the official zoning map, or when there arises a question as to how or whether a parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be resolved by the application of subsections 3.03(c)(1) through (7) of this section, the property shall be considered as classified RE, residential estate district, temporarily, and subject to Section 3.04 of this chapter. 
3.04 - Temporary zoning of annexed territory. 
(a)  All territory hereafter annexed to the city shall be temporarily classified as RE, residential estate district, until permanent zoning is established by the city council. The procedure for establishing permanent zoning on annexed territory shall conform to the procedure established by this code for zoning amendments. 
(b)  In an area temporarily classified as RE, residential estate district, the following regulations shall apply. 
(1)  No person shall erect, construct or proceed or continue with the erection or construction of any building or structure or add to any building or structure or cause the same to be done in any newly annexed territory to the city without first applying for and obtaining a zoning development permit and a building permit therefor from the building official or the city council as may be required herein. 
(2)  No permit for the construction of a building or use of land shall be issued by the building official other than a permit that will allow the construction of a building permitted in the RE, residential estate district, unless and until such territory has been classified in a zoning district other than the RE, residential estate district, by the city council in the manner provided in Section 6.02 of this code. 
3.05 - Use regulations. 
(a)  Schedule of Use Regulations. The schedule of use regulations of this section provides a tabular summary of the land use types permitted within each zoning district. The table is intended for reference only and does not necessarily reflect all of the regulations that may apply to particular uses or zoning districts. In the event of conflict between the schedule of use regulations and the text of this code, the text shall control. The schedule of use regulations shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  Permitted Uses. Uses identified in a particular district column with a "P" shall be permitted in such district, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this code. 
(2)  Conditional Uses. Uses identified in a particular district column with a "C" shall be permitted in such district only upon approval of a conditional use permit by the city council in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.10 of this code, conditional use permits. 
(3)  Temporary Uses. Uses identified in a particular district column with a "T" shall be permitted in such district only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.20 of this code, temporary use permits. 
(4)  Not Permitted. Uses not identified in a particular district column with a "P," "C" or "T" are not allowed in such district unless otherwise expressly permitted in this code. 
(5)  Special Use Conditions. Numbers occurring in parenthesis after the names of selected use categories refer to conditions applicable to the use in any zone district and set forth in subsection (b) of this section, special use conditions. 
SCHEDULE OF USE REGULATIONS 
Use Type RE 

Zoning District R-1 

Zoning District R-2 

Zoning District MH 

Zoning District O 

Zoning District CBD 

Zoning District C 

Zoning District NB 

Zoning District I 

Zoning District Residential Uses Apartments (1) P P P Dwelling, single-family (2) P P P P P C P Dwelling, duplex (2) P C P Dwelling, 3-, 4-, 5-, or 6-family P C P Dwelling, multi-family 7 or more C C C Dwelling, manufactured home P Manufactured home park (3) P Manufactured home subdivision P Dwelling, accessory unit - ADU (22) C C Trailer or manufactured home sales or rental P P Accessory and Temporary Uses Accessory use or structure (4) P P P P C P P P P Asphalt or concrete batch plant, temporary (5) T T T T T Caretaker or guard residence, accessory C C P Equipment rental/repair/storage/ wholesaling, accessory P P P Farm or farming P P Field office, temporary (6) T T T T T T T T Garage, private P P P P P P Home occupation (7) P P P P P P P P Radio, television or microwave tower, private (up to thirty feet high) P P P P P P Sales trailer, temporary (8) T T T T T T Educational, Institutional and Civic Uses Charitable, civic, youth, social and fraternal organization P P P P Church or place of worship C C C C C C C C Child care facility, small home based P P P P P Child care facility, large home based (9) C C C C C C C Child care facility, commercial (9) C C C C C C C Clinic C C P P P Essential services P P P P P P P P P Group home (10) C C C C C Hospital C P P P Municipal facilities P P P P P P P P P Nursing home (19) C C C Other public facilities C C C C C P School (public, private and church) C C C C C C C C Transportation-Related Uses Bus station or terminal C P P Parking lot, trucks or trailers (transport) P P Storage or hauling company C P Truck freight terminal C P Retail Commercial Uses Bank or savings and loan P P P Commercial nurseries and greenhouses C P P P Flea markets P P P P Micro-breweries/micro-wineries/micro-distilleries with on-site consumption P P P Mobile vendor (11) P P P P P P P P Neighborhood commercial P P Parking lot or parking garage (12) P P Retail service establishments P P C P Retail, general (indoors)(13) P P Retail, general (outdoors) P P Secondhand store P P C Pawnshop C P Shopping center or supermarket C P Convenience store C P Personal Service Uses Animal pound or kennel (public or private) C P Barber and beauty shops P P P Bed and breakfast (14) C C P P C Boarding or rooming house (15) C P P P P Boat storage and service P P Cleaning shop or laundry pick-up station P P P P Crafts shop (16) P P P Crematorium C C C Custom personal services P P P P Equipment rental, repair, storage and wholesaling P C P Hotel or motel P P Household appliance service and repair P P C P Laundry, self-service P P C P Mortuary or funeral home C C C Office, business and professional C P P P P Residential hotel/hostel P C Recreational and Entertainment Uses Fitness clubs or recreation centers, private C C P P C P Golf course or driving range P Recreational vehicle storage and service P P Recreational vehicle (17) C Restaurant or bar P P P Studio, television or radio P P P Theater P P Travel bureau or consultant P P P Veterinary clinic C P Automobile and Related Service Uses Auto parts and accessory sales (indoors) P P P Auto repair garage (18) C P P Car wash C C P Gasoline service station P P P Wrecking or auto salvage yard C Industrial Uses Adult entertainment establishment (21) C Asphalt/concrete batching plant, permanent C Building material sales and yard P P Cleaning or laundry plant P P Commercial wireless antennas and towers (20) C C C C P Contractor storage or equipment yard C P Electrical substation, high voltage C P Food processing C P Heating or air conditioning shop P P Lithographic or print shop P P P Machinery, heavy - sales and rental P P Maintenance and repair service for buildings P P Manufacturing, general P Manufacturing, hazardous/objectionable C Manufacturing, light C C P Manufacturing, wood products C P Plumbing or electrical shop P P Repair services, heavy equipment C P Repair services, limited P P P Self-storage warehouse C P Trailer or manufactured home sales or rental P P Upholstery shop P P P Warehouse C P Welding or machine shop P P Medical Marijuana Medical marijuana center P P Patient and caregiver cultivation (24) P P P P P P P Cultivation in excess of square footage limitation (24) P P Urban Agriculture Home garden P P P P P P P Community garden (25) P C P P P P P P P  
(b)  Special Use Conditions. In addition to applicable site development standards of Chapter 5 of this code, the following conditions apply to the listed uses when referenced in the use regulations of a particular zoning district: Section 3.07, RE, residential estate district through Section 3.16, PUD, planned unit development district. 
(1)  Apartments. Residential uses may comprise up to one-half the floor area of a single story nonresidential building and shall either be owner-occupied or used for long-term rental purposes. Those structures with multiple floors are allowed unlimited use for additional stories above the ground floor. 
(2)  Single-family and two-family dwellings. All single-family and two-family dwellings shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Minimum wall dimensions of the principal structure, excluding garage, shall be twenty-four (24) feet. 
b.  All principal residential structures shall: 
1.  Be placed on a slab-on-grade or perimeter foundation approved by the building department; 
2.  Have a wood, brick or stucco exterior, or a material that looks similar to wood, brick or stucco; 
3.  Have a minimum 4:12 roof pitch and a one (1) foot overhang (structures constructed in the traditional southwest Spanish style are exempt from this requirement), provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to a manufactured home dwelling in the MH, residential manufactured home district. 
(3)  Manufactured Home Park. Manufactured home parks shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  All manufactured homes within approved manufactured home parks shall be placed in accordance with City Ordinance No. 953, Series 2001, and the manufactured housing installations program adopted by the state housing board of the state of Colorado. 
b.  Permitting. It shall be the responsibility of the park owner or his/her designee to procure all necessary manufactured home installation permits through the Cortez planning and building department prior to the placing and setting of any manufactured home. 
1.  An application fee shall be submitted in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. 
2.  No manufactured home shall be occupied until approved by the planning and building department. 
c.  Park land shall be dedicated in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.05 of this code. 
d.  Plan Required. Each manufactured home park shall file with the department of planning and building a plan of the park drawn to scale and demonstrating: 
1.  The boundaries of the park, existing public rights-of-way both within and adjacent to the area, and any unusual topographic or geological features; 
2.  A drainage plan as described in Section 4.06 of this code, which will permit adequate surface drainage of the area and which fits with plans for drainage of adjacent property and conforms with any city drainage projects or proposals; 
3.  A circulation plan showing the location and widths of all streets and roads with exits and entrances to public rights-of-way designated, as well as all pedestrian walkways within the park; 
4.  The location, size, and other necessary requirements of all sanitary sewer, fire lines, fire hydrants, and water lines and individual connections; 
5.  The arrangement of land uses within the park including, but not limited to, the location of community facility areas, recreation areas, individual manufactured home lots, and recreational vehicle and park trailer lots; 
(a)  The number of recreational vehicles and/or park trailers permitted within a manufactured home park shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total number of lots within the park. 
6.  The location of privately owned public utility locations including, but not limited to, natural gas supply systems and electrical installations; and 
7.  The name and address of the owner(s), operator(s), as well as the legal description of the area and the present zoning of the property. 
e.  Lot Standards. 
1.  The planning commission and the city council shall approve the overall density within a manufactured home park but in no event shall it be greater than ten (10) units per gross acre. 
2.  All manufactured homes shall be installed utilizing only non-permanent foundation systems as defined by, and complying with, all provisions of city of Cortez Ordinance No. 953, Series 2001, Manufactured Home Installation Procedures. 
3.  All recreational vehicles and park trailers shall be set up as required by the manufacturer's specifications or as defined by applicable city ordinances. 
4.  A minimum distance of twenty (20) feet shall be maintained between any two (2) manufactured homes or other approved dwelling units in any direction. 
f.  Street and Road Standards. 
1.  Each manufactured home lot within a manufactured home park shall have direct access to a park street. 
2.  Park streets shall be of adequate widths to accommodate contemplated parking and traffic load in accordance with the type of street and such street and parking areas shall be a dust-free surface (asphaltic materials or concrete). 
3.  The park street system shall have direct connection to a public right-of-way. Whenever this access meets an existing public street, the access entrance must meet city street design standards for a distance of forty (40) feet from the property line into the development. 
4.  Streets and walkways designed for the general use of the manufactured home park residents shall be lighted during the hours of darkness. Such lighting shall not be under the control of the individual manufactured home occupants. 
g.  Utility Installations. No dwelling unit may connect to utility services other than the lot with which it has been permitted. 
h.  Removal of Manufactured Home, Recreational Vehicle and Park Trailer Wheels. The removal of wheels, axles, and running gear from manufactured homes located in a manufactured home park shall be permitted. Removal of the same shall not be permitted for other approved dwelling units. 
i.  Skirting. Each manufactured home placed in a manufactured home park shall be skirted so as to obscure from view the space beneath the floor of the unit and the stand. Skirting for recreational vehicles and park trailers shall be optional. 
j.  Permitted Dwelling Units. All units shall meet the requirements of this subsection. 
1.  Manufactured home dwelling as defined in Land Use Code Section 2.02. 
2.  Recreational vehicle as defined in Land Use Code Section 2.02. 
(a)  Units shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in length. 
3.  Park trailer as defined in Land Use Code Section 2.02. 
(4)  Accessory Use or Structure. Accessory uses or structures may be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Such accessory uses shall be limited to those customarily associated with and appropriate, incidental and subordinate to the principal use, 
b.  Such accessory uses shall be located on the same lot or tract as the associated principal use. 
c.  Such accessory uses, and expressly including detached garages and attached carports located in the front yard setback, shall be controlled in the same manner as the associated principal use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this code. Carports located in the rear one-half of the building lot and all nongarage accessory structures shall be required to have a minimum 2:12 roof pitch. 
d.  In no event shall an accessory use be construed to authorize a use not otherwise permitted in the zone district in which the principal use is located, and in no event shall an accessory use or structure be established prior to the principal use or structure to which it is accessory. 
e.  Dimensional requirements in the O, RE, R-1, R-2, MH, and NB zone districts: 
1.  Each accessory structure shall have a total square footage not to exceed eight hundred (800) square feet; or, thirty-three (33) percent of the total square footage of the principal structure. 
2.  The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed twenty (20) feet or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less; provided, however, that the height of carports may not exceed sixteen (16) feet or be equal in height of a single-story principal structure if located in the front yard and attached. 
f.  Accessory structures exceeding the dimensional requirements listed in subsection (b)(4)(e) of this section may be approved through the conditional use process. 
g.  An accessory carport, whether detached from, or attached to the principal structure, may be allowed to extend into the front yard setback if all of the following standards can be met: 
1.  The carport roof must be constructed in such a manner to appear as a part of the original construction of the principal structure. 
2.  The materials used in construction of the accessory use are compatible with the materials used in the principal use. 
3.  The carport meets side yard setback standards. 
4.  The carport does not extend into or over any easement or any city right-of-way. 
5.  The carport roof slope shall comply with the requirements of garages in Section 3.05(b)(4)(c) of this section and have no less than a 4:12 pitch or match the roof pitch of the existing principal structure. A carport in conjunction with a Southwestern style house shall have no less than a 2:12 roof pitch. 
6.  Staff is authorized to review the proposal for compliance with the above standards and approve the building materials for the project. 
7.  All attached carports shall meet the requirements for separation of uses as contained in the adopted building codes of the city. 
8.  Accessory carport structures that are proposed to be placed closer than ten (10) feet to the front property line must go through the conditional use process in accordance with Section 6.10 of this code. 
(5)  Asphalt or Concrete Batching Plant, Temporary. A temporary asphalt or concrete batching plant permit may be approved by the zoning administrator for producing asphalt or concrete products used in construction activities on the same or nearby sites subject to the following conditions. 
a.  The batching plant site shall comply with all applicable provisions of city, state and federal laws. 
b.  The batch plant shall not be located within six-hundred (600) feet of a residence. 
c.  Hours of operation will be limited to Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
d.  The batch plant permit will be valid for up to six (6) months. 
e.  No portion of the batch plant or its operation shall be located on a public street. 
f.  The batch plant shall only furnish concrete, asphalt, or both, to a specific project. The placement of a temporary batching plant for a private project is restricted to the site of the project. 
g.  The site must be clear of all equipment, material and debris upon completion. 
h.  All public improvements that are damaged during the operation of the temporary batching plant must be repaired or replaced within thirty (30) days of completion of the project. 
i.  At termination and/or removal of plant permit, permittee shall have the person responsible walk the site with the building official or his/her designee to verify the site meets city approval. 
(6)  Field Office, Temporary. A temporary field office permit may be approved by the zoning administrator for a structure or shelter used in connection with an approved development or building project for housing on the site of temporary administrative and supervisory function for sheltering employees and equipment during the construction phase of a project. Such a structure or shelter shall be promptly removed following the approval of a certificate of occupancy. 
(7)  Home Occupation. A home occupation may be allowed as an accessory use to a dwelling unit. Prior to commencing the home occupation the applicant shall request and receive a home occupation permit from the city. The form of the application shall be as required by the city clerk but at a minimum shall contain the following information: name of applicant, address of home occupation, proposed activity, and a statement of assurance that the applicant shall comply with the requirements of this section. The fee for such application shall be established and modified from time to time by resolution of the city council but shall initially be set at ten dollars ($10.00). Each home occupation shall be subject to compliance with the following conditions: 
a.  A home occupation shall be permitted only when it is an accessory use to a dwelling unit. 
b.  A home occupation shall not involve any structural alteration in the main building or any of its rooms. 
c.  A home occupation shall not involve the installation of machinery or additional equipment other than that customary to normal household operations. 
d.  A home occupation shall utilize no more than twenty (20) percent of the total floor area of the dwelling unit. 
e.  A person who engages in a home occupation shall not use an advertisement, sign, or display on or off the premises; provided, however, that this shall not be construed to regulate signage attached to vehicles. 
f.  A home occupation shall not operate during hours other than 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
g.  A home occupation shall not generate more traffic than the typical or average dwelling unit and it shall not involve or result in the presence of more than four (4) patrons on the premises at one time. 
h.  A home occupation shall not generate loud and raucous noise, or utilize mechanical, electrical or other equipment or items that produce noise, electrical or magnetic interference, vibration, heat, glare, smoke, dust, odor or other nuisance outside the residential building or operate in any way that substantially and unreasonably interferes with the use and enjoyment of adjacent or nearby property or interferes with public peace and comfort. 
i.  A home occupation shall not involve the visible storage of equipment or materials, or the presence of highly explosive or combustible equipment or vehicles with more than two (2) axles. 
j.  Parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the specification in Section 5.02(d) of this code. 
k.  A home occupation shall not include any of the following: kennel, mortuary, restaurant, dance studio, nursing home, taxi service, health or medical clinic, veterinary clinic or similar activities. 
(8)  Sales Trailer, Temporary. A temporary use permit may be issued by the zoning administrator for a manufactured office trailer used while model homes are being constructed, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A temporary permit allowing sales from a manufactured office trailer may be issued for a period not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days from approval of a zoning development permit, with no extensions, while permanent model homes are being constructed. 
b.  The trailer shall not be used for living or sleeping purposes. 
c.  Skirting shall be installed around the trailer to conceal the undercarriage. 
d.  The trailer shall be located in a platted subdivision on a lot that is owned by the applicant/builder and shall not be located within a required front yard. 
e.  A building permit must be issued for the model home at the time of the temporary permit for the trailer. 
(9)  Child Care Facility. Child care facilities that desire to operate other than permitted hours shall apply for a conditional use permit. 
(10)  Group Home. A group home may provide living arrangements for not more than eight (8) residents per home sixty (60) years of age or older; or for persons in alcohol recovery, halfway house or other similar programs; or for the developmentally disabled, limited to cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, mental retardation, autism, and epilepsy; and not more than two (2) supervisory personnel; subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Such homes must be state-licensed. 
b.  All exterior aspects of a group home, including its scale and off-street parking configuration, shall not disrupt the residential character of the area. 
c.  In no case shall the total number of persons residing on premises (including staff) be more than one (1) per four hundred (400) square feet of usable floor area twenty (20) percent more than the single family equivalent). 
d.  Such homes shall provide off-street parking pursuant to Section 5.02(d) of this code. 
(11)  Mobile vendors are not allowed in the central business district (CBD). Mobile vendors shall be regulated as set forth in the Cortez City Code at Chapter 15, Article IX, Mobile Food Vendors Sections 15-66 thru 15-68.8 and all other applicable Cortez City Code sections, now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(12)  Parking Lot or Garage. Automotive repair or maintenance services are neither offered nor provided. 
(13)  General Retail (Indoors). Most displays of merchandise or inventory shall be displayed indoors. However, external temporary displays of merchandise are permitted as follows: 
a.  External temporary displays of merchandise or inventory by the principal business may be displayed on the sidewalk adjoining the front property line, provided the actual sales transaction is conducted from within the building of the principal business. Sales transactions are allowed on the sidewalks only during times when sales events take place which are sponsored by the Chamber of Commerce or other recognized business group. In all such cases, merchandise shall be placed in such a manner as to allow for an uninterrupted walking area on the sidewalk with a minimum width of five (5) feet. 
b.  External temporary displays of merchandise may also take place within the confines of the property of the principal business or off-site from the principal business within two hundred (200) feet of the principal building. If such display is off-site, use of the adjoining sidewalks for display purposes is prohibited. 
c.  In the case of shopping centers or other instances where the principal structure is more than ten (10) feet away from the front property line, external temporary exhibits of merchandise may be placed within the allowed display area. 
1.  Allowed display area is defined as the thirty (30) percent of the distance between the front of the principal structure and the front curb line or parking lot edge which is closest to the principal structure. 
d.  In no case shall the external placement of merchandise obstruct fire lanes, reduce the required number of off-street parking places, impede the flow of pedestrian traffic, or in any way cause or create a safety hazard. 
(14)  Bed and Breakfast. A bed and breakfast establishment may provide lodging and breakfast for temporary overnight occupants in no more than five (5) separate bedrooms for compensation. In addition to residential off-street parking requirements, a bed and breakfast shall provide one (1) off-street parking space per bedroom offered for use for temporary overnight accommodations. 
(15)  Boarding or Rooming House. A boarding or rooming house may provide no more than four (4) separate bedrooms offered for compensation. In addition to residential off-street parking requirements, a boarding or rooming house shall provide one (1) off-street parking space per bedroom offered for guests. 
(16)  Craft Shop. At least one-half of the floor area of the principal structure shall be devoted to retail sales. 
(17)  Recreational Vehicle Park. Development and operational standards shall include: 
a.  Maximum density of the camping area shall not exceed twenty-five (25) units per gross acre; 
b.  Minimum lot area per unit shall be no less than one thousand (1000) square feet; 
c.  Each lot shall have access to a dust-free, public or private street or road (whenever this access meets an existing public street the access entrance must meet city street design standards for a distance of forty (40) feet from the property line into the development); 
d.  Sanitary and shower facilities shall comply with the more restrictive minimum standards of either the city or the state of Colorado; 
e.  There shall be a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet provided between occupancy units; 
f.  There shall be one (1) parking space of two hundred (200) square feet provided for each unit no less than fifteen (15) feet distance from the unit; 
g.  Land shall be provided for common recreational space in the amount of five (5) percent of the gross acreage of the camping area; and 
h.  The Cortez fire protection district shall specify the number and location of fire hydrants. 
(18)  Auto Repair Garage or Place. All motor vehicles on the premises must carry a current registration and a work order with a completion date not to exceed 30 days. Motor vehicles without valid registration and or a work order shall be classified as salvage and junk, and may not be kept, stored or worked on in an auto repair shop. 
(19)  Nursing Home. A nursing home may provide living arrangements for residents sixty (60) years of age or older or for the developmentally disabled, limited to cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, mental retardation, autism, and epilepsy, and for necessary care givers and supervisory personnel; subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Such homes must be state-licensed. 
b.  All exterior aspects of a nursing home, including its scale and off-street parking configuration, shall not disrupt the character of the area. 
c.  In no case shall the total number of persons residing on premises (including staff) be more than one (1) per four hundred (400) square feet of usable floor area. 
d.  Such homes shall provide off-street parking pursuant to Section 5.02(d) of this code. 
(20)  Commercial Wireless Antennas and Towers. Commercial wireless antennas and towers may be permitted, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Co-Location Requirements. A proposal for a new commercial wireless telecommunication service tower shall not be approved unless the city council finds that the equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or building within a two (2) mile search radius for towers over 150 feet, one (1) mile search radius for towers over 120 feet, one-half (1/2) mile search radius for towers under 120 feet in height, and one-quarter (1/4) mile radius for towers under 60 feet in height of the proposed tower, due to one or more of the following reasons: 
1.  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost; 
2.  Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer; 
3.  All proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service tower shall be designed (structurally, electrically, and in all respects) to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least two (2) additional users if the tower is to be over 60 feet in height, or for four (4) additional users if the tower is over 100 feet in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights; 
4.  Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building. 
b.  Tower and Antenna Design. Proposed or modified towers and antennas shall meet the following design requirements: 
1.  Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration; and 
2.  Commercial wireless telecommunication service towers shall be of monopole design unless the city council determines that an alternative design would better blend in with the surrounding environment. 
c.  Tower Siting. Towers shall not be located between a principal structure and a public street, except in the I, industrial zone district where towers may be placed within a side yard abutting an internal industrial street; 
d.  Tower Setbacks. All towers shall conform to the minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district, subject to the additional requirements and modifications: 
1.  The required setback for antenna and tower not rigidly attached to a building shall be equal to the combined height of the antenna and tower. Antennas and towers rigidly attached to a building, whose base is on the ground, may exceed this required setback by the amount equal to the distance from the point of attachment to the ground. 
2.  Towers shall be setback from the planned public rights-of-way as shown on the most recently adopted master street plan by a minimum distance equal to one-half of the height of the tower including all antennas and attachments. 
3.  Towers in the I, industrial zone district may encroach into the rear setback area, provided that the rear property line abuts another industrially zoned property and the tower does not encroach upon any easements. 
4.  Notwithstanding other provisions to the contrary, a tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a public street varied at the sole discretion of the city council, to allow the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure such as a church steeple, light standard power line support device or similar structure. 
e.  Tower Height. The maximum height of all commercial wireless antennas and supporting towers shall not exceed the minimum that is technically necessary to serve the design purpose; provided, however: 
1.  The maximum height of all commercial wireless antennas and supporting towers shall not exceed the length of the shortest setback on the subject parcel or 120 feet, whichever is less; and 
2.  No tower that serves more than one (1) dwelling or place of business shall be in excess of a height equal to the distance from the base of the antenna and tower to the nearest overhead electrical power line, less five (5) feet. 
3.  Towers in the Industrial (I) Zone shall be allowed to attain a height of one hundred fifty feet (150') including the antenna. 
f.  Lights and Other Attachments. 
1.  Towers shall not be artificially illuminated or display strobe lights unless the Federal Aviation Administration or other federal or state authority for a particular tower specifically requires such lighting when incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be attached to the tower; and 
2.  No tower shall have constructed on, or attached to, any additional platform, catwalk, crow's nest, or like structure (other than those required by industry standards or federal regulations), except during periods of construction or repair. 
g.  Signs and Advertising. The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment information signs is prohibited. 
h.  Accessory Utility Buildings. All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. All ground mounted equipment shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of non-vegetative screening better reflects and complements the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
i.  Interference with Public Safety Telecommunications. No telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety telecommunications. All applications for new service shall be accompanied by an intermodulation study, which provides a technical evaluation of existing and proposed transmissions and indicates all potential interference problems. Before the introduction of new service or changes in existing service, telecommunication providers shall notify the city at least 10 calendar days in advance of such changes and allow the city to monitor interference levels during the testing process. At the city council's discretion, such new service or changes may be required to obtain a new conditional use permit. 
j.  Performance Standards. All towers must conform to the applicable performance standards in Section 5.07 of this code. 
k.  Tower Construction Requirements. All towers erected, constructed or located within the city, and all wiring therefore, shall comply with the requirements of all current construction codes. 
l.  Additional Submittal Requirements. In addition to the information required elsewhere in this code, development applications for towers shall include a report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer that: 
1.  Describes the tower height and design including a cross section and elevation; 
2.  Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas; 
3.  Describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of antennas that it can accommodate; 
4.  Documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid interference with established public safety telecommunication; 
5.  Includes an engineer's stamp and registration number; and 
6.  Includes other information necessary to evaluate the request; 
7.  A letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions of shared use; 
8.  Before the issuance of a building permit, the following supplemental information shall be submitted; 
9.  Proof that the proposed tower complies with regulations administered by Federal Aviation Administration; and 
10.  A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer, which demonstrates the towers compliance with the aforementioned structural and electrical standard. 
(21)  Adult Entertainment Uses and Establishments and Uses. The purpose and intent of this section is to regulate sexually-oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city, thereby helping to reduce and eliminate the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or the Colorado Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
a.  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of the exterior boundary of any residential zone district, church, public or private school, child care center, public community center, park, fairground, recreation center, any alcoholic beverage establishment located in the city at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, any area designated as an urban renewal project area pursuant to C.R.S. Section 31-25-107. Further, no adult entertainment use shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of any arterial or major collector roadways. 
b.  No adult entertainment use shall be located within one thousand (1000) feet of any other adult entertainment use whether such adult entertainment uses are within or without the city. 
c.  The method of measurement for the one thousand (1000) foot restriction shall be computed by direct measurement from the exterior boundary of any area identified in this section, or from the nearest property line of the property upon which an adult entertainment business or establishment, or other adult entertainment use is conducted, to the nearest property line of the property where on the building in which an adult entertainment use is to occur. 
d.  Any adult entertainment establishment operating at the effective date of this code in violation of any relevant provision of this code or the Cortez City Code shall be deemed a nonconforming use. An adult entertainment establishment that is deemed a nonconforming use shall be permitted to continue operating for an amortization period of six (6) months. Such nonconforming adult entertainment use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered, except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any adult entertainment establishment deemed a nonconforming use shall apply for a license provided for by the Cortez City Code Section 4A-5 et seq. within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this code or be subject to the relevant penalty provisions set forth herein and in Cortez City Code Sections 4A-38 and 4A-40 et seq. 
e.  An adult entertainment establishment lawfully operating as a conforming use pursuant to the receipt of zoning approval and obtaining a license is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of an adult entertainment establishment license, of any uses identified in Section 4A of the Cortez City Code or subsection 3.05(b)(21)(a-c) of this section, within the specific distancing requirements noted therein. 
f.  No licensee, manager, or employee mingling with the patrons of sexually oriented businesses or serving food or drinks shall be nude or in a state of nudity. It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section that an employee of a sexually oriented business exposed any specified anatomical area during the employee's bona fide use of a restroom, or during the employee's bona fide use of a dressing room that is accessible only to employees. Further, no licensee or employee shall encourage or knowingly permit any person on the premises to engage in specified sexual activities, which conduct involving specified sexual activities is unlawful and shall be subject to criminal penalties as set forth in Section 1.09 of this code, Enforcement and penalties. 
g.  Advertisements, displays, or other promotional material depicting adult entertainment uses shall not be shown or exhibited to be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks or walkways, or from other areas public or semi-public. 
h.  Only one (1) adult entertainment establishment use shall be permitted per building or, in other words, no building, premises, structure, or other facility that contains any sexually oriented business shall contain any other kind of sexually oriented business therein. 
i.  All building openings, entries, and windows shall be located, covered, or screened in such a manner as to prevent a viewing to the interior from any public or semi-public area; for new construction the building shall also be oriented so as to minimize any possibility of viewing the interior from public or semi-public areas. 
j.  No one under 21 years of age shall be admitted to any adult entertainment establishment where live nude entertainment and performances are featured, which live nude entertainment is characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas. Further, no one under 18 years of age shall be admitted to any adult entertainment establishment of any kind and the foregoing minimum age limitations also apply to any employees, agents, servants, or independent contractors working on the premises during the hours when adult entertainment is being presented. 
k.  It is unlawful for an adult entertainment establishment and/or a sexually oriented business to be opened for business or for the licensee or any employee of a licensee to allow patrons upon licensed premises, or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day. Also, such establishments shall not conduct business beginning from 9:00 p.m. on a Saturday to 9:00 a.m. on a following Monday. Further, it is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if, working as an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether a license has been issued for such business under this code, engages in a performance, solicits a performance, makes a sale, solicits a sale, provides a service, or solicits a service between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day. 
l.  It is unlawful for an adult entertainment establishment and/or a sexually oriented business or for a licensee or any employee of a licensee thereto, regardless of whether a license has been issued for such business under this code, to knowingly allow any patron upon the premises to engage in a specified sexual activity while on such premises. It is also unlawful for any licensee or employee of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether a license has been issued for such business under this code to engage in a specified sexual activity while on the premises of such adult entertainment establishment. The foregoing conditions contained in this subsection are promulgated pursuant to the terms of the Cortez City Code contained in Chapter 4A, and C.R.S. Sections 18-7-208 and 18-7-301 and this code. 
m.  This section shall not apply to those areas of an adult motel that are private rooms. 
n.  Any person or entity who operates or causes to be operated an adult entertainment establishment who violates any provisions contained in this section or does not have a valid license is subject to a suit for injunction and is subject to civil and criminal penalties as set forth in Section 1.09 of this code. 
o.  Each day of operation in violation of any provision of this code shall constitute a separate offense. 
p.  Any adult entertainment establishment that engages in repeated or continuing violations of these regulations shall constitute a public nuisance. For purposes of these regulations, "repeated violations" shall mean three or more violations of any provision set forth herein within one (1) year dating from the time of a new violation, and a "continuing violation" shall mean a violation of any provision set forth herein lasting for three (3) or more consecutive days. 
q.  Notwithstanding any other remedies at law or equity, the city attorney may bring an action in the district court of Montezuma County for an injunction against the operation of such establishments in a manner that violates any of the provisions set forth herein. 
(22)  Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs). This type of use is intended to provide a mechanism to help meet the need of affordable housing by allowing accessory residential dwelling units under certain circumstances in areas normally restricted to a single unit, while preserving existing single-family character. All accessory single-family dwelling units shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  An ADU shall be permitted within the RE and R-1 zones as a conditional use and shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and the city council as per Section 6.10 of this code, Conditional use permits. 
b.  The parcel must contain a single-family unit occupied by the property owner. 
c.  The ADU may be attached or incorporated within the living area of the existing primary dwelling or detached. 
d.  The ADU shall not result in an increase of more than twenty (20) percent in the existing living area. 
e.  The ADU may be used for rental purposes and shall be reserved for occupancy of one (1) or two (2) persons. 
f.  The ADU must be provided with two off-street parking spaces as per Section 5.01 of this code and may be contained in a garage or protected by a carport. 
g.  Any new construction associated with the ADU shall comply with all setbacks, lot coverage, height, and design standards contained within the base zone and shall not alter the general appearance of the primary dwelling as a single-family residence. 
h.  The ADU shall have adequate sewer and water services and additional tap fees may be required for the dwelling. 
i.  The ADU shall not adversely impact traffic flow or parking in the neighborhood. 
j.  The lot shall consist of twenty (20) percent more area than the minimum lot size in the underlying zoning district. 
    An ADU that conforms to these requirements shall not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located, and shall be deemed to be a residential use consistent with the existing general plan and zoning designation for the lot. 
(23A)  Medical Marijuana Dispensaries. 
a.  Medical marijuana dispensaries are defined as commercial/retail facilities that grow marijuana for provision to, or provides marijuana to, ill state certified medical marijuana patients. Medical marijuana dispensaries shall only be allowed in the commercial highway (C) and central business district (CBD) zones. Medical marijuana dispensaries shall not be allowed within any residentially zoned areas and shall not be allowed as a home occupation. 
b.  Any medical marijuana center located within the city shall meet the distance requirements as set forth in Cortez City Code section 15-312, distance requirements, now in effect or as may be amended from time to time excepting when an operator/owner has a licensed medical marijuana and retail marijuana establishment at the same physical location whether located within or outside the corporate limits of the city. The suitability of a location for the medical marijuana dispensary shall be determined at the time of the issuance of the first license for such dispensary. The fact that changes in the neighborhood that occur after the issuance of the first license might render the site unsuitable for a medical marijuana dispensary under this section shall not be grounds to suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew the license for such dispensary so long as the license for the dispensary remains in effect. Nothing within this section shall preclude the establishment of a public, private, or charter school, licensed day-care facility, licensed pre-school, or dedicated public park within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of a preexisting medical marijuana dispensary. 
c.  All medical marijuana dispensaries shall be required to obtain a city sales tax license and shall collect and remit all applicable state, county and city sales taxes in a timely manner. 
d.  Any medical marijuana dispensary within the city of Cortez shall be required to have a fully operational alarm system including fire alarm that must be properly maintained. 
e.  Medical marijuana dispensaries shall apply for a sign permit through the planning and zoning division of the city. All exterior signage associated with a medical marijuana dispensary will meet the standards established in the city of Cortez Land Use Code. In addition, no exterior signage, including window treatments over eight and one-half (81/2) inches by eleven (11) inches in size shall use the word "marijuana," "cannabis," or any other word, phrase, or symbol commonly understood to refer to marijuana. 
f.  Each medical marijuana dispensary shall be owned and operated according to Colorado State Constitution, Statutes, and Regulations as may be amended from time to time. 
(23B)  Retail Marijuana Establishments. 
a.  Retail marijuana establishments are defined those establishments licensed by the state of Colorado and approved by the city of Cortez as a retail marijuana store, retail marijuana cultivation facility, retail marijuana products manufacturer or retail marijuana testing facility. Retail marijuana establishments shall only be allowed in the commercial highway (C) and central business district (CBD) zones. Retail marijuana establishments shall not be allowed within any residentially zoned areas and shall not be allowed as a home occupation. 
b.  Any retail marijuana establishment located within the city shall follow the distance requirements as set forth in section 15-312, distance requirements, now in effect or as may be amended from time to time, excepting when an operator/owner has a licensed medical marijuana dispensary and retail marijuana establishment at the same physical location whether located within or outside the corporate limits of the city. The suitability of a location for the retail marijuana business shall be determined at the time of the issuance of the first license for such retail marijuana establishment. The fact that changes in the neighborhood that occur after the issuance of the first license might render the site unsuitable for a retail marijuana establishment under this section shall not be grounds to suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew the license for such retail marijuana establishment so long as the license for the retail marijuana establishment remains in effect. Nothing within this section shall preclude the establishment of a public, private, or charter school, licensed day-care facility, licensed pre-school, or dedicated public park within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of a preexisting retail marijuana establishment. 
c.  All retail marijuana establishments shall be required to obtain a city sales tax license and shall collect and remit all applicable state, county and city sales taxes in a timely manner. 
d.  Any retail marijuana establishment within the city of Cortez shall be required to have a fully operational alarm system including fire alarm that must be properly maintained. 
e.  Retail marijuana establishments shall apply for a sign permit through the planning and zoning division of the city. All exterior signage associated with a retail marijuana establishment will meet the standards established in the city of Cortez Land Use Code. In addition, no exterior signage, including window treatments over eight and one-half (81/2) inches by eleven (11) inches in size shall use the word "marijuana," "cannabis," or any other word, phrase, or symbol commonly understood to refer to marijuana. 
f.  Each retail marijuana establishments shall be owned and operated according to Colorado State Constitution, statutes, and regulations as may be amended from time to time. 
(24)  The cultivation, production, or possession of marijuana plants for medical use by a patient or primary caregiver as such terms are defined by Article XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution, shall be allowed in residential structures subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Such cultivation, production, or possession of marijuana plants must be in full compliance with all applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, C.R.S. §§ 12- 43.3-101 et seq., and the Medical Marijuana Program established by C.R.S § 25-1.5-106. 
b.  Such marijuana plants are cultivated, produced, or possessed within a licensed patient's or registered caregiver's primary residence, as defined by paragraph (h) below. 
c.  The patient or caregiver must reside in the primary residence where the medical marijuana is grown. 
d.  The cultivation, production, or possession of such marijuana plants must not be perceptible from the exterior of the primary residence, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Common visual observation, which also prohibits any form of signage; 
2.  Unusual odors, smells, fragrances, or other olfactory stimulus; 
3.  Light pollution, glare, or brightness that disturbs the repose of another; 
4.  Undue vehicular or foot traffic, including excess parking within the residential zone; and 
5.  Excess noise from the primary residence, which noise is created as a consequence of growing medical marijuana. 
e.  Such marijuana plants shall not be grown or processed in the common areas of a multi-family or attached residential development. 
f.  Such marijuana plants are used exclusively by a licensed patient for the patient's personal use and solely to address a debilitating medical condition. 
g.  Such cultivation, production, or possession of marijuana plants shall be limited to the following space limitations within a primary residence: 
1.  Within a single-family dwelling unit (Group R-3 as defined by the International Building Code, as adopted in Chapter 6, Section 6.1 of the Cortez City Code): a secure, defined, contiguous one hundred fifty (150) square-foot area within the primary residence of the licensed patient or registered caregiver; 
2.  Within a multi-family dwelling unit (Group R-2 as defined by the International Building Code, as adopted in Chapter 6, Section 6.1 of the Cortez City Code): a secure, defined, contiguous one hundred (100) square foot area within the primary residence of the patient or registered caregiver. 
h.  Such cultivation, production, or possession of marijuana plants shall meet the requirements of all adopted city of Cortez building, life/safety codes, and other applicable state electrical and other codes. 
i.  For purposes of this ordinance, "primary residence" means the place that a person, by custom and practice, makes his or her principle domicile and address and to which the person intends to return, following any temporary absence, such as vacation. 
    Residence is evidenced by actual daily physical presence, use, and occupancy of the primary residence and the use of the residential address for domestic purposes, such as, but not limited to, slumber, prepa ration of and partaking of meals, regular mail delivery, vehicle and voter registration, or credit, water, and utility billing. A person shall have only one (1) primary residence. A primary residence shall not include accessory buildings. 
j.  For purposes of this ordinance, "a secure" area means an area within the primary residence accessible only to the patient or primary caregiver. Secure premises shall be locked or partitioned off to prevent access by children, visitors, casual passersby, vandals, or anyone not licensed and authorized to possess medical marijuana. 
k.  If a licensed patient or registered caregiver raises quantities of marijuana requiring more than the square footage limitations of paragraph (g) above, such patient or caregiver must be in full compliance with the Colorado medical marijuana program as provided in C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106(14). 
1.  Such patient or caregiver may grow medical marijuana for personal use and solely to address a debilitating medical condition within the central business district (CBD), or commercial highway (C) zoned districts of the city; 
2.  Such patient or caregiver must submit plans, obtain a building permit, and pass inspections to ensure that the CBD or C premises are in compliance with the city of Cortez's building code, state electrical code, fire code, and all other relevant life/safety codes in order to obtain a certificate of occupancy from the city of Cortez's building division; 
3.  Such patient or caregiver must ensure that the premises are secure, as defined in paragraph (j) above; however, within the commercial and central business district settings so that no children, visitors, passersby, vandals, or anyone else not licensed to possess medical marijuana may access the premises; and 
4.  The patient or caregiver must reside on premises in an apartment or living area constructed in compliance with the city of Cortez building code, state electrical code, and all other relevant life/safety codes. 
l.  Reserved. 
m.  Outdoor cultivation of marijuana, for medical marijuana purposes, for retail marijuana purposes or for personal use by private citizens is prohibited. 
(25)  A community garden is a privately or publicly owned parcel of land used for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers, or herbs by multiple users. Community gardens may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one (1) or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group and may include common areas maintained or used by group members. 
    Community gardens and their users must comply with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations relating to the operation, use, and enjoyment of the garden premises. Site users may not introduce heavy metals or other harmful contaminants to garden or farm sites. Site users may use pesticides only to the extent permitted by law. 
    Community gardens are permitted in the following zoning districts: Residential estate (RE), residential multi-family (R-2), manufactured housing (MH), open (O), central business district (CBD), commercial highway (C), neighborhood business (NB) and industrial (I) zones. A conditional use permit shall be required to establish a community garden in the residential single-family (R-1) zoning district. All community gardens shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Site users must have an established set of operating rules addressing the governance structure of the garden, hours of operation, maintenance, and security requirements. 
b.  Site users must have a garden coordinator to perform the coordinating role for the management of the community gardens and to liaise with the city. The name and telephone number of the garden coordinator and a copy of the operating rules shall be kept on file with the city planning and building department. 
c.  The land shall be served by a water supply sufficient to support the cultivation practices on site. 
d.  The site must be maintained so that water and fertilizer will not drain onto adjacent property. 
e.  All seed, fertilizer, and animal feed shall be stored in a sealed, rodent-proof container and housed in an enclosed structure. 
f.  Fences are permitted as regulated in the underlying zone district. 
g.  To the extent permitted under federal and state law, site users must use sustainable growing practices. 
h.  Compost materials from the garden or gardeners shall be stored at least five (5) feet from adjacent property, and in a manner that controls odor, prevents infestation, and minimizes runoff into waterways and onto adjacent properties. If requested by the site users, waste may be collected regularly by the city. 
i.  The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted, subject to the requirements of the currently-adopted land use code and building codes: 
1.  Sheds for storage of tools, greenhouses, hoophouses, and cold frames in which plants are cultivated, benches, bike racks, compost or waste bins, picnic tables, children's play area, etc. 
j.  Farm stands shall not be permitted on-site, and sale of community garden produce shall not be permitted on-site, without express written authority from city council. 
(26)  Flea Markets. 
a.  Definition. Flea market(s) in the city of Cortez Land Use Code shall have the same meaning as stated in Chapter 15, Article XIII, Section 15-109, Definitions. Cortez City Code. Now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
b.  Flea Market Regulations. Flea market owners, operators and participants shall follow the rules and regulations contained in Chapter 15, Article XIII, Flea Markets. Sections 15-109 thru 15-128. Cortez City Code and all other applicable federal, state and local statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations. Now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
c.  Locations. Flea markets shall be allowed in zones, CBD, C, NB, I. 
d.  Penalty. A violation of this ordinance shall be punishable as set forth in Section 17-16A Cortez City Code now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(27)  Micro-breweries/micro-wineries/micro-distilleries with on-site consumption shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The use will not create offensive odors that are perceptible from other properties. 
b.  The use will include on-site consumption as a primary or secondary use, to include a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the gross floor area. 
c.  The operation may include other uses such as a standard restaurant, bar, or live entertainment as is otherwise permitted in the zoning district. 
(Ord. 1051, 2005; Ord. 1050 (part), 2005; Ord. 1043 (part), 2005; Ord. 1024 (part), 2004; Ord. 1016, 2004; Ord. 1015 (part), 2004; Ord. 984 (part), 2003; Ord. 982 (part), 2003; Ord. 973 (part), 2002; Ord. 971 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 1130, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 1135, 1-12-2010; Ord. No. 1141, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 1155, 2-28-2012; Ord. No. 1166, 5-22-2012; Ord. No. 1167, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 1191, 9-9-2014 ; Ord. No. 1192, 8-26-2014 ; Ord. No. 1197, 11-24-2014 ; Ord. No. 1201, 8-25-2015 ; Ord. No. 1212 , 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 1220 , 3-28-2017; Ord. No. 1239 , 3-27-2018) 
3.06 - Area regulations. 
(a)  Schedule of Residential Area Regulations. The following residential area regulations schedule summarizes the regulations of this code with regard to minimum lot size, minimum yards, maximum lot coverage, minimum floor area per dwelling unit, and maximum building height of residential uses in the various zoning districts. The standards shown in the following schedule may be modified by additional provisions contained in this section or in the individual district regulations. In the event of any conflict between the text of this section and the schedule of residential area regulations, the text shall control. 
Abbreviated 
Designation RE Residential estate district O Open district R-1 Residential single-family district CBD Central business district R-2 Residential multi-family district C Commercial highway district MH Residential manufactured home district NB Neighborhood business district I Industrial  
RESIDENTIAL AREA REGULATIONS 
Development Standard Zoning 
District 
RE Zoning 
District 
R-1 Zoning District 
R-2 Zoning 
District MH Zoning 
District 
CBD Zoning 
District C Zoning 
District 
NB Zoning 
District 
I Zoning 
District 
O Single-Family or One-Family Dwelling Min. lot area/unit (sq. ft.) 43,560 7,000 6,000 6,000 - 6,000 6,000 - - Min. front yard (ft.) 50' 20' 20' 20' - 10' 20' - 20' Min. side yard (ft.) 50' 7' 7' 7' - 7' 7' - 20' Min. rear yard (ft.) 25' 7' 7' 7' - 7' 7' - 20' Max. lot coverage (%) 20% 40% 50% 50% - - 50% - 10% Min. floor area/manufactured home (sq. ft.) - - - 700 - - - - - Max. height (ft.) 35' 35' 35' 35' - 35' 35' - 28 Min. lot width (ft.) 80' 50' 50' 50' - - 50' - - Duplex or Two-Family Dwelling Min. lot area/unit (sq. ft.) - - 3,500 3,500 - - 3,500 - - Min. front yard (ft.) - - 20' 20' - - 20' - - Min. side yard (ft.) - - 7' 7' - - 7' - - Min. rear yard (ft.) - - 7' 7' - - 7' - - Max. lot coverage (%) - - 50% 50% - - 50% - - Min. floor area/ principal unit (sq. ft.) - - 800 800 - - 800 - - Max. height (ft.) - - 35' 35' - - 35' - - Min. lot width (ft.) - - 50' 50' - - 50' - - Three, Four, Five, or Six-Family Dwelling Min. lot area/unit (sq. ft.) - - 3,000 3,000 - - 3,000 - - Min. front yard (ft.) - - 20' 20' - - 20' - - Min. side yard (ft.) - - 7' 7' - - 7' - - Min. rear yard (ft.) - - 7' 7' - - 7' - - Max. lot coverage (%) - - 50% 50% - - 50% - - Min. floor area/ unit (sq. ft.) - - 800 800 - - 800 - - Max. height (ft.) - - 35' 35' - - 35' - - Min. lot width (ft.) - - 60' 60' - - 60' - - Apartments Min. floor area/apartment (sq. ft.) - - - - 500 500 500 - - Min. lot area/unit (sq. ft.) - - 3,000 3,000 - - 3,000 - - Min. front yard (ft.) - - 20' 20' - - 20' - - Min. side yard (ft.) - - 7' 7' - - 7' - - Min. rear yard (ft.) - - 7' 7' - - 7' - - Max. lot coverage (%) - - 50% 50% - - 50% - - Min. floor area/studio unit (sq. ft.) - - 450 450 - - 450 - - Min. floor area/1 bedroom unit (sq. ft.) - - 500 500 - - 500 - - Min. floor area/2 bedroom unit (sq. ft.) - - 700 700 - - 700 - - Min. floor area/3+ bedroom unit (sq. ft.) - - 800 800 - - 800 - - Max. height (ft.) - - 35' 35' - - 35' - - Min. lot width (ft.) - - 60' 60' - - 60' - - Manufactured Home Dwelling Min. lot area/unit (sq. ft.) - - - 6,000 - - - - - Min. front yard (ft.) - - - 20' - - - - - Min. side yard (ft.) - - - 7' - - - - - Min. rear yard (ft.) - - - 7' - - - - - Max. lot coverage (%) - - - 50% - - - - - Min. floor area/principal unit (sq. ft.) - - - 700 - - - - - Max. height (ft.) - - - 35' - - - - - Min. lot width (ft.) - - - 50' - - - - -  
(b)  Schedule of Nonresidential Area Regulations. The following nonresidential area regulations schedule summarizes the regulations of this code with regard to minimum lot area, minimum yards, maximum lot coverage, minimum floor area per nonresidential use, maximum height, and minimum lot width of nonresidential uses in the various zoning districts. The standards shown in the following schedule may be modified by additional provisions contained in this section or in the individual district regulations. In the event of any conflict between the text of this section and the schedule of nonresidential area regulations, the text shall control. 
NONRESIDENTIAL AREA REGULATIONS 
Development Standard Zone District CBD Zone District C Zone District NB Zone District I Zone District O Min. lot area (sq. ft.) 2,500 3,000 6,000 10,000 - Min. front yard (ft.) 10' 10' 20' 15' 20' Min. side yard (ft.) 0' 0' 7' or less by cond. use permit 7' 20' Min. rear yard (ft.) 7' 7' 20' 7' 20' Max. lot coverage - 50% 50% 50% 10% Minimum floor area per nonresidential use (sq. ft.) - - 500' - 500' Max. height (ft.) 50' 50' 35' 35' 28'  
(c)  Minimum Lot Area. Residential uses shall comply with the minimum lot area per dwelling unit standards and summarized in the residential area regulations schedule, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this subsection or elsewhere in this code. Nonresidential uses shall comply with the minimum lot area standards and summarized in the nonresidential area regulations schedule, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this subsection or elsewhere in this code. 
(d)  Minimum Front Yard Setback. The location of buildings shall comply with the minimum front yard setback standards summarized in the residential and nonresidential area regulations schedules, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this subsection or elsewhere in this code. 
(1)  Measurement. The front setback for the purpose of these calculations refers to the open space at grade between a structure and the property line of the lot on which the structure is located measured by the horizontal distance between the lot line and the closest projection of the principal or accessory building. 
(2)  Setback Averaging. If the existing front setbacks of lots within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street are less than the required front setback of the underlying zoning district, applicants shall be allowed to use the "average" front setback on the block. In such cases, the "average setback" shall represent the mean (average) setback of all lots on the same side of the street within the same block, provided that lots that are not developed with the same type of use that is proposed on the subject property shall not be included in the calculation. When one or more of the lots on the block are vacant the normally required setback for the vacant lot shall be used in calculating the average setback. This provision shall not be interpreted as requiring a greater front setback than imposed by the underlying zone district. Responsibility for demonstrating eligibility for an "average setback" pursuant to this subsection shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
(3)  Corner Lots. For lots with frontage on two (2) intersecting streets, such a lot shall have the front of the lot determined by the legal street address for the lot. Corner lots shall comply with the front yard setback for the front of the lot and 75% of the front yard setback for the side of the lot facing the other street. The rear yard setback and the side yard setback for the interior side of the lot shall be as required by the area regulations. 
(4)  Carports. Carports with three sides open may be constructed in conjunction with an allowed residential structure to within ten (10) feet of the front property line. No carport shall be constructed or encroach over any recorded easement. No portion of the carport overhang shall encroach over any public right-of-way or other private property. If a property owner desires to construct a carport closer than ten feet of the front property line a conditional use permit is required as per Section 6.10 of this code. 
(5)  Double Frontage Lots. Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, a required front yard shall be provided on both streets unless a building line for accessory buildings has been established along one frontage on the plat or by resolution, in which event only one (1) required front yard need be observed. 
(e)  Minimum Side Yard Setback. The location of buildings shall comply with the minimum side yard setback standards summarized in the residential and nonresidential area regulations schedules, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this subsection or elsewhere in this code. 
(1)  Principal Structures. Principal structures shall have a side yard of not less than seven (7) feet measured from any side lot line; provided however, that principal structures shall not be located within fourteen (14) feet of the adjoining property principal structure. 
(2)  Accessory Buildings. Detached accessory buildings shall have a side yard of not less than five (5) feet measured from any side lot line, alley right-of-way or easement line (except in the RE, residential estate district); provided, however, that detached accessory buildings shall not be located within feet (10) feet of any other building. No accessory building shall be higher than the principal structure on the lot. 
(3)  Carports. Carports with three sides open may be constructed in conjunction with an allowed residential structure provided that all setbacks for the principal structure are met. No carport shall be constructed or encroach over any recorded easement. No portion of the carport overhang shall encroach over any public right-of-way or other private property. No free-standing carport shall be higher than sixteen feet. 
(f)  Minimum Rear Yard Setback. The location of buildings shall comply with the minimum rear yard setback standards summarized in the residential and nonresidential area regulations schedules, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this subsection or elsewhere in this code. 
(1)  Carports. Carports with three sides open may be constructed in conjunction with an allowed residential structure up to within five feet of the rear property line. No carport shall be constructed or encroach over any recorded easement. No portion of the carport overhang shall encroach over any public right-of-way or other private property. A minimum of ten (10) feet separation is required between the carport and any structure on the adjoining property. No free-standing carport shall be higher than sixteen feet. 
(g)  Maximum Lot Coverage. The size of buildings shall comply with the maximum lot coverage standards summarized in the residential and nonresidential area regulations schedules, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this subsection or elsewhere in this code. 
(1)  Measurement. Roof eaves extending not more than three (3) feet from the walls of a building shall be excluded from coverage computations. 
(h)  Minimum Floor Area. Residential uses shall comply with the minimum floor area per dwelling unit standards summarized in the residential area regulations schedule, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this subsection or elsewhere in this code. Nonresidential uses shall comply with the minimum floor area per principal use standards summarized in the nonresidential area regulations schedule, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this subsection or elsewhere in this code. 
(1)  Measurement. The floor area, for the purpose of these minimum floor area requirements, refers to the total of the horizontal area of each floor, measured from the outside face of the building walls and excluding garages, carports, cellars and accessory buildings. 
(i)  Maximum Height. The height of buildings and structures shall comply with the maximum height standards summarized in the residential and nonresidential area regulations schedules, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this subsection or elsewhere in this code. 
(1)  Measurement. 
a.  Buildings and Other Structures. Height refers to the vertical distance between average finished grade along the front of the building and the highest point on the peak of the roof. 
b.  Commercial Wireless Antennas and Towers. The height of commercial antennas and towers shall be determined by measuring the vertical distance from the tower's point of contact with the ground or rooftop to the highest point of the tower, including all antennas or other attachments when towers are mounted upon other structures. 
(2)  Permitted Exceptions. The following structures and features shall be exempt from the height requirements of this code: 
a.  Chimneys, smokestacks or flues; 
b.  Cooling towers and ventilators; 
c.  Elevator bulkheads and stairway enclosures; 
d.  Tanks and water towers; 
e.  Utility poles and support structures; 
f.  Belfries, spires and church steeples; and 
g.  Monuments, flagpoles and ornamental towers. 
(j)  Minimum Lot Width. Lots used for residential uses shall comply with the minimum lot width standards contained in the district regulations and summarized in the residential area regulations schedule, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this subsection, or elsewhere in this code. 
(1)  Measurement. Lot width shall be the length of the minimum required front yard setback line between the two side lot lines. If the front yard setback line is an arc or a curve, the lot width shall be the length of such arc or curve. 
(2)  Cul-de-Sacs. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum front street line of forty (40) feet and a minimum lot width of fifty (50) feet, provided that this provision shall not apply in the PUD, planned unit development district. 
(Ord. 1043 (part), 2005; Ord. 1024 (part), 2004) 
3.07 - RE, residential estate district. 
(a)  Purpose. See Section 3.02(a) of this chapter, Purpose for Zone Districts. 
(b)  Permitted Uses. Permitted uses in the RE, residential estate district shall be those established for the RE, residential estate district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this code. 
(c)  Conditional Uses. Conditional uses in the RE, residential estate district shall be those established for the RE, residential estate district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the city council in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.10 of this code, Conditional use permits. 
(d)  Temporary Uses. Temporary uses in the RE, residential estate district shall be those established for the RE, residential estate district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to the approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.20 of this code, Temporary use permits. 
(e)  District Regulations. All principal structures shall: 
(1)  Be placed on a slab-on-grade or a perimeter foundation approved by the building department. 
(2)  Have a wood, brick, or stucco exterior, or a material that looks similar to wood, brick, or stucco; and 
(3)  Have a minimum 4:12 roof pitch and a one (1) foot eave overhang; provided, however, that structures constructed in the traditional southwest Spanish-style are exempt from this requirement. 
(f)  Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the RE, residential estate district shall be forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet, subject to Section 3.06(c) of this chapter. 
(g)  Minimum Front Yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the RE, residential estate district shall be fifty (50) feet, subject to Section 3.06(d) of this chapter. 
(h)  Minimum Side Yard. The minimum side yard in the RE, residential estate district shall be fifty (50) feet, subject to Section 3.06(e) of this chapter. 
(i)  Minimum Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard in the RE, residential estate district shall be as twenty-five (25) feet, subject to Section 3.06(f) of this chapter. 
(j)  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the RE, residential estate district shall be twenty (20) percent, subject to Section 3.06(g) of this chapter. 
(k)  Maximum Height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the RE, residential estate district shall be thirty-five (35) feet, subject to Section 3.06(i) of this chapter. 
(l)  Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width for all uses in the RE, residential estate district shall be eighty (80) feet, subject to Section 3.06 (j) of this chapter. 
3.08 - R-1, residential single-family district. 
(a)  Purpose. See Section 3.02(a), Purpose for Zone Districts. 
(b)  Permitted Uses. Permitted uses in the R-1, residential single-family district shall be those established for the R-1, residential single-family district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this code. 
(c)  Conditional Uses. Conditional uses in the R-1, residential single-family district shall be those established for the R-1, residential single-family district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the city council in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.10 of this code, conditional use permits. 
(d)  Temporary Uses. Temporary uses in the R-1, residential single-family district shall be those established for the R-1, residential single-family district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to the approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.20 of this code, Temporary use permits. 
(e)  District Regulations. All principal structures shall: 
(1)  Be placed on a slab-on-grade or a perimeter foundation approved by the building department. 
(2)  Have a wood, brick, or stucco exterior, or a material that looks similar to wood, brick, or stucco; and 
(3)  Have a minimum 4:12 roof pitch and a one (1) foot eave overhang; provided, however, that structures constructed in the traditional southwest Spanish style are exempt from this requirement. 
(f)  Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the R-1, residential single-family district shall be seven thousand (7,000) square feet, subject to Section 3.06(c) of this chapter. 
(g)  Minimum Front Yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the R-1, residential single-family district shall be twenty (20) feet, subject to Section 3.06(d) of this chapter. 
(h)  Minimum Side Yard. The minimum side yard in the R-1, residential single-family district shall be seven (7) feet, subject to Section 3.06(e) of this chapter. 
(i)  Minimum Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard in the R-1, residential single-family district shall be seven (7) feet, subject to Section 3.06(f) of this chapter. 
(j)  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the R-1, residential single-family district shall be forty (40) percent, subject to Section 3.06(g) of this chapter. 
(k)  Maximum Height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the R-1, residential single-family district shall be thirty-five (35) feet, subject to Section 3.06(i) of this chapter. 
(l)  Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width for all uses in the R-1, residential single-family district shall be fifty (50) feet, subject to Section 3.06 (j) of this chapter. 
3.09 - R-2, residential multi-family district. 
(a)  Purpose. See Section 3.02(a), Purpose for Zone Districts. 
(b)  Permitted Uses. Permitted uses in the R-2, residential multi-family district shall be those established for the R-2, residential multi-family district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this code. 
(c)  Conditional Uses. Conditional uses in the R-2, residential multi-family district shall be those established for the R-2, residential multi-family district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the city council in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.10 of this code, conditional use permits. 
(d)  Temporary Uses. Temporary uses in the R-2, residential multi-family district shall be those established for the R-2, residential multi-family district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to the approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.20 of this code, Temporary use permits. 
(e)  District Regulations. All principal structures shall: 
(1)  Be placed on a slab-on-grade or a perimeter foundation approved by the building department; 
(2)  Have a wood, brick, or stucco exterior, or a material that looks similar to wood, brick, or stucco; and 
(3)  Have a minimum 4:12 roof pitch and a one (1) foot eave overhang; provided, however, that structures constructed in the traditional southwest Spanish style are exempt from this requirement. 
(f)  Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the R-2, residential multi-family district shall be as follows, subject to Section 3.06(c) of this chapter: 
(1)  Six thousand (6,000) square feet per single-family dwelling unit; 
(2)  Three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet per duplex unit; and 
(3)  Three thousand (3,000) square feet per multi-family dwelling unit. 
(g)  Minimum Front Yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the R-2, residential multi-family district shall be twenty (20) feet, subject to Section 3.06(d) of this chapter. 
(h)  Minimum Side Yard. The minimum side yard for all uses in the R-2, residential multi-family district shall be seven (7) feet, subject to Section 3.06(e) of this chapter. 
(i)  Minimum Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard for all uses in the R-2, residential multi-family district shall be seven (7) feet, subject to Section 3.06(f) of this chapter. 
(j)  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all uses in the R-2, residential multi-family district shall be fifty (50) percent, subject to Section 3.06(g) of this chapter. 
(k)  Minimum Floor Area. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the R-2, residential multi-family district shall be as follows, subject to Section 3.06(h) of this chapter: 
(1)  Eight hundred (800) square feet per dwelling unit in a duplex dwelling; 
(2)  Eight hundred (800) square feet per dwelling unit in a multi-family dwelling with six (6) units or less; 
(3)  Four hundred fifty (450) square feet per studio dwelling unit in a multi-family dwelling with seven (7) or more units; 
(4)  Five hundred (500) square feet per one-bedroom dwelling unit in a multi-family dwelling with seven (7) or more units; 
(5)  Seven hundred (700) square feet per two-bedroom dwelling unit in a multi-family dwelling with seven (7) or more units; and 
(6)  Eight hundred (800) square feet per dwelling unit with three or more bedrooms in a multi-family dwelling with seven (7) or more units. 
(l)  Maximum Height. The maximum height of all buildings and structures in the R-2, residential multi-family district shall be thirty-five (35) feet, subject to Section 3.06(i) of this chapter. 
(m)  Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width in the R-2, residential multi-family district shall be as follows, subject to Section 3.06(j) of this chapter. 
(1)  Fifty (50) feet for single-family and two-family dwellings, and 
(2)  Sixty (60) feet for all other uses. 
3.10 - MH, residential manufactured home district. 
(a)  Purpose. See Section 3.02(a) of this chapter, Purpose for Zone Districts. 
(b)  Permitted Uses. Permitted uses in the MH, residential manufactured home district shall be those established for the MH, residential manufactured home district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this code. 
(c)  Conditional Uses. Conditional Uses in the MH, residential manufactured home district shall be those established for the MH, residential manufactured home district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the city council in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.10 of this code, conditional use permits. 
(d)  Temporary Uses. Temporary uses in the MH, residential manufactured home district shall be those established for the MH, residential manufactured home district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to the approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.20 of this code, Temporary use permits. 
(e)  Design Standards. 
(1)  Except for manufactured homes, all principal single- and two-family shall be placed on a slab-on-grade or perimeter foundation approved by the building department. All multi-family applications shall have a foundation system approved by the building department. 
(2)  All single- and two-family structures shall comply with design standards contained in Section 3.05(b)(2)(b) of this chapter. 
(f)  Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the MH, residential manufactured home district shall be as follows, subject to Section 3.06(c) of this chapter. 
(1)  Six thousand (6,000) square feet per single-family and manufactured home dwelling unit; 
(2)  Three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet per duplex dwelling unit; and 
(3)  Three thousand (3,000) square feet per multi-family dwelling unit. 
(g)  Minimum Front Yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the MH, residential manufactured home district shall be twenty (20) feet, subject to Section 3.06(d) of this chapter. 
(h)  Minimum Side Yard. The minimum side yard in the MH, residential manufactured home district shall be seven (7) feet, subject to Section 3.06(e) of this chapter. 
(i)  Minimum Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard in the MH, residential manufactured home district shall be seven (7) feet, subject to Section 3.06(f) of this chapter. 
(j)  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the MH, residential manufactured home district shall be fifty (50) percent, subject to Section 3.06(g) of this chapter; provided, however, the maximum lot coverage may be increased to fifty-five (55) percent with planning commission approval if compatible with adjacent uses, given neighborhood context and parcel size. 
(k)  Minimum Floor Area. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the MH, residential manufactured home district shall be as follows, subject to Section 3.06(h) of this chapter: 
(1)  Five hundred (500) square feet per apartment; 
(2)  Eight hundred (800) square feet per dwelling unit in a multi-family dwelling with six (6) units or less; 
(3)  Four hundred fifty (450) square feet per studio dwelling unit in multi-family dwelling with seven (7) or more units; 
(4)  Five hundred (500) square feet per one-bedroom dwelling unit in a multi-family dwelling with seven (7) or more units; 
(5)  Seven hundred (700) square feet per two-bedroom dwelling unit in a multi-family dwelling with seven (7) or more units; and 
(6)  Eight hundred (800) square feet per dwelling unit with three (3) or more bedrooms in a multi-family dwelling with seven (7) or more units. 
(l)  Maximum Height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the MH, residential manufactured home district shall be thirty-five (35) feet, subject to Section 3.06(i) of this chapter. 
(m)  Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width in the MH, residential manufactured home district shall be as follows, subject to Section 3.06(j) of this chapter : 
(1)  Fifty (50) feet for single-family and two-family dwellings, and manufactured homes; and 
(2)  Sixty (60) feet for all other uses. 
(Ord. 1024 (part), 2004) 
3.11 - O, open district. 
(a)  Purpose. See Section 3.02(a) of this chapter, Purpose for Zone Districts. 
(b)  Permitted Uses. Permitted uses in the O, open district shall be those established for the O, open district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this code. 
(c)  Conditional Uses. Conditional uses in the O, open district shall be those established for the O, open district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the city council in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.10 of this code, conditional use permits. 
(d)  Temporary Uses. Temporary uses in the O, open district shall be those established for the O, open district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to the approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.20 of this code, Temporary use permits. 
(e)  Design Standard of General Application. 
(1)  Open space shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.05 of this code, Trees, landscaping and screening. 
(2)  All permitted or accessory residential uses shall comply with design standards for single-family dwellings contained in Section 3.05(b)(2)(b) of this chapter. 
(f)  Minimum Lot Area. There shall be no minimum lot area for uses in the O, open district. 
(g)  Minimum Front Yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the O, open district shall be twenty (20) feet, subject to Section 3.06(d) of this chapter. 
(h)  Minimum Side Yard. The minimum side yard in the O, open district shall be twenty (20) feet, subject to Section 3.06(e) of this chapter. 
(i)  Minimum Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard in the O, open district shall be twenty (20) feet, subject to Section 3.06(f) of this chapter. 
(j)  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the O, open district shall be ten (10) percent, subject to Section 3.06(g) of this chapter. 
(k)  Maximum Height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the O, open district shall be twenty-eight (28) feet, subject to Section 3.06(i) of this chapter. 
(l)  Minimum Lot Width. There shall be no minimum lot width in the O, open district, subject to Section 3.06 (j) of this chapter. 
3.12 - CBD, central business district. 
(a)  Purpose. See Section 3.02(a), Purpose for Zone Districts. 
(b)  Permitted Uses. Permitted uses in the CBD, central business district shall be those established for the CBD, central business district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this code. 
(c)  Conditional Uses. Conditional Uses in the CBD, central business district shall be those established for the CBD, central business district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the city council in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.10 of this code, conditional use permits. 
(d)  Temporary Uses. Temporary Uses in the CBD, central business district shall be those established for the CBD, central business district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to the approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.20 of this code, Temporary use permits. 
(e)  Design Standards. 
(1)  Open space shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.05 of this code, Trees, landscaping and screening. 
(2)  Retail uses in central business district with less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet with alley access do not have to provide loading berths. 
(3)  Retail uses in the central business district with less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet do not have to provide off-street parking. 
(f)  Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area per nonresidential use in the CBD, central business district shall be twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet, subject to Section 3.06(c) of this chapter. 
(g)  Minimum Front Yard. There shall be no minimum front yard for uses in the CBD, central business district. 
(h)  Minimum Side Yard. There shall be no minimum side yard for uses in the CBD, central business district. 
(i)  Minimum Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard in the CBD, central business district shall be seven (7) feet, subject to Section 3.06(f) of this chapter. 
(j)  Maximum Lot Coverage. There shall be no maximum lot coverage in the CBD, central business district. 
(k)  Minimum Floor Area. The minimum floor area per apartment in the CBD, central business district shall be five hundred (500) square feet, subject to Section 3.06(h) of this chapter. 
(l)  Maximum Height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the CBD, central business district shall be fifty (50) feet, subject to Section 3.06(i) of this chapter. 
(m)  Minimum Lot Width. There shall be no minimum lot width in the CBD, central business district, subject to Section 3.06 (j) of this chapter. 
3.13 - C, commercial highway district. 
(a)  Purpose. See Section 3.02(a), Purpose for Zone Districts. 
(b)  Permitted Uses. Permitted uses in the C, commercial highway district shall be those established for the C, commercial highway district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this code. 
(c)  Conditional Uses. Conditional uses in the C, commercial highway district shall be those established for the C, commercial highway district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the city council in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.10 of this code, Conditional use permits. 
(d)  Temporary Uses. Temporary uses in the C, commercial highway district shall be those established for the C, commercial highway district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to the approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.20 of this code, Temporary use permits. 
(e)  Design Standards. 
(1)  Open space shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.05 of this code, Trees, landscaping and screening. 
(2)  All principal structures allowed as a conditional use shall be placed on a slab-on-grade or perimeter foundation approved by the building department. All multi-family and commercial applications shall have a foundation system approved by the building department. 
(3)  All single-family structures shall comply with design standards for single-family dwellings contained in Section 3.05(b)(2)(b) of this chapter. 
(f)  Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area in the C, commercial highway district shall be as follows, subject to Section 3.06(c) of this chapter: 
(1)  Six thousand (6,000) square feet for single-family dwelling units; and 
(2)  Three thousand (3,000) square feet for all nonresidential uses. 
(g)  Minimum Front Yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the C, commercial highway district shall be 10 feet, subject to Section 3.06(d) of this chapter. 
(h)  Minimum Side Yard. The minimum side yard setback in the C, commercial highway district shall be as follows, subject to Section 3.06(e) of this chapter: 
(1)  Seven (7) feet for single family dwelling units; and 
(2)  None (0) for nonresidential uses; provided, however, that the minimum street side yard shall be ten (10) feet. 
(i)  Minimum Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard for all uses in the C, commercial highway district shall be seven (7) feet, subject to Section 3.06(f) of this chapter. 
(j)  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all uses in C, commercial highway district shall be fifty (50) percent, subject to Section 3.06(g) of this chapter. 
(k)  Minimum Floor Area. The minimum floor area in the C, commercial highway district shall be as follows, subject to Section 3.07(h) of this chapter: 
(1)  Five hundred (500) square feet per apartment; 
(2)  None (0) for nonresidential uses. 
(l)  Maximum Height. The maximum height in the C, commercial highway district shall be as follows, subject to Section 3.06(i) of this chapter: 
(1)  Fifty (50) feet for nonresidential uses; and 
(2)  Thirty-five (35) feet for single-family dwelling units. 
(m)  Minimum Lot Width. There shall be no minimum lot width in the C, commercial highway district, subject to Section 3.06 (j) of this chapter. 
3.14 - NB, neighborhood business district. 
(a)  Purpose. See Section 3.02(a) of this chapter, Purpose for Zone Districts. 
(b)  Permitted Uses. Permitted uses in the NB, neighborhood business district shall be those established for the NB, neighborhood business district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this code. 
(1)  Apartments Within Commercial Uses. Residential apartments are permitted in any commercial building provided such use occupies no more than one-third ( 1/3 ) of any floor and must be a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet per apartment. 
(2)  Limitation on hours of operation. All commercial activities in the NB, neighborhood business district shall operate only between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(c)  Conditional Uses. Conditional uses in the NB, neighborhood business district shall be those established for the NB, neighborhood business district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the city council in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.10 of this code, conditional use permits. 
(1)  Limitation on Hours of Operation. All commercial activities in the NB, neighborhood business district shall operate only between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Exception: Large home based and commercial childcare facilities shall operate between the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. or as allowed by conditional use permit. 
(d)  Temporary Uses. Temporary uses in the NB, neighborhood business district shall be those established for the NB, neighborhood business district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to the approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.20 of this code, temporary use permits. 
(1)  Limitation on Hours of Operation. All commercial activities in the NB, neighborhood business district shall operate only between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(e)  Design Standards. 
(1)  Open space shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.05 of this code, Trees, landscaping and screening. 
(2)  All single- and two-family dwellings shall be placed on a slab-on-grade or perimeter foundation approved by the building department. 
(3)  All multi-family and commercial applications shall have a foundation system approved by the building department. 
(4)  All single- and two-family dwellings shall comply with design standards contained in Section 3.05(b)(2)(b) of this chapter. 
(f)  Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area in the NB, neighborhood business district shall be as follows, subject to Section 3.06(c) of this chapter: 
(1)  Six thousand (6,000) square feet per nonresidential use; 
(2)  Six thousand (6,000) square feet per single-family dwelling unit; 
(3)  Thirty-five hundred (3,500) square feet per duplex dwelling unit; and 
(4)  Three thousand (3,000) square feet per multi-family dwelling unit. 
(g)  Minimum Front Yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the NB, neighborhood business district shall be twenty (20) feet, subject to Section 3.06(d) of this chapter. 
(h)  Minimum Side Yard. The minimum side yard in the NB, neighborhood business district shall be seven (7) feet, subject to Section 3.06(e). 
(i)  Minimum Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard in the NB, neighborhood business district shall be seven (7) feet, subject to Section 3.06(f) of this chapter. 
(j)  Maximum Lot Coverage. There shall be a maximum lot coverage of 50 percent for all uses within the NB, neighborhood business district. 
(k)  Minimum Floor Area. The minimum floor area in the NB, neighborhood business district shall be as follows, subject to Section 3.06(h) of this chapter: 
(1)  Five hundred (500) square feet per apartment; 
(2)  Eight hundred (800) square feet per dwelling unit in a multi-family dwelling with six (6) units or less; 
(3)  Four hundred fifty (450) square feet per studio dwelling unit in multi-family dwelling with seven (7) or more units; 
(4)  Five hundred (500) square feet per one-bedroom dwelling unit in a multi-family dwelling with seven (7) or more units; 
(5)  Seven hundred (700) square feet per two-bedroom dwelling unit in a multi-family dwelling with seven (7) or more units; 
(6)  Eight hundred (800) square feet per dwelling unit with three or more bedrooms in a multi-family dwelling with seven (7) or more units; and 
(7)  Five hundred (500) square feet per nonresidential use, unless otherwise permitted by the planning commission. 
(l)  Maximum Height. The maximum height of all buildings and structures in the NB, neighborhood business district shall be thirty-five (35) feet, subject to Section 3.06(i) of this chapter. 
(m)  Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width in the NB, neighborhood business district shall be as follows, subject to Section 3.06(j) of this chapter: 
(1)  Fifty (50) feet for single-family and two-family dwellings; and 
(2)  Sixty (60) feet for all other uses, subject to Section 3.06(j) of this chapter. 
3.15 - I, industrial district. 
(a)  Purpose. See Section 3.02(a) of this chapter, Purpose for Zone Districts. 
(b)  Permitted Uses. Permitted uses in the I, industrial district shall be those established for the I, industrial district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this code. 
(c)  Conditional Uses. Conditional uses in the I, industrial district shall be those established for the I, industrial district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the city council in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.10 of this chapter, conditional use permits. 
(d)  Temporary Uses. Temporary uses in the I, industrial district shall be those established for the I, industrial district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to the approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.20 of this chapter, Temporary use permits. 
(e)  Design Standards. 
(1)  Open space shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.05 of this code, Trees, landscaping and screening. 
(f)  Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area for all principal uses in the I, industrial district shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet, subject to Section 3.06(c) of this chapter. 
(g)  Minimum Front Yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the I, industrial district shall be fifteen (15), subject to Section 3.06(d) of this chapter. 
(h)  Minimum Side Yard. The minimum side yard in the I, industrial district shall be seven (7) feet, subject to Section 3.06(e) of this chapter. 
(i)  Minimum Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard in the I, industrial district shall be seven (7) feet, subject to Section 3.06(f) of this chapter. 
(j)  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the I, industrial district shall be fifty (50) percent, subject to Section 3.06(g) of this chapter. 
(k)  Maximum Height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the I, industrial district shall be thirty-five (35) feet, subject to Section 3.06(i) of this chapter. 
(l)  Minimum Lot Width. There shall be no minimum lot width in the I, industrial district, subject to Section 3.06(j) of this chapter. 
3.16 - PUD, planned unit development district. 
(a)  Purpose and Intent. The PUD, planned unit development district is designed primarily to provide flexibility to accommodate mixed-use, nontraditional and innovative developments and renewal. It is further intended to promote more economical and efficient use of the land while providing a harmonious variety of housing choices, a higher level of urban amenities, and the preservation of natural and scenic qualities of open spaces. The PUD, planned unit development district may be applied in all land use categories of the Cortez comprehensive plan. In addition to the regulations of this section, development in the PUD, planned unit development district shall be in compliance with other applicable provisions of this code. 
(b)  Types of Planned Unit Developments. The city council, after public hearing and proper notice and after recommendation from the planning and zoning commission, may authorize the creation of the following types of planned unit development districts: 
(1)  Shopping centers on tracts of three (3) acres or more; 
(2)  Housing developments on tracts of five (5) acres or more; 
(3)  Industrial parks on tracts of ten (10) acres or more; 
(4)  Medical center and/or hospital on tracts of three (3) acres or more; 
(5)  Civic center, recreation or community center on tracts of one (1) acre or more; 
(6)  Office, motel or hotel on tracts of three (3) acres or more; 
(7)  Any combination of the above on tracts of ten (10) acres or more; or 
(8)  Combinations of commercial and residential uses may be on tracts of land that are (1) one to (10) ten acres in size and located in the commercial highway zone. 
(9)  Upon the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, the city council may find that smaller tracts of property are appropriate for the development or redevelopment as a PUD. In approving a planned unit development smaller than the minimum acreages above, the planning and zoning commission and the council shall find that the proposed development: 
a.  Cannot be developed under conventional zoning; 
b.  Is adequately buffered from adjacent residential property; 
c.  Mitigates adverse impacts on adjacent properties; 
d.  Is consistent with the spirit and intent of the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  General Requirements. The ordinance approving a planned unit development district shall include findings that the proposed development shall: 
(1)  Be consistent with the Cortez comprehensive plan, 
(2)  Be consistent with the character of existing land uses in the surrounding area, and 
(3)  Not adversely affect the future development of the surrounding area. 
(4)  Planned unit developments shall be used only when long-term community benefits, which may be achieved through high quality development, will be derived. The planning and zoning commission shall determine whether substantial community benefits will be derived. In addition to the above findings, the following list of specific benefits that would support a PUD zoning district shall be addressed. The items include but are not limited to: 
a.  More effective infrastructure; 
b.  Reduced traffic demands; 
c.  A greater quality and quantity of public and/or private open space; 
d.  Other recreational amenities; 
e.  Needed housing types and/or mix; 
f.  Innovative designs; and/or 
g.  Protection and/or preservation of natural resources, habitat areas and natural features. 
(d)  Site Plan Requirement. In establishing a planned unit development district in accordance with this section, the city council shall require a comprehensive site plan of the development in accordance with the requirements of Section 6.14 of this code, Site plans. Such site plan shall be approved and recorded as part of the approving ordinance prior to the issuance of any zoning development permit in the planned unit development. Such required plan and ordinance shall set forth the requirements for ingress and egress to the property, public streets or drives, with adequate right-of-way, special setbacks, sidewalks, utilities, drainage, parking space, height of building, maximum lot coverage, common open space, yards and open spaces, screening walls or fences, landscaping and other development and protective requirements including maintenance considered necessary to create a reasonable transition to and protection of the adjacent property. However, a single-family residence may be constructed on a platted lot of record located in a PUD, planned unit development district without approval of a site plan other than as required for a normal building permit where a single-family residence is listed as a permitted use in the underlying zone district. 
(e)  Approval and Conditions. Every planned unit development district approved under the provisions of this code shall follow the procedure for and be considered an amendment to the zoning map. In approving the planned unit development district, the city council may impose conditions relative to the standard of development and such conditions shall be complied with before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the use of the land or any structure that is part of the planned unit development district and such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the approval of the zoning amendment, but shall be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of the certificate of occupancy. All planned unit development districts approved in accordance with the provisions of this code shall be referenced on the official zoning map and a list of such planned unit development districts, together with the category of uses permitted therein, shall be maintained in the office of the zoning administrator. Every application for a planned unit development district shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with Sections 6.04 and 6.05 of this code, except that full approval shall be executed through the adoption of such site plan and the approving ordinance as noted in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  Time Limit of Approval. If within a maximum of twelve (12) months following the approval of a planned unit development the applicant has not submitted a final plat, or a building permit application where a final plat is not required, or if the planning commission finds that the applicant has abandoned the project, or if the planning commission determines that no substantial progress has been made toward completion of the project in the previous twelve (12) months, procedures shall be initiated to rezone the land to its original state. At its discretion and for good cause, the planning commission may extend for six (6) months and one (1) time only, the period for filing a final plat or building permit application. 
(g)  Permitted and Conditional Uses. Permitted and conditional uses in a PUD shall be determined by the city council upon recommendation of the planning commission. Unless otherwise explicitly approved by the city council, the only permitted and conditional uses allowed shall be those established for the underlying zone district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and other provisions of this code. Approval of such uses when not specifically authorized shall require amendment of the planned unit development ordinance or site plan, according to the procedures for zoning map amendments set forth in Section 6.02 of this code, Zoning map and land use code amendments. Notwithstanding the above, specific authorization shall not be required for conditional uses if such uses are shown on the approved site plan or in the ordinance for the planned unit development district, or for customary accessory uses. 
(h)  Temporary Uses. Temporary uses shall be those established for the underlying zone district as outlined in Section 3.05 of this chapter, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and other provisions of this code. 
(i)  Prohibited Uses. Manufactured home dwelling units shall not be permitted in the PUD, planned unit development district. 
(j)  Street and Access Requirements. 
(1)  Public Streets. All streets shall conform to the requirements of Section 4.03 of this code, Streets and alleys, and the street development standards of the city. 
(2)  Private Streets and Drives. Private streets and drives need not meet the requirements of this code which would otherwise be applicable if the planning commission after recommendation of the fire chief, chief of police and the public works director finds that the design of the proposed streets and common vehicular ways is adequate to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and will promote the purposes and intent of this section. 
a.  Design standards for private streets shall be adequate to accommodate their anticipated uses and shall consider such factors as traffic volumes, vehicle weight, speed, emergency vehicle size, turning radius and the types of development served. 
b.  A part of every residential building shall be no farther than sixty (60) feet from an access roadway or drive providing vehicular access from a public street, and not farther than five hundred (500) feet, measured along the route of vehicular access, from a public street. 
c.  Ownership and maintenance responsibilities shall be vested with the abutting property owners and other persons to whom such streets provide access and such ownership and maintenance responsibilities shall not be transferred to a third party, or abandoned without the prior written approval of the city. 
d.  At or near the entrance of a private street intersecting with a dedicated public street or with another private street, there shall be erected and maintained by the applicant/developer, a sign having the dimensions of at least 15 inches by 21 inches (15? × 21?) upon which is printed and clearly legible in at least two-inch (2?) letters the name of the private street and the words "PRIVATE STREET", and in at least one-inch (1?) letters the words, "NOT DEDICATED FOR PUBLIC USE OR MAINTAINED BY THE CITY OF CORTEZ (LUC 3.16)." The words, letters, and figures of the sign shall be arranged in substantially the following manner: 
NAME OF STREET 
PRIVATE STREET 
NOT DEDICATED FOR PUBLIC USE OR MAINTAINED BY THE CITY OF CORTEZ (LUC 3.16) 
e.  If the residents of the community desire to dedicate the private street(s) to the city for public use, application shall be made to the city through the city planner's office. Applications shall include a petition signed by no less than fifty-one percent (51%) of the property owners of frontage of such street(s), a record of street maintenance and patching history, a dedicatory plat labeled "Amended Plat", and the appropriate fee for amended plats as adopted by council resolution. In addition, the city engineer and the director of public works shall inspect the street(s) to determine if the paving, curb and gutter, and sidewalks are within acceptable levels of service to be included into the city's public streets system. A comprehensive report covering level of deterioration, extent of repairs, and estimated costs of repairs or reconstruction shall be submitted to the applicant and included in the application to the city. Prior to acceptance of the street(s), the city may require repairs and/or complete reconstruction of the paved street surface, curbs, gutters and sidewalks, the cost of which shall be borne by the applicants. 
(k)  PUD Perimeter Buffer Zone. A planned unit development shall maintain an appropriate relationship with surrounding or adjacent residential areas and shall include a buffer zone along the perimeter or edge of the development. The buffer zone must be kept free of buildings or structures and must be landscaped, screened, or protected by natural features so that adverse effects on surrounding areas are minimized. 
(1)  Where single-family or duplex dwelling units are adjacent to a low-density residential area, there shall be a minimum twenty-five (25) foot buffer zone. 
(2)  Where multi-family or nonresidential buildings or structures are adjacent to a low-density residential area, there shall be a minimum thirty (30) foot buffer zone. 
(l)  Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in a planned unit development shall be according to the underlying zone district; provided, however, that the minimum lot area may be reduced as follows where the balance of the site is dedicated as common open space, subject to Section 3.06(c) of this chapter: 
Zone District: Minimum Lot Area: RE, residential estate 20,000 square feet/dwelling unit R-1 residential 3,500 square feet/dwelling unit R-2 residential 3,000 square feet/dwelling unit C, commercial 3,000 square feet/principal use I, industrial 30,000 square feet/principal use  
(m)  Minimum Front Yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the PUD, planned unit development district shall be as established by the approved site plan. Where the front yard is not specified on the site plan, the minimum front yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet with the following exceptions, subject to Section 3.06(d) of this chapter. 
(1)  The minimum front yard for shopping center or retail development shall be sixty (60) feet, except drive-in service buildings may have a minimum thirty (30) foot front yard and gasoline service station pump islands may not be located nearer than eighteen (18) feet to the front property line. 
(2)  The minimum front yard for single-family dwellings shall be as follows: 
a.  Where the side of the garage faces the street, the minimum ten (10) foot front yard shall be provided from the side of the garage to the right-of-way line; 
b.  Where the garage faces the street, the minimum twenty (20) foot front yard shall be from the face of the garage to the right-of-way line; and 
c.  Where a rear entry garage is provided, the minimum front yard shall be fifteen (15) feet from the foundation line to the right-of-way line. 
(n)  Minimum Side Yard. The minimum side yard requirements in a planned unit development shall be one (1) of the following, subject to Section 3.06(e) of this chapter: 
(1)  Ten (10) percent of the width of the lot but not less than six (6) feet between property line and foundation line. 
(2)  Five (5) feet from the foundation line to the side property line except that a side yard may be reduced to zero (0) provided no doors, windows, or other openings are provided on the wall of the building facing or along such reduced side yard and provided an access and maintenance easement of five (5) feet shall be provided and indicated within the subdivision plat on all contiguous lots to allow the adjacent owner to maintain and repair the side of a structure with a reduced or no yard space. A minimum distance of 10 feet from foundation line to foundation line shall be provided between all buildings. 
(o)  Minimum Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard in a PUD, planned unit development district shall be established on the site plan, which shall be made a part of the amending ordinance. In no case shall the required rear yard for the main building be less than ten (10) feet except as provided in Section 3.06(f) of this chapter. 
(1)  The minimum rear yard for single-family dwelling units in the planned unit development district shall be as follows: 
a.  Ten (10) feet from the foundation line to the rear property line except that a rear yard may be reduced to zero (0) provided no doors, windows or other openings are provided on the wall of the structure facing or adjacent to the rear yard and provided an access and maintenance easement of five (5) feet shall be provided and indicated within the subdivision plat on all contiguous lots to allow the adjacent owner to maintain and repair the side of the structure with a reduced or no yard space. 
b.  A minimum distance of ten (10) feet from foundation line to foundation line shall be provided between all buildings. 
(p)  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all uses in the PUD, planned unit development district shall be fifty (50) percent for all uses, subject to Section 3.06(g) of this chapter. 
(q)  Minimum Floor Area Per Unit. The minimum floor area per unit in the PUD, planned unit development district shall conform to the standards of the underlying zone district. 
(r)  Maximum Height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the PUD, planned unit development district shall be negotiable but in no case shall exceed fifty (50) feet for all uses, subject to Section 3.06(i) of this chapter. 
(s)  Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the PUD, planned unit development district shall be as follows, subject to Section 3.06(j) of this chapter: 
(1)  Forty (40) feet for single family dwellings; 
(2)  Fifty (50) feet for two-family dwellings; and 
(3)  Sixty (60) feet for multi-family dwellings. 
(Ord. 1024 (part), 2004; Ord. 1014, 2004; Ord. 991 (part), 2003) 
Chapter 4 - SUBDIVISION STANDARDS 
Sections: 

4.01 - Scope and applicability. 
(a)  Applicability. All plats and subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city, and all land outside the corporate limits of the city that the city council may be petitioned to include within the corporate limits of the city, by an extension of such corporate limits, shall conform to the following rules and regulations. 
(b)  Creation of Building Site. No permit for the construction of a building or buildings upon any tract or plot shall be issued until a building site, building tract or building lot has been created by compliance with one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The lot or tract and is part of a plat of record, properly approved by the city council of the city and filed in the plat records of Montezuma County, Colorado; or 
(2)  The parcel, tract or lot contains at least 12,000 square feet and faces upon a dedicated street and was separately owned prior to the effective date of the original subdivision regulations of the city or prior to annexation to the city, whichever is applicable, in which event a building permit for only one main building conforming to all the requirements of this code may be issued on each such original separately owned parcel without first complying with (1) preceding. 
(c)  Platting Property Not Permanently Zoned. 
(1)  No subdivision plat shall be approved within the city limits until the area covered by the proposed plat shall have been permanently zoned by the city council. 
(2)  No subdivision plat shall be approved within any area where an application or ordinance for annexation or a recommendation for annexation to the city is pending before the city council. 
(3)  In the event the planning commission holds a hearing on proposed annexation, it may, at its discretion, at the same time, hold a hearing upon the permanent zoning that is to be given to the area or tract to be annexed, and make a recommendation on both matters to the city council so that the city council can, if it desires, act on the matter of permanent zoning and annexation at the same time. 
4.02 - Building lots. 
(a)  Lot Configuration. The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated and shall not be less than those specified as minimum standards by the zoning district. The depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
(b)  Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to street lines unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. 
(c)  Street Frontage Required. Each lot or building tract shall front upon a public street. 
(d)  Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage lots shall be avoided, except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(e)  Large Lots. Where the area is divided into larger lots than for normal city building sites and, in the opinion of the planning commission, any or all of the tracts are susceptible of being resubdivided, the original subdivision shall be such that the alignment of future street dedications may conform to the general street layout in the surrounding area and so that the larger tracts may be later subdivided in conformance with the requirements of this code and the minimum standards specified by the zoning district. 
4.03 - Streets and alleys. 
(a)  Applicability. The following design standards shall be required for all subdivisions. 
(b)  Asphalt Streets. On and after the passage of these regulations, all developers shall be required to construct asphalt streets. This requirement may be waived for RE, residential estate district developments upon recommendation of the planning commission. 
(c)  Street Layout. Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, provisions shall be made for the extension of streets in accordance with the Cortez thoroughfare plan for street extension and shall bear a logical relationship to the topography and to the location of existing or planned streets on adjacent properties. Adequate local streets shall be provided to accommodate the subdivision and provide access to lots. Where the layout of streets is not shown in the Cortez thoroughfare plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection to existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or 
(2)  Conform to a plan for a neighborhood or planned unit development approved or adopted by the planning commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable or where neighborhood design makes a varied plan appropriate. 
(d)  Street Connections. The system of streets designated for the subdivision, except in unusual cases, must connect with streets already dedicated in adjacent subdivision; and where no adjacent connections are platted, must in general be the reasonable projection of streets in the nearest subdivided tracts, and must be continued to the boundaries of the tract subdivided, so that other subdivisions may connect therewith. Reserve strips of land controlling access to or egress from other property or to or from any street or alley or having the effect of restricting or damaging the adjoining property for subdivision purposes or that will not be taxable or accessible for special improvements shall not be permitted in any subdivision unless such reserve strips are conveyed to the city in fee simple. 
(e)  Half Streets. Half streets shall be prohibited unless they are for the purpose of increasing the width of an inadequate existing right-of-way. 
(f)  Street Intersections. More than two (2) streets intersecting at a point shall be avoided, except where it is impractical to secure a proper street system otherwise and all intersections shall be as near ninety (90°) degrees as possible and in no case shall the intersection angle be less than sixty degrees (60°). 
(g)  Street Jogs. Nonintersecting streets with centerline offset of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be approved. 
(h)  Block Lengths. Block lengths shall not be less than three hundred (300) feet or more than four hundred fifty (450) feet. 
(i)  Cul-de-Sacs. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed four hundred (400) feet in length and shall have a turnaround, surface diameter of one hundred ten (110) feet, right-of-way diameter of one hundred thirty (130) feet. A cul-de-sac of less that two hundred (200) feet in length in a single-family residential area does not require a radial turnaround if the city engineer determines that an equally safe and convenient form of turning space is adequate for the vehicles expected to use the cul-de-sac. Ordinarily, cul-de-sacs shall be discouraged, as they do not result in a continuation or conformance to existing streets or streets pattern. 
(j)  Dead-End Streets. Dead-end streets, except for cul-de-sacs, shall be prohibited unless they are designed to connect with future streets on adjacent lands and that have not been platted. In cases where these types of dead-end streets are allowed, a temporary turnaround of one hundred (100) feet shall be constructed. 
(k)  Street Design Standards. Street and alley widths, curves, grades, design speed and centerline radius, shall meet following standards: 
(1)  Street grade and curves. 
a.  Streets may have a maximum grade of seven percent (7%). 
b.  Centerline grade changes with an algebraic difference of more than two percent (2%) shall be connected with vertical curves of sufficient length to provide a minimum two hundred (200) feet of sight distance. 
c.  No vertical curve shall be less than two hundred (200) feet in length. 
STREET DESIGN STANDARDS 
Design Features Alley Local Arterial Highway Marginal Access Local Collector Number of lanes - 2 2-4 2 2 Lane width (ft.) - 12' 12' 12' 12' Pavement width (ft.) - 32' 64' 32' 36' Right-of-way width (ft.) 20' 56' 100' 56-80' 60' Design speed (mph) - 30 55 30 30 Maximum grade (%) 7% 7% 4% 7% 6% Min. centerline radius (ft.) 150' 150' (State regs.) 150' 150'  
(l)  Street Curve Radii. Streets shall have a minimum radii at the centerline of one hundred fifty (150) feet, unless in special circumstances the city council approves a local residential street with a smaller minimum radius in which case the developer shall pay any additional cost of installing the water and sewer lines caused by the smaller radius. 
(m)  Alley Easements Required. Alley easements shall be provided in all residential areas unless otherwise approved by the planning commission and in commercial and industrial districts. The planning commission may waive the requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access such as off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
(n)  Minimum Alley Width. The minimum right-of-way width of an alley shall be twenty (20) feet. The minimum gravel surface width of alleys shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(o)  Construction and Dedication of Internal Streets. Streets shall be constructed by the developer and dedicated to the city, along with all necessary right-of-way, with no pro-rata share from the city. 
(p)  Turn Bypasses and Turn Lanes. Right-turn bypasses or left-turn lanes may be required at the intersection of collector streets if traffic conditions indicated they are needed. Sufficient right-of-way shall be dedicated to accommodate such lanes when they are required. 
(q)  Street Names and Numbers. All street names shall be as established subject to approval of the planning commission. When streets are in alignment with existing streets, any new streets shall be named according to the streets with which they correspond. Streets that do not fit into an established street-naming pattern shall be named in a manner that will not duplicate or be confused with existing streets within the city or its environs. Street numbers shall be assigned by the building official in accordance with the uniform housing numbering system, as outlined in Article II, Section 6 of the Code of the City of Cortez, adopted 1982. 
4.04 - Easements. 
(a)  Utility Easements Required. Utility easements shall be provided in all residential areas unless otherwise approved by the planning commission and in commercial and industrial districts, except that the planning commission may waive the requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access such as off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
(b)  Minimum Width. The minimum right-of-way width of a utility easement shall be ten (10) feet respectively. 
(c)  Utility Easements. Utility easements of ten (10) feet in width on each side of all rear lot lines and five (5) feet in width on each side of side lot lines shall be provided where necessary. Where the rear or side lot lines abut property outside of the subdivision on which there are no rear or side lot line easements at least five (5) feet in width, the easements on the rear and side lot lines in the subdivision shall be ten (10') feet in width. 
(d)  Potable Water and Sewer Easements. Water and sewer easements shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width. 
(e)  "T" Intersections and Cul-de-Sacs. Easements twenty (20) feet in width shall be provided in "T" intersections and cul-de-sacs for the continuation of utilities or drainage improvements, if necessary. 
(f)  Fire Lanes and Emergency Access Easements. Fire lanes and emergency access easements twenty (20) feet in width shall be provided where required by the fire marshal. 
(g)  Drainage Easements. When a proposed subdivision is traversed by an irrigation ditch or channel, natural creek or stream or a proposed drainage easement, there shall be provided an easement sufficient for drainage and to allow for maintenance of the ditch. The easement must be supported by a drainage plan as set forth in Section 4.06 of this chapter. 
(h)  Adjoining Areas. When easements in areas adjoining proposed subdivisions are necessary to provide adequate drainage thereof or to serve such subdivisions with utilities, the developer shall obtain such easements. 
4.05 - Public land dedication. 
(a)  Purpose. The requirements for open space, school sites, park and recreational areas contained in this section are intended to ensure that in the city there will be sufficient land dedicated or otherwise set aside to meet the demand and need of the future residents of the development for open space, school sites, and parks, containing passive or active recreational areas that are reasonably attributable to such development. 
(b)  Applicability. Every subdivision shall include a dedication of land to the city, or other entity, as determined by the city council, to be used for parks and recreation, open space, school sites, or cash-in-lieu of such dedication in an amount established by this section as a condition of final plat approval and prior to the recording of a final plat. This requirement may be waived for developments, that in the sole estimation of the city, have: 
(1)  Demonstrated an embodiment of the goals of the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Call for development exceeding the minimum standards required for such developments; and 
(3)  Which will implement the city's future land use plan. 
(c)  Dedication Requirement. The obligation of the developer shall be to dedicate to the city at least five percent (5%) of the gross land area in fee simple, or other equivalent consideration, unless such a land dedication was required for the subject land at the time of annexation or waived by the city for the reasons stated in subsection (b) of this section. 
(1)  Prior to submittal of the preliminary plat, the developer shall inform the Cortez-Montezuma school district of his intentions to subdivide, and if deemed necessary by the district, reserve land suitable for future school usage. 
(2)  If the city council finds that park lands proposed to be privately owned and maintained are in the public interest and meet the needs of the neighborhood, up to seventy-five percent (75%) credit toward the dedication requirement otherwise due may be allowed for privately owned, common open space. 
(d)  Specifications. 
(1)  Land dedicated or otherwise set aside for open space, school sites and park and recreational areas shall be of such size, dimensions, topography, and general character as is reasonably required for the type of use necessary to meet the demand and need of future residents, e.g., school sites, open space buffer, public trails, active recreation for team or individual sports, playground, tot lot, picnic area, etc. 
(2)  Unique natural areas or flood prone areas that provide an opportunity for linkage parks may be included in areas dedicated or otherwise set aside or reserved for open space. Wetlands, or other sensitive areas, as identified by Sections 2.02, 5.05 and 6.04 of this code may be included in this category. 
(3)  The shape and slope of sixty percent (60%) of the land shall be such that it will be useable, for active recreational activities such as baseball, tennis, football, and sports. The area shall be dry, seeded for grass, and have a slope not exceeding three percent (3%) grade. Provided, however, that this requirement may be waived by the city council if the recreational requirements of a subdivision or development are met elsewhere, if the land is better used in other activities, or if such area have unique natural, environmental or historic value. 
(4)  Unique natural areas or flood prone areas that provide an opportunity for linkage parks may be included in areas dedicated or otherwise set aside or reserved for open space. 
(5)  No land dedicated or otherwise reserved in compliance with this section shall have dimensions smaller than one hundred (100) feet in width and one hundred fifty (150) feet in depth, without the specific approval of the city council; or 
(6)  The city, at its sole discretion, may elect to use the dedicated land for any municipal, school or other public function deemed necessary. Such use shall be compatible with surrounding use. 
(7)  All lands to be dedicated must have access via a minimum 50-foot right-of-way and also must accommodate connection of all utilities necessary to operate the dedicated land as a public park or recreation area. 
(8)  Developer and/or owner shall supply signage designating this area as public land. The selection and type of signage shall be approved by city council. 
(e)  Platting Requirements. Any land dedicated for open space, school sites, or park and recreational areas shall be shown on the face of a plat submitted for approval by the planning commission and city council. 
(1)  Pins to be Installed. Each corner of the park land to be donated shall be marked with permanent monument consisting of three-fourths (3/4) inch iron pins set in concrete. These shall be located and identified on a recordable land survey completed by a land surveyor registered in the state of Colorado and provided to the city by the owner and/or developer. 
(2)  Plat to be Recorded. Upon approval by the city council, such plat shall be filed of record in office of the Montezuma County clerk and recorder. 
(f)  Payment of Cash in Lieu of Dedication. Payment of cash in-lieu of dedication of land for park and recreational purposes shall be made prior to the recording of a final plat and shall be subject to the following provisions. 
(1)  Applicability. In any case in which the subdivision is less than 20 acres, or where the land required to be dedicated or otherwise reserved by this section would be less than one (1) acre, and in all cases in which the city council may find that the park and recreational needs of a proposed development would be better served by a park in a different location or the expansion or improvement of an existing park or recreational area, the city council shall require a developer or developers to pay the city cash in lieu or to dedicate or convey other equivalent consideration in lieu of applicable cash dedication. 
(2)  Schedule for Cash in Lieu. The amount of cash payment required shall be based on the market value of number of acres that otherwise would be required to be dedicated. The city council, following recommendation by the planning and zoning commission shall, by resolution, set the per-acre fee for dedicated land based upon the current fair market value for raw lands adjacent to the city of Cortez, utilizing an average per-acre value calculated over the previous five years. The five-year per-acre value and the corresponding cash-in-lieu fee shall be reviewed and updated annually at the adoption of fees and charges for city services. 
(3)  Accounting, Expenditure and Refunds. All such payments of cash in-lieu fees shall be accounted for and spent according to the following requirements. 
a.  Cash in-lieu payments shall be segregated in a special parks and recreation capital improvement fund to be spent on a first in, first out basis and used only for the acquisition and improvements of open space, school sites, and park and recreational areas within the city that will meet the needs of the residents of the development or subdivision in respect of which such payment was made; 
b.  Cash in-lieu payments shall be expended on the acquisition or improvement of open space or park land within reasonable proximity to the proposed development or subdivision from such development or subdivision; and 
c.  If cash in-lieu payments are not expended or unconditionally committed to be expended within ten (10) years of receipt, the developer or developers shall be entitled to a refund of the amount paid upon written request by the developer or developers filed with the city clerk within one (1) year after the right to such refund arises. 
(g)  Maintenance of Private Parks. 
(1)  If the open space and park and recreational areas required by this section are to remain private, such areas shall be maintained by and deeded to a homeowners' association, or a trustee. No plat containing a reservation of private open space and park and recreational areas shall be approved until the applicant shall have filed with the city a declaration of the covenants and restrictions that will govern such association or trustee, and received approval of the same from the planning commission and the city council. Such instrument shall be approved by the city attorney as to legal form and effect, and by the planning commission and city council as to the suitability of the proposed use of the proposed open space and park and recreational areas. 
(2)  The covenants and restrictions, when submitted, shall provide for establishment of the homeowners' association or trust, and shall further provide that the covenants and restrictions and maintenance shall be permanent, that the homeowners are liable for the payment of maintenance fees and capital assessments, that unpaid homeowners' fees and assessments will be a lien on the property of the delinquent homeowners, that the association or trustee shall be responsible for liability insurance, taxes and perpetual maintenance, that membership shall be mandatory for each homeowner and any successive buyer, and that each homeowner, at the time of purchase, shall be furnished with a copy of the approved restrictions or conditions. 
(h)  Payment of Cash in Lieu of Dedication. The cash in lieu of open space, park and recreation areas or school land dedication collected by the city of Cortez shall be shared with the Montezuma Cortez School District RE1, with the school district to receive 20% of, and the city of Cortez to receive 80% of any cash in lieu of fee paid. Any monies collected shall be paid to the Montezuma Cortez School District RE1 quarterly. 
(Ord. 1096, 2007) 
(Ord. No. 1150, 6-28-2011) 
4.06 - Drainage. 
(a)  Adequate Drainage Required. A developer shall provide, at his expense, drainage structures that will become integral parts of the existing street or roadway drainage system, and the dimensions of all drainage structures must be approved by the city public works director prior to installation. The developer shall show that the drainage plan complies with existing master drainage plan of the city and failure to provide such proof will constitute grounds for denial of the application. Drainage structures and ditches shall be of a size and nature sufficient to carry the calculated storm water from streets, roadways and open drainage areas as based on standard engineering principles. A grading and drainage plan as described below shall accompany any application that may require a drainage study. The plan shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a professional engineer of the state of Colorado and include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Project site, including two hundred feet beyond its boundaries; 
(2)  Existing contours at two foot intervals shown as dashed lines; 
(3)  Proposed contours at two foot intervals shown as solid lines; 
(4)  Indication of a permanent benchmark referenced to mean sea level; 
(5)  Drainage system shown in plan view with estimated cubic feet per second flow for a ten-year storm; 
(6)  Location of all natural drainage channels and water bodies; 
(7)  Existing and proposed drainage easements; 
(8)  Type, size, and location of existing and proposed drainage structures such as pipes, tiles, culverts, retention ponds, detention areas, etc.; 
(9)  One hundred-year (base) flood areas; 
(10)  Additional grading and drainage standards may be required in the Zone A Flood Zones to satisfy Federal Emergency Management Administration requirements; 
(11)  Erosion Control Plan showing adequate sedimentation control which shall be accomplished throughout construction phases as well as during the ongoing operation of the use and any permanent sedimentation control structures and/or facilities to mechanically stabilize the soil (e.g., sedimentation ponds, dikes, seeding, retaining walls, rip-rap, etc.); and 
(12)  Flood Hazards. 
(b)  Minimum Standards. All provisions for drainage and flood control shall be established at a minimum to handle the anticipated 100-year frequency storms for maximum period of intensity over the entire drainage basin, which the subdivision serves, and they shall be made in accordance with the approved improvement plan. The 100-year floodplain referred to herein shall mean that floodplain calculated on the basis of a fully-developed watershed, regardless of any regulated floodplain designations. 
(c)  Erosion. Where free fall of water occurs, satisfactory means shall be provided to prevent erosion of soil. Culverts shall have concrete head walls and wing walls where conditions require. 
(d)  Catch basins. Standard drop inlet catch basins shall be constructed. 
(e)  Engineered Design. The city requires that improvements be designed by a Colorado registered engineer. 
(f)  Water and Sewer System Protection. Water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. 
(g)  Retention Areas. For control of on-site drainage that may impact downstream flows from storm run-off, the developer may be required to construct retention areas. It may be necessary for the developer to supply, at his expense, a drainage plan to support the size or absence of retention areas on the site, as described in this section. 
4.07 - Water supply. 
    All municipal water service shall be subject to the requirements of the Municipal Code of the City of Cortez. All potable water lines, fire hydrants and appurtenances shall be designed and constructed to meet the currently applicable requirements of the city and the Cortez fire protection district. Fire hydrants shall be provided to serve new subdivisions sufficient to maintain a Class 7 fire rating by the Insurance Service Office ("ISO"). 
4.08 - Sanitation. 
    Sanitary sewer service and facilities shall be provided by and meet all requirements of the Cortez sanitation district. 
4.09 - Underground utilities. 
    All utilities shall be placed underground, except transformers, switching boxes, terminal boxes, and similar facilities. 
4.10 - Development reports. 
(a)  In addition to the drainage study described in Section 4.06 of this chapter, other reports or studies may be required. Evidence establishing soil suitability in the form of a report based on information from the National Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) or another form acceptable to city staff will be required as part of the submittal documents. At a minimum, the report shall include: a description of soil types, locations and characteristics with supporting soil maps, soil logs of test pits and auger holes, and other information necessary to determine soil suitability for the scope of the development; constraints on development based on the findings; and analysis and evaluation of such information with recommendations regarding structural constraints, erosion control and a determination of the adequacy of the characteristics of the soil as they relate to the proposed uses and development. 
(1)  The surface mapping report of the area shall be accompanied by a written narrative and map that is titled, dated and signed by a Colorado licensed professional engineer. The report must address the above concerns and any geological or flood hazards/limitations. 
(2)  Subsurface soils investigations shall include a map locating test pits or auger holes. 
(3)  The scope and detail of the soils analysis shall be determined by the Colorado licensed professional engineer. 
(b)  Because the utility plan, roadway plan, grading and drainage and erosion control plans are interrelated with the soils investigation plan, they may be shown on the same sheet of the submitted plans if it does not result in undue confusion and congestion on the plan sheet. 
4.11 - Impact fees. 
(a)  General. This section provides a means of public/private partnering to maintain desired features of new residential subdivisions that serve necessary functions of stormwater detention structures and safety and aesthetic improvements, such as street medians, pedestrian lighting, and landscaped areas that will impact individual staffing and budgets of specific city departments through: 
1.  Establishment of a fee to provide moneys in order to form a partnership with the developer to provide for maintenance of such improvements as: 
a.  Landscaped street medians and roundabouts; 
b.  Special pedestrian lighting that is not in conformance with current lighting assemblies; and 
c.  Special or unusual structures used to distinguish entryways and landmarks in specific developments. 
2.  Providing a means for individual developments to financially contribute to maintenance of unique improvements that may generate impacts upon the city's revenues that would otherwise be publicly subsidized. 
(b)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, this "improvement assessment fee" is defined as "legislatively adopted, specifically applicable, on-going fees applied to improvements in all new development that will be served by the residents of a specific development for which the fee is collected." 
    These assessments are not "land development fees" that are defined as "legislatively adopted, generally applicable, one-time fees applied to all new development that will be served by the public improvements or services for which the fee is collected." 
    Improvement assessment fees may be instituted at the sole discretion of the city council, although only at the developer's request: 
1.  When a developer adds improvements or structures that are beyond what the city would normally maintain, the cost of such maintenance shall be assessed against the purchaser/owner of each said lot or property within the subdivision. 
2.  Determining Fee Amounts. The improvement assessment fee for median and detention areas shall be based on the costs to the city for staff time and other costs associated with standard care procedures (water costs, mowing, fertilizing, etc.) to maintain one acre of planted grass or sod. This fee shall be adjusted to reflect alterations to the total grass area if xeriscape, gravel, or decorative concrete is utilized and shall be reviewed annually by council. 
a.  Fees for pedestrian lighting and maintenance of all elements of the lights shall be based on the costs associated with repair and replacement of pole and bulb elements and shall include staff time involved in the execution of the activity. 
b.  Fees shall be reviewed, increased or decreased by the city council by resolution. 
3.  The charge of the assessment shall be added to the monthly water bill. 
4.  When assessments are required to pay for the costs of these improvements or structures, the final plat of the subdivision shall have it clearly noted that it is subject to the assessment described herein. There shall also be a description of what is generating the assessment, i.e., medians, pedestrian lighting, etc. 
5.  Any property owner who fails to pay their assessment shall be subject to a lien against their property. Such lien shall be filed with the Montezuma county clerk and recorder and forwarded to the county assessor for collection with regular property taxes. 
6.  Accounting, Expenditure and Refunds. All such payments of improvement fees shall be accounted for and spent according to the following requirements: 
a.  Improvement fees shall be segregated in a revenue line item in the general fund to be spent for the maintenance and repair of such improvements as open space/detention areas, medians, pedestrian lighting and possible other amenities that will meet the needs of the residents of the development or subdivision in respect of which such payment was made. 
(Ord. 1091, 2007: Ord. 1069, 2006) 
Chapter 5 - SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Sections: 

5.01 - Scope and applicability. 
    No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any development until all of the applicable standards of this chapter are met. 
5.02 - Parking, loading and access. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to require off-street parking and loading facilities in proportion to the parking demand for each use in order to ensure functionally adequate, aesthetically pleasing and secure off-street parking. The regulations and design standards of this section are intended to accomplish the following: 
(1)  To ensure the usefulness of parking facilities. 
(2)  To ensure sufficient parking spaces on-site in order to prevent excessive parking on public streets and in residential neighborhoods. 
(3)  To ensure that access to parking does not impair the function of adjacent roadways or endanger the public safety. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  New and Complying Development. New development occurring after the effective date of this section, and development existing on the effective date of this section and complying with the number of off-street parking spaces required by this section shall be subject to the following provisions. 
a.  Every use of a building or land hereafter established shall provide the minimum off-street parking spaces as required by this section. 
b.  The number of parking spaces may be reduced when the land use or floor area of a building is changed or reduced to a use or floor area for which fewer parking spaces are required. 
c.  When a building is expanded or a land use is changed so as to increase the number of parking spaces required, the number of such spaces shall be increased. 
(2)  Existing Noncomplying Development. Developments with legally noncomplying parking areas shall be subject to the following provisions. 
a.  Existing parking spaces shall not be reduced below the minimum required by this section. 
b.  Building permits and certificates of occupancy may be issued for a change of use or remodeling or structural alterations in developments containing legally noncomplying-parking areas, without requiring compliance with this section, provided that such redevelopment does not result in an increase in the number of required parking spaces. 
c.  Any building expansion or change of use that results in an increase over the number of parking spaces that would be required under this section for the lot shall provide additional parking spaces only for that increment of the expansion, as if it were a separate development. Only the expanded portion of the parking area shall be required to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Computing Parking. The minimum number of parking spaces required for a specific development proposal shall be based on the requirements listed in subsection (d) of this section, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements, and the following provisions. 
(1)  Exception. Permitted uses in the central business district with less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet do not have to provide off-street parking. 
(2)  Unlisted Uses. Where questions arise concerning the minimum off-street parking and requirements for any use not specifically listed, the requirements may be interpreted as those of a similar use. 
(3)  Multiple Uses. In computing the parking requirements for any building or development, the total parking requirements shall be the sum of the specific parking space requirements for each class of use included in the building or development. 
(4)  Benches, Pews and Similar Seating. When measurements determining the number of required parking spaces are based on the seating capacity of a use and individual seats are not provided, twenty-two (22) inches or portions thereof of undivided seating shall constitute one seat. 
(5)  Fractions. When measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in fractions, any fraction less than one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded and any fraction of one-half (1/2) or more shall be rounded upward to the next highest full number. 
(d)  Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following minimum requirements. 
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 
Use Type Parking Requirement For 

Usable Floor Area Off-Street Loading 

Requirement Residential Uses Residential structure, with 1 to 10 dwelling units 2 spaces per single-family equivalent None Residential structure, with 11 to 30 dwelling units 2 spaces per single-family equivalent 1 space Residential structure, with more than 30 dwelling units 2 spaces per single-family equivalent 1 berths for first 30 dwelling units, plus 
2 berths for 31 to 100 dwelling units; or 
3 berths for more than 100 dwelling units. Residential structure, occupied only by the elderly 1.5 spaces per single-family equivalent 1 space for first 30 dwelling units, 
plus 2 berths for 31 to 100 dwelling units; or 
3 berths for more than 100 dwelling units. Accessory and Temporary Uses Automobile parking garage - None Home occupations 1 space per 100 sq. ft. None Accessory retail/service uses 1 space per 300 sq. ft. Based on primary use Temporary uses None None All other accessory uses 1 space per 400 sq. ft. Based on primary use Educational, Institutional and Civic Uses High schools and colleges 1 space per 4 student capacity, faculty and staff Schedule A Elementary, primary and junior high schools 2 spaces per 20 student capacity Schedule A Auditoriums, arenas, gymnasiums, exhibition halls, convention centers and other similar gathering places 1 space per 100 sq. ft. or 1 space per 4 seats (whichever is greater), plus 1 space per 2 employees Schedule A Group homes and nursing homes 0.6 spaces per resident plus 1 space for each employee (typical peak staff) None Churches 1 space per 4 auditorium seats None All other educational, institutional and civic uses 1 space per 400 sq. ft. Schedule A Hospital or clinic 2 spaces per three beds Schedule A Transportation-Related Uses Automobile parking garages - None All other transportation-related uses 1 space per 400 sq. ft. To be determined by city engineer Automobile and Related Service Uses All automobile and related service uses 1 space per 300 sq. ft. Retail Uses Markets, retail bakeries, grocery stores, delicatessens, and liquor stores 1 space per 100 sq. ft. Schedule B Restaurants and bars 1 space per 4 seats Schedule B All other retail uses 1 space per 300 sq. ft. Schedule B Personal Service Uses Lodging facilities 1 space per guest unit, plus 1 space per 2 employees None Professional offices and clinics 1 space per 300 sq. ft. Schedule A Financial institutions 1 space per 300 sq. ft. Schedule A All other personal service uses 1 space per 300 sq. ft. Schedule A Recreational and Entertainment Uses Theaters 1 space per 100 sq. ft. or 1 space per 4 seats (whichever is greater), plus 1 space per 2 employees None All other recreational and entertainment uses 1 space per 300 sq. ft. None Industrial Uses Utility facilities (other than offices) 1 space per 400 sq. ft. None All other industrial uses 1 space per 400 sq. ft. Schedule B  
(e)  Off-Site Parking. Required off-street parking shall be provided on the same lots as the principal use, provided that all or a portion of the required parking spaces may be located on a separate lot from the lot on which the principal use is located, based on the following provisions. 
(1)  Contiguous. The off-site parking shall be located on a lot that is immediately adjacent to and contiguous with the lot containing the principal use. 
(2)  Common Ownership. Any off-site parking area shall be under the same ownership as the principal use to which it is accessory, and all necessary legal instruments shall be executed to ensure that the required number of spaces shall remain available throughout the life of the principal use. 
(f)  Parking Space Dimensions, Lighting and Design. 
(1)  Each off-street parking space shall consist of an open area measuring nine (9) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet long and seven (7) feet high and shall have vehicular access to a public street or alley. 
(2)  Off-street parking shall be properly drained, shall have a durable dust-free, all weather surface and shall be maintained in a usable condition at all times. 
a.  Acceptable surface materials are those that are resistant to deterioration from weather and/or traffic and shall include, but are not limited to: concrete, asphalt, sealed pavers, cobbles, sealed brick or any other material that would have similar characteristics and uses. 
b.  Unacceptable materials are those that deteriorate from weather and/or traffic and shall include, but are not limited to: gravel, three-quarters (3/4) road base, volcanic cinders, clinker rock, or any other material that would have similar characteristics. 
(3)  Security lighting shall be provided in parking lots with a minimum ground level illumination of 0.5 foot-candle at any location in the lot. Lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining residential areas. 
(4)  Off-street parking areas serving commercial or industrial uses shall be landscaped and screened in accordance with requirements of Section 5.05 of this chapter, Trees, landscaping and screening. 
(g)  Restricted Use of Parking Areas. No automobile trailers, boats, detached campers, junk vehicles or any other object that will render the parking space unusable according to the purpose of this section shall be parked or stored in off-street parking areas. Junk vehicles shall be defined as those that either (1) lack a current license or inspection sticker or (2) are wrecked and/or dismantled. 
(h)  Off-Street Loading Requirements. 
(1)  Schedule A Loading Requirements. All uses for which Schedule A loading requirements are indicated in the table to subsection (d) of this section, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements, shall provide the following minimum number of loading spaces or berths: 
Schedule A 
Square Feet of 

Usable Floor Area Minimum 

Required 

Loading Berths 0 to 10,000 None 10,001 to 40,000 One (1) berth 40,001 to 100,000 Two (2) berths Each additional 100,000 or portion thereof One (1) additional berth  
(2)  Schedule B Loading Requirements. All uses for which Schedule B loading requirements are indicated in the table to subsection (d) of this section, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements, shall provide the following minimum number of loading spaces or berths: 
Schedule B 
Square Feet of 

Usable Floor Area Minimum 

Required 

Loading Berths 0 to 10,000 None 10,001 to 25,000 One (1) berth 25,001 to 40,000 Two (2) berths 40,001 to 100,000 Three (3) berths Each additional 60,000 or portion thereof One (1) additional berth  
a.  Exception. Commercial uses in the central business district with less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet with alley access do not have to provide loading berths. 
(i)  Design of Loading Areas. All loading spaces in the I, industrial district shall comply with the following design requirements. 
(1)  Location. No loading space shall be located within the right-of-way of a public street. Any loading dock or door shall be set back far enough from the right-of-way so that no portion of the right-of-way is occupied by trucks or other vehicles while loading or unloading. The location of the loading area shall not interfere with the free circulation of vehicles in the off-street parking area. No loading space shall be located so as to block access by emergency vehicles. 
(2)  Size of Berths. The minimum required dimensions of loading spaces, open or enclosed, shall be twelve (12) feet in width by fifty-five (55) feet in length, with a minimum vertical clearance of fifteen (15) feet. Where tractor-trailer units will be using the facility, the minimum length shall be sixty-five (65) feet. 
(3)  Paving Standards. The surface of all open off-street loading spaces shall conform to the requirements for off-street parking areas. 
(4)  Loading Areas Design. The surface of all open off-street loading spaces shall conform to the requirements for off-street parking areas, in accordance with subsection (f)(2) of this section. 
(j)  Driveways and Access. 
(1)  Access Required. All required off-street parking shall be provided with driveway access to a public street or alley. 
(2)  Minimum Driveway Width. Driveways shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width when serving one (1) dwelling unit, or fourteen (14) feet wide when serving more that one residence or another use such as a boarding house. 
(3)  Corner Visibility. The following requirements are intended to provide an unobstructed view around the intersections of streets, alleys and driveways, promoting public safety and enhancing the quality of design at these intersections. 
a.  A line of sight across corner lots must be preserved so as not to impair the view of a motorist at street intersections. Fences cannot exceed four (4) feet in height. 
b.  Fence materials used within thirty-five (35) feet of the street corner must be at least ninety percent (90%) open and not obstruct the line of sight from a vehicle stopped at the intersection. In addition, the area within the triangle formed by the two (2) thirty-five-foot street sidelines must be kept free from bushes over two (2) feet high and tree branches lower than six (6) feet. All measurements are based from the adjacent curb elevation. 
c.  The same requirements at alley intersections apply as at street corners, except the maximum fence height is six (6) feet and the sideline clear zone is fifteen (15) feet for each direction. 
d.  Fences within fifteen (15) feet of the sides and fifteen (15) feet deep along the sides of a driveway shall not exceed four (4) feet in height and must be constructed with ninety percent (90%) of the fence area open to allow a clear view of traffic on the street. 
(4)  Driveway and Access Design. The surface of each primary driveway and access shall conform to the requirements for off-street parking areas, in accordance with subsection (f)(2) of this section. No structure with a nonconforming driveway surface existing on or prior to July 22, 1997, shall be required to comply with this standard except in the case of reconstruction, substantial remodel, or change in use. 
(Ord. No. 1130, 9-8-2009) 
5.03 - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Applicability. This section is intended to ensure pedestrian access is available to serve uses that need and benefit from such access. Builders shall be required to construct sidewalks in accordance with the Cortez thoroughfare plan, on all streets with curb and gutter adjacent to their building sites in all zoning districts. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the requirements of this section are met. This requirement may be waived for residential estate developments upon recommendation of the planning commission. 
(b)  Sidewalk Construction Standards. Sidewalks at least nine (9) feet in width shall be provided in the CBD, central business district; five (5) feet in width in the C, commercial highway district and in the NB, neighborhood business district; and four (4) feet in width in all other districts. The construction specification of sidewalks will conform to city specifications for streets on file with the city engineer and city clerk. 
5.04 - Fences and walls. 
(a)  Fence Permit. Fences, hedges, and walls (all referred to as "fences") may be permitted in the yards of any zone. A fence permit must be obtained from the building official of the city prior to constructing any fence. The following information is to be provided to the building official for the fence permit: 
(1)  Description of the type and manner of proposed fence construction; 
(2)  A site plan of the lot showing property lines, building structures, streets and alleys, and the proposed fence location; and 
(3)  Proposed height of the fence. 
(b)  Fence Heights. 
(1)  Maximum fence heights for any combination of fence materials within the city are as shown in the following table: 
MAXIMUM FENCE HEIGHT 
Type of Use Height Residential-Front yard 4' Residential-Rear yard 8' Commercial-Security areas 7' Industrial/ manufacturing zones 7' Jail or correctional facilities 12' Public utilities 8' Public or parochial school 8' Public parks and playgrounds 8'  
(c)  Fence Heights Exceptions. 
(1)  Public utilities may exceed the specified height limit when required by industry codes or mortgage requirements. The building official shall be presented with copies of such codes or mortgage requirements prior to the approval of a fence permit. 
(2)  Where houses on adjacent lots are constructed such that the front of one house faces the back of the adjacent house, then the maximum rear yard fence height shall be four (4) feet. 
(d)  Property Line Determination. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to locate all property lines. No fence may extend beyond or across a property line except with the written approval of the affected property owner. 
(e)  Prohibited Fences. Sharp-pointed fixtures, barbed wire or electrically-charged fences shall not be permitted anywhere in the city; provided, however, that: 
(1)  Public utilities shall be excepted from this provision when such fence features are required by industry regulations, standards or mortgage requirements. 
(2)  Facilities in the I, industrial district shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(3)  Jail or correctional facilities shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(f)  Construction Within Rights-of-Way. 
(1)  Any person constructing a fence on the city's public right-of-way may be required to relocate that fence in the future if a need arises for the public use of that right-of-way. Fences may not be built upon Colorado State Highway rights-of way. 
(g)  Construction Requirements - Residential Uses. 
(1)  Interior Lots. A fence may extend into the non-used portion of the city right-of-way to within five (5) feet of the existing curbline or to the back of an existing sidewalk. If neither a sidewalk nor curbing is present on the street, then the fence must be placed within, or on, the property lines facing the street. 
(2)  Corner Lots at Street Intersections. Fences and walls shall be erected in accordance with the requirements of Section 5.02(j)(3) of this chapter, Corner Visibility. 
(h)  Construction Requirements - Commercial Fences. Fence construction requirements for fences built in conjunction with commercial uses are the same as those listed above for residential use, except no fences may be located closer than ten (10) feet to the back of an existing curb. If no curbs exist in the street front, then the fence must be placed within the property line. 
(i)  Construction Methods. All fence construction methods must be approved by the building official. When available, fences will be built according to manufacturer's recommendation. 
(1)  For wood, chain-link, and other similarly constructed fences; the maximum post spacing will be ten (10) feet when no manufacturer's recommendation is available. The minimum depth of posts into the ground shall be eighteen (18) inches. 
(2)  For block fences, column supports shall be a maximum of twelve (12) feet apart. The foundation requirements are piers the same dimensions, or larger, than the blocks under each column and extending at least thirty-two (32) inches below grade. A continuous footer, a minimum of six (6) inches deep by twelve (12) inches wide, with reinforcing bar shall be constructed between the piers and tied into the piers by reinforcing steel. 
(3)  No fence shall be constructed in such a manner or be of such design, as to be hazardous or dangerous to persons or animals. 
5.05 - Trees, landscaping and screening. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is designed to provide standards for the installation and maintenance of landscaping, walls and screening devices so as to promote the general welfare of the community. This is accomplished by establishing a long-term, well-planned program of tree care and beautification for its citizens and visitors and the intent is to establish an attractive and healthy environmental setting within the community through a closely supervised treatment of tree care. 
(b)  Applicability. This section shall pertain to lands owned by the city, to public rights-of-way within the city limits, to private landscaped open space areas along primary and secondary gateways, as well as to all commercial and industrial parking areas. 
(c)  Authority. The city parks and recreation department shall have the power to promulgate rules, standards and specifications concerning the trimming, spraying, removal, planting, pruning and protection of trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, and other plants upon the right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place in the city as well as commercial and parking areas as provided herein. Rules, regulations, and specifications promulgated by the parks and recreation department are subject to review and approval by the city council. For the purposes of this section the term "director of parks and recreation" means the director or his/her duly appointed representative. 
(d)  Parks, Recreation, and Forestry Advisory Board. A board to be known as the "parks, recreation, and forestry advisory board" is created as an advisory board to the city council. The board shall consist of five (5) members. In addition to the parks, recreation, and forestry advisory board, an ex-officio board of advisors consisting of the following: a member of city council, a member of city staff, and a representative from the Colorado State Forest Service shall be appointed. The mayor, with the approval of council, shall appoint the board. No compensation shall be paid to members of the board. The duties of the board shall be: 
(1)  To study, investigate, plan, advise, report, and recommend to city council any action, program, plan or legislation which the board shall find or determine to be necessary or advisable for the care, preservation, trimming, planting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in public ways, streets and alleys; 
(2)  To assist the city council and the citizens of Cortez in the dissemination of news, educational material and information regarding the selection, planting and maintenance of trees within the corporate limits, whether the same be on private or public property; and 
(3)  To make such recommendations from time to time to the city council as to desirable legislation concerning the tree program and activities for the municipality, such as an annual Arbor Day program. 
(e)  Tree Protection. It is declared unlawful for any person, not the owner hereof, or without lawful authority to do so, to injure, willfully deface, disfigure, or destroy any tree or shrub, or to injure, destroy, cut, or pick any vegetation located on any public place. 
(f)  Disease Control. Upon the discovery of any destructive or communicable disease or other pestilence which endangers the growth, health, life, or well being of trees or plants in the city, or which is capable of causing an epidemic spread of communicable disease or insect infestation such as Dutch elm disease, the director of the parks and recreation department or his duly appointed representative, shall at once cause written notice to be served upon the owner of the property upon which such diseased tree is situated, which notice shall require such property owner to eradicate, remove or otherwise control such condition within reasonable time, which time period shall be not more than thirty (30) days. If the owner, agent, or occupant of the property fails to comply within the time period specified, the city shall correct such condition and assess the cost of such correction to the owner or agent, and such costs shall constitute a lien against the property until paid. 
(g)  Planting and Spacing. All street trees shall be spaced thirty (30) to fifty (50) feet apart. The director of parks and recreation shall approve specific spacing for all street trees. The distance trees may be planted from curbs, curb lines, sidewalks, sidewalk lines, and property lines will be in accordance with the species size at maturity. 
(1)  Trees shall be centered in the space between the sidewalk and street. Approval for planting street trees must be obtained by permit from the director of parks and recreation. 
(2)  No street tree shall be planted closer than twenty (20) feet from any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersection curbs or curb lines.5.05 
(3)  No street tree shall be planted closer than ten (10) feet from any fire hydrant. 
(h)  Trimming. Any tree growing over a public alley, street, or highway, or so located as to extend its branches over a public alley, street, or highway, shall be trimmed by the owner, agent, or occupant of the property on which the tree stands so that there shall be a clear height of fourteen (14) feet above the surface of the street, alley, or highway, and eight (8) feet above the surface of the sidewalks unobstructed by the branches; such owner or agent or occupant shall remove all dead branches and stubs on such tree, or trees which are or may become a menace to travelers on public highways, streets, or alleys of the city. 
(1)  Owner to Maintain or City to Correct Deficiencies at Owner's Expense. 
a.  Any owner or occupant of any real property shall maintain all hedges and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks so that no part of such hedges or shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public sidewalk of the city. 
b.  If a hedge, shrub, or its parts in any way cause a hindrance to the general public, or in any way endanger the security or usefulness of any public street, right-of-way, highway, alley, sewer, or sidewalk as determined by the director of parks and recreation, it is declared to be a public nuisance. 
c.  If a tree or its parts in any way cause a hindrance to the general public, or in any way endanger the security or usefulness of any public street, right-of-way, highway, alley, sewer, or sidewalk as determined by the director of parks and recreation, it is declared to be a public nuisance. 
d.  If the owner of such property does not correct or remove such nuisance within thirty (30) days after written notification by the director of parks and recreation, the director of parks and recreation shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed and the cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner or agent of the property in question and the costs shall constitute a lien on the property until paid. 
(i)  Approved Tree Species. A list of recommended tree species for a variety of settings and uses shall be obtainable from the director of parks and recreation. The director of parks and recreation will also supply a list of trees not suitable for planting as street trees. No conifer trees shall be permitted to be planted between the sidewalk and the street as specified by the director of parks and recreation. 
(j)  Utilities. No street trees other than those species of small trees approved by the director of parks and recreation may be planted in any city right-of-way under or within ten (10) feet of any underground waterline, sewer line, transmission line, or other utility. In addition it is encouraged that the same guidelines be followed for the planting of trees on private property. 
(k)  Enforcement. The director of parks and recreation shall have the power to enforce rules, regulations and specifications concerning the trimming, spraying, removal, planting, pruning, and protection of trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, and other plants upon the right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place in the city. 
(l)  Variances. The parks, recreation, and forestry advisory board, as established by the city, shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this section in accordance with the criteria of Section 6.17(c) of this code. 
(m)  Commercial/Industrial Landscaping Requirements. The intent of requiring landscape treatment for open space is to improve the appearance and layout of commercial development in the community. These requirements shall apply to commercial development of vacant lands, as well as to new development on land where existing structures are removed to provide commercial development property. The CBD, central business district is exempt from these regulations. 
(1)  Landscaping plans pertaining to city rights-of-way shall be submitted as part of the site development plans submitted with the building plans. In all cases where a project is subject to review by the planning and zoning commission, the director of parks and recreation shall provide a statement as to the conformance of the submitted plan. 
(2)  Landscaping plans pertaining to commercial private property shall be submitted together with the site development plan in building permit process. They shall be processed concurrently. 
(n)  Submission of Landscaping Plan. All landscaping plans shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Location of existing improvements (curbs, gutter, sidewalk, building, etc.), and existing vegetation including all trees with a diameter of one and one-half (1.5) inches or greater. 
(2)  Location of proposed structures, parking areas, circulation ways, pedestrian way, signs, and landscaping areas. 
(3)  A minimum of 10% of the commercial area to be developed must be landscaped. A statement pertaining to percentages of lot coverage of building, parking areas and landscaping area. 
(4)  A statement pertaining to preservation and disposition of existing vegetation. 
(5)  Proposed landscaping showing the location, size, species and spacing of trees and shrubs and the identification of the type of ground cover or ground treatment in all areas not covered by building or pavement. Size, species, and spacing shall be by direct labeling or by a clearly understandable legend. 
(6)  When phasing of the project is proposed, a phasing program for the landscaping may also be proposed. 
(7)  Flower and shrub bed definition must be clearly indicated. 
(8)  A schematic drawing of any proposed irrigation system. 
(9)  Identification of the method of reclamation for repair of cut and fill areas and other landform disruptions caused by construction. 
(10)  The owner, agent, or developer of the commercial property shall provide a written statement of the provisions being made for the maintenance and replacement of landscaping to include mandatory replacement of any vegetation, which dies within a one-year period from the time of planting. The director of parks and recreation shall approve the plan. 
(11)  If wetlands are submitted as part of the landscaping plan, identification and delineation of these areas must be indicated on the site plan. The name and address of the consultant and any documentation for avoidance or minimization of impacts from development must accompany the submittal information. 
(o)  Ground Cover Shall be Planted on Exposed Cut Areas. The proposed ground covers shall be approved by the director of parks and recreation and shall include various species that are selected for their ability to stabilize the slope and prevent erosion. 
(p)  Parking Areas in Commercial or Industrial Developments. 
(1)  Such parking area shall be adequately screened from contiguous residential uses by a fence, wall, earth berms, or trees and shrubs in combination. These screening materials shall not be less than three and one-half (3.5) feet above level or in a strip less than four (4) feet wide and shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
(2)  At least ten percent (10%) of the total parking area, including access ways, shall be devoted exclusively to landscaping with trees, shrubs, and ground cover which reduce the visual impact and assist in defining on-site traffic movement. This will be considered part of the total ten percent (10%) landscaping requirement. 
(3)  A landscaping lighting plan shall be submitted with the site/development plan and landscape lighting shall not be directed towards any adjacent residential uses or public streets. 
(q)  Landscape Plan Design Criteria. 
(1)  All plant material must meet specifications of the American Association of Nurserymen (AAN) for No. 1 grade. Trees, as identified in guidelines promulgated by the city representative, shall be placed in the city rights-of-way at intervals no greater than fifty (50) feet on-center and be at least of a 11/2' caliper (minimum size). 
(2)  In areas where commercial and/or industrial uses are proposed, landscaping shall be required within the city right-of-way (exclusive of area necessary for sidewalks which shall serve as a visual buffer to screen parking areas). 
(3)  In areas where such a landscaping area is not available, cuts shall be made in the sidewalk for the placement of street trees. This will be considered part of the total 10% landscape requirement. 
(4)  Where a city right-of-way border state-controlled roads, then landscaping requirements shall meet any state of Colorado requirements in addition to these regulations. 
(5)  All plants must be sized according to the following table: 
MINIMUM PLANT SIZES 
Type Sizes Standard deciduous trees 11/2 inches caliper Small ornamental and flowering trees 11/2 inches caliper Evergreen trees 4 feet Shrubs/ground covers Adequate size to be consistent with design intent  
(Ord. 1059, 2005) 
5.06 - Signs. 
(a)  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of these regulations is to encourage and promote a consistent and appropriate signage element for the benefit of the citizens as well as the business community. These regulations are not designed or intended to discourage or inhibit aesthetically pleasing signage design, materials, and placement. 
(b)  Applicability. The following regulations shall govern the placement and construction of all outdoor advertising displayed within the city. 
(c)  Permitted Signs. Signs listed in this section are permitted. 
(1)  Permanent Signs. Permanent signs shall be regulated as follows: 
a.  Contents. Identification by letter, numeral, symbol, or design of the uses-by-right of name, use, hours of operation, services and products offered, events and prices of products, and services. 
b.  Sign Types. Wall, ground, roof, and projecting. 
c.  Maximum Number of Signs. 
1.  For a Lot Having But One Use-by-Right. Two (2) signs for each street front of the lot on which the use-by-right is located. 
2.  For a Lot Having Two or More Uses-by-Right. One (1) sign for each of the uses-by-right located on the lot. For a use-by-right on a corner two (2) signs provided each sign is on a different surface. 
d.  Maximum Sign Area-Unlimited. Signs shall not be limited in surface area when surface-painted on the exterior walls of the building, or when the surface of the sign protrudes not more than one (1) inch beyond the attachment method. Such attachment material shall extend no more than two (2) inches, for an overall projection of not more than three (3) inches from the surface of the exterior wall. 
1.  Lot With One Use-by-Right. One (1) square foot of sign area for each linear foot of street front of the lot; provided, however, that in computing the area of such signs, the measurement of not more than two (2) front lines, one contiguous with the other shall be used; and provided that no single sign shall exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area nor shall the total sign area of any one use exceed six hundred (600) square feet. 
2.  Lot With Two or More Uses-by-Right. For each use-by-right the calculation shall be figured as follows: The linear street frontage of the lot the building is located on shall be divided proportionately among the users, based on the users linear front feet, provided that no single sign shall exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area nor shall the total sign area for all of the uses-by-right exceed six hundred (600) square feet. 
3.  Structures and Uses With No Direct Frontage On Public Rights-of-Way, and Two or More Uses-By-Right. A sign may be installed as long as it is reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator. 
e.  Maximum Height Above Grade. 
1.  Wall signs shall not exceed the height of the building. 
2.  Ground and roof signs shall not have their highest point more than twenty-five (25) feet above grade. 
f.  Location and Clearance. 
1.  Ground signs shall not protrude over any public right-of-way. On a corner, ground signs shall be at least ten (10) feet back from each boundary line on that lot which it is located, provided that a clear area be maintained to a height of eight (8) feet above public right-of-way. 
2.  Wall signs shall be located so that a clear area to a height of eight (8) feet above grade shall be maintained. 
3.  Ground signs may be less than eight (8) feet in height if adequately protected by plants, landscaping, benches, etc., and the signs do not impair the vision of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
4.  Projecting signs shall be a minimum height of eight (8) feet above ground level. The sign shall not extend more than six (6) feet over the public right-of-way and it shall not be higher than four (4) feet above building face of the building, but in any case is not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height above grade. 
g.  Illumination. Permitted signs may be illuminated, but shall not exceed twenty-five (25) watts per bulb for incandescent lighting, nor one hundred eighteen (118) watts per bulb for fluorescent lighting. 
h.  Ground Signs. Ground signs will be allowed in the commercial district (C) and the central business district (CBD). 
i.  National Electric Safety Code. All permitted signs must be in compliance with the National Electric Safety Code. 
(2)  Temporary Signs. All temporary signs shall comply with the standards in this section. 
a.  Purpose. To announce the sale or leasing of a property or building; public events to be held; the builder or tenant of a proposed building or property; or election campaigns. 
b.  Maximum size: thirty-two (32) square feet per sign. 
c.  Maximum height: twelve (12) feet. 
d.  Number: one for each street frontage upon which the property faces, and so placed that only one sign faces each street. 
e.  Type and location: 
1.  Wall Signs. Set back from the boundary lines of the lot on which it is located, the same distance as a structure containing a use-by-right provided, however, wall signs may project into the required setback space eight (8) inches. 
2.  Ground Signs. Set back ten (10) feet from the boundary lines of the lot on which it is located, provided that a clear area be maintained to a height of eight (8) feet. 
f.  Illumination and Animation. None. 
g.  Time Limit. Six (6) months maximum, with four (4) successive renewals each of six (6) months duration at the same location upon application. Once the purpose for which the sign has been erected has been fulfilled, the permit shall be deemed void. 
h.  Traffic control signs erected by proper authority shall be exempt from these regulations. 
i.  Pennants, banners, and posters may be erected advertising a special civic event. Such items may be erected two (2) weeks prior to the opening of the event advertised, and must be removed promptly following termination of the event. Banners and pennants erected under this clause may exceed the normal size limitation for temporary signs. Pennants, banners, and posters visible from any state highway must also be approved by the State Department of Highways. 
(3)  Billboards. 
a.  Size. The size of a billboard shall not exceed one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet. 
b.  Contents. Any billboard located in the city shall identify local goods, services, and commodities available and specify where such can be obtained. 
c.  Annual Permits. The owner of each billboard shall apply annually, before March 31, for a current year permit. The city building department shall determine that such billboard is being maintained in a structurally complete and sound condition and that the display surface and materials of the sign are in good repair by determining that the information is clearly visible to the consuming public. 
d.  Maximum Heights and Widths. No billboard shall exceed a maximum height of twelve (12) feet nor a maximum width of sixteen (16) feet. 
e.  Height Above Grade. The base or bottom of any billboard shall not exceed a height of one (1) foot above the grade of any adjoining highway or street right-of-way at its point closest to the billboard. 
(4)  Historic Preservation. 
a.  Purpose. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the city council retains the right to designate any number of signs within the CBD, central business district and the C, commercial highway district as historic signs. Any sign so designated shall be exempt from the nonconformance provisions of this code for so long as the historic sign: is not altered or enlarged, and is maintained in safe and satisfactory condition. Subject to conformance with height and clearance provisions, designated historic signs may be reattached to a different part of the building face without penalty. Should any of these conditions occur, the historic sign designation shall cease, and said sign shall be subject to the provisions of Section 1.08(c), Nonconforming Signs, of this code. 
b.  Application. Any business or property owner within the CBD, central business district and the C, commercial highway district may request designation as a historic sign. An application in the form approved by the city clerk shall be used. The application shall be submitted, accompanied by letters of support from at least three (3) other business or property owners within the CBD or C district. Such letters of support shall reference: the period of time which the sign has been in use, the unique characteristics of the sign that contribute to the central business district or commercial highway district; the history or upkeep and repair of the sign; the historic value of the sign; and, such other factors as may be deemed important. 
c.  Review and Approval. Once the application has been accepted by the city clerk as being complete, it shall be referred to a reviewing body, which shall be the planning and zoning commission unless the city council by resolution appoints a separate body to review historic sign applications. Members of the historic preservation board may appear before the reviewing board and participate in the review process. The reviewing body shall meet and make a recommendation within forty-five (45) days after the receipt of an application. At its discretion, the reviewing body may hold hearings, conduct research and take testimony if deemed necessary to make a recommendation. In making its recommendation, the reviewing body shall consider the period of time which the sign has been in use, the unique characteristics of the sign that contribute to the CBD, central business district or the C, commercial highway district; the history of upkeep and repair of the sign; the historic value of the sign; and, such other factors as the reviewing body deems important. The reviewing body shall make a recommendation to city council within forty-five (45) days of review of the application. The city council shall either approve or reject the recommendation by motion made and adopted at any regular or special meeting following receipt of the recommendation. 
d.  Historic Designation Provisions and Review of Alterations. Any proposed changes that alter the appearance of a historic sign shall undergo a review process by the historic preservation board. The board shall determine if the alteration is compatible with the historic designation and with the review criteria as outlined in Section 6.19(h). Compliance with the review criteria shall be mandatory for any signs designated as historic after the adoption of Ordinance No. 1140, Series 2010. Compliance with the review criteria for signs designated as historic prior to the adoption of said ordinance shall be voluntary; however any alterations to historic signs that are not in keeping with the review criteria may be subject to revocation of designation. Notwithstanding, repairs and mechanical upgrades to a historic sign may be approved by the department of planning and building, in the interest of public safety. In the event that the advertised business closes, any signs designated as historic may be allowed to remain on the building. Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit subsequent property owners from applying for a sign permit to advertise for a new business. Such sign permits shall be issued by the department of planning and building on a case-by-case basis. 
e.  Revocation of Designation. If a special feature on a designated sign has been altered in such a way so as to negate the features necessary to retain designation, or if the designated historic sign has been removed from view of the public, the owner may apply to the board for a revocation of the designation or the board shall authorize revocation of the designation in the absence of the owner's application to do so. 
(d)  Prohibited Signs. Prohibited signs are signs which: 
(1)  Contain statements, words, or pictures of an obscene, indecent or immoral character; 
(2)  Are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination which may be confused with or construed as a traffic control device or which hides from view any traffic or street sign or signal; 
(3)  Have a moving part or are portable or wheeled; or 
(4)  Contain or consist of ribbon streamers, strings of light bulbs, spinners, or other similarly moving devices. 
(5)  Advertises or acts as a location or identification sign for a business that has not been in operation for thirty (30) days. The property owner will be fully responsible for the removal of these obsolete signs if not removed by the tenant. 
(e)  Sign Area Measurement. 
(1)  Area to be Measured. The area of a sign shall be measured in conformance with the regulations as herein set forth, provided that the structure or bracing of a sign shall be omitted from measurement unless such structure or bracing is made part of the message or face of the sign. Where a sign has two (2) or more display faces, the area of one (1) face shall be used in determining the area of the sign. 
(2)  Computations. The area of signs with or without backing shall be computed by enclosing, with the smallest single continuous perimeter, all backing, background, material, letters, numbers, or emblems which are part of the overall display. 
(f)  Permits. It is unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, paint, or repaint, or change the use of any permitted sign as defined in this section without first obtaining a sign permit. 
(1)  Exceptions. Certain types of signs shall be exempt from the regulations of this section (see Section 2.02 of this code, Definitions): public, directional, occupant, memorial, bulletin, signs in the display window, professional, real estate, signs within buildings, political, and garage sale signs, and wall signs which have less than three (3) square feet of display area. 
(2)  Sign Permit Procedures and Fees. For all sign permits required, an application shall be submitted and a fee shall be charged to cover the costs of inspection and administration (see Section 6.21 of this code). 
(Ord. 1113, 2008; Ord. 816 §§ 1, 2, 1996) 
(Ord. No. 1129, 9-22-2009; Ord. No. 1140, 5-25-2010) 
5.07 - Performance standards. 
(a)  Applicability. All uses in any district of the city shall conform in operation, location and construction to the subjective performance standards herein specified so that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected. 
(b)  Exemption. The following are exempt from the performance standards of this section: 
(1)  Temporary construction, excavation and grading associated with development for which applicable permits have been issued and with the installation of streets or utilities; and 
(2)  Demolition activities that are necessary and incidental to permitted development on the same lot, on another of several lots being developed at the same time or in the public right-of-way or easement. 
(c)  General. The location, size, design and operating characteristics of all uses shall minimize adverse effects, including visual impacts, on surrounding properties; and 
(d)  Noise. At no point on the bounding property line of any use in any district shall the sound pressure level of any use, operation or plant produce noise of such intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the use and enjoyment of adjacent property. For the purposes of this section, bounding property line shall be interpreted as being at the far side of any street alley; stream or other permanently dedicated open space from the noise source when such open space exists between the property line of the noise source and adjacent property. When no such open space exists, the common line between two (2) parcels of property shall be interpreted as the bounding property line. 
(e)  Smoke and Particulate Matter. No operation or use in any district shall at any time create smoke and particulate matter that, when considered at the bounding property line of the source of operation creates a nuisance or distracts from the use and enjoyment of adjacent property. 
(f)  Odorous Matter. No use shall be located or operated in any district that involves the emission of odorous matter from a source of operation where the odorous matter exceeds the odor threshold at the bounding property line or any point beyond the tract on which such use or operation is located. The odor threshold shall be the concentration of odorous matter in the atmosphere necessary to be perceptible to the olfactory nerve of a normal person. 
(g)  Fire and Explosive Hazard Material. 
(1)  Explosives. No use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds or products that decompose by detonation shall be permitted in any district, except that chlorates, nitrates, phosphorus and similar substances and compounds in small quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists or wholesalers may be permitted when approved by the fire marshal as not presenting a fire or explosion hazard. 
(2)  Flammables. The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials (e.g., pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film, solvents and petroleum products) shall be permitted only when such storage or use conforms to the city's standards and regulations. 
(h)  Toxic and Noxious Matter. No operation or use in any district shall emit a concentration across the bounding property line of the tract on which such operation or use is located of toxic or noxious matter that will exceed the threshold limits set forth by the Colorado Department of Health. 
(i)  Vibration. No operation or use in any district shall at any time create earth borne vibration that, when considered at the bounding property line of the source of operation creates a nuisance or distracts from the use and enjoyment of adjacent property. 
(j)  Open Storage. No open storage of materials or commodities shall be permitted in any district except as an accessory use to a main use located in a building in an I or PUD industrial district. No open storage operation shall be located in front of a main building. No wrecking, junk, or salvage yard shall be permitted as a storage use in any district. 
(k)  Glare. No use or operation in any district shall be located or conducted so as to produce intense glare or direct illumination across the bounding property line from a visible source of illumination nor shall any such light be of such intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the use and enjoyment of adjacent property. 
Chapter 6 - ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 
Sections: 

6.01 - Planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  Planning and Zoning Commission Created. The City of Cortez Code, Article II creates an advisory board known as the planning and zoning commission ("planning commission" or "commission"). 
(b)  Organization. The City of Cortez Code, Article II describes the organization, of the planning commission. 
(1)  The commission consists of nine (9) members, five (5) members who are real estate owning, qualified, taxpaying electors of the city appointed by the city. The four remaining members shall be ex-officio members without vote and consist of the city manager, the zoning administrator, the city engineer and the mayor of the city council. 
(2)  The term of office of the original planning commission members was staggered. As the term of each member expires, the vacancy thus created shall be filled by a majority vote of the city council for a term of three years. If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of term, the city council by majority vote shall appoint a new member to fill the unexpired term. 
(3)  Commission members may be removed from office prior to the expiration of the appointed term for cause. 
(c)  Officers and Procedures. At the first regular commission meeting in January of each year, the first item of business shall be the selection of the commission's chairman from the membership of the commission. 
(1)  The chairman shall preside over meetings. In the event a question over procedures arises, Robert's Rules of Order shall prevail. 
(2)  The commission shall create and fill other offices, as it deems necessary. 
(3)  The recording of minutes of all commission meetings shall be the responsibility of the city clerk. 
(4)  A majority of the appointed members of the commission shall constitute a quorum to do business and the affirmative vote of three fifths of the appointed members in attendance shall be necessary to pass any motion. 
(5)  The commission shall establish rules and procedures that govern its operation. 
(6)  The commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting per month. Special meetings may be called by any three appointed members of the commission or the city manager upon due notice to the chairman and other members of the commission. 
(d)  Powers and Duties. The planning commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To recommend the boundaries of the various zoning districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein under this code or the laws of the state of Colorado to the city council and to recommend approval or denial of zoning changes and regulations under this code. 
(2)  To hear, recommend or determine any matter relating to zoning, planning or subdivision control as they may be specified or required under this code or applicable laws of the state of Colorado. 
(3)  To make and adopt a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city, including any areas outside its boundaries, subject to the approval of the city council, which in the commission's judgment bear relation to the planning of the city (C.R.S. 31-23-306). 
(4)  To exercise the duties and powers as may be now or hereafter conferred by this code and the applicable laws of the state of Colorado. 
(5)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this code, pursuant to Section 6.18 of this chapter, Special exceptions. 
6.02 - Zoning map and land use code amendments. 
(a)  Initiation of Text Amendment. Any person having a proprietary interest in any property may submit an application for a change or amendment to the provisions of this code, or the planning commission may on its own motion or on request from the city council, institute study and proposal for changes and amendments in the public interest. 
(b)  Application for Zoning Map Amendment. Any person having a proprietary interest in any property within the corporate limits of the city, requesting a change or amendment to the zoning classification of such property shall file five (5) copies of the application for such change or amendment with the zoning administrator. The application shall at a minimum, include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant shall be provided. 
(2)  The application shall clearly state the requested change or amendment and describe the property to be affected by such request by metes and bounds or by other legal description. 
(3)  The application shall be accompanied by a title certificate from a licensed title company or attorney listing the name of the property owner(s) and all liens, easements and judgments of record that affect the title to the subject property. 
(4)  A statement from the county treasurer showing the status of all current taxes due on such parcel. 
(5)  Certified boundary survey of land area to be rezoned, along with an indication of the existing zoning, predominant existing uses, and existing zoning designations within three hundred (300) feet in all directions of the boundary of the land area to be rezoned; and 
(6)  A list of surrounding property owners and their legal mailing addresses within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundary of the parcel proposed to be zoned or rezoned. 
(7)  A statement by the applicant explaining the rationale for the rezoning request relative to the standards imposed by subsection (c) of this section. 
(8)  A filing fee shall be submitted to cover the cost of review and processing with every application in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  Rezoning Policy Declaration. For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable and desirable development within the city, the rezoning of land is to be discouraged. Rezoning shall only be considered if one or more of the following standards are held to apply to the request: 
(1)  The land to be zoned was zoned in error and, as presently zoned, is inconsistent with the policies and goals of the city's comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The area for which rezoning is requested has changed or is changing to such a degree that it is in the public interest to encourage a redevelopment of the area. 
(3)  The proposed rezoning is necessary in order to provide land for a use which was not anticipated at the time of the adoption of the city's comprehensive plan, and that such rezoning will be consistent with the policies and goals of the plan. Special consideration shall be given to existing conditions on and around the area in question, including the changing nature of the area, land uses, densities, and the height and scale of both existing and proposed structures. 
(d)  Review by Planning Commission. Before taking action on any proposed amendment, supplement or change, the city council shall submit the same to the planning commission for its recommendation and report. 
(1)  Items for Consideration in Zoning Amendments. The planning commission shall in its action on the rezoning request, consider the following: 
a.  Was the existing zone for the property adopted in error? 
b.  Has there been a change of character in the area (e.g. installation of public facilities, other zone changes, new growth trends, deterioration, development transitions, etc.)? 
c.  Is there a need for the proposed rezoning within the area or community? 
d.  Are the proposed uses compatible with the surrounding area or uses; will there be adverse impacts; and/or can any adverse impacts be mitigated? 
e.  Will there be benefits derived by the community or area by granting the proposed rezoning? 
f.  Are adequate facilities available to serve development for the type and scope suggested by the proposed zone? If utilities are not available, could they be reasonably extended? 
g.  Is the proposal in conformance with the policies, intents and requirements of the Cortez comprehensive plan? 
h.  Does the proposed change constitute "spot zoning?" 
(2)  Public Hearing Required. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for amendment or change prior to making its recommendation to the city council. 
a.  Within forty-five (45) days following the closing of the public hearing, the planning commission shall either recommend approval, approval with modifications, or disapproval of the application to the city council. The recommendation of the planning commission shall be transmitted to the city council and to the applicant within ten (10) days of the recommendation. 
(3)  Notification Requirements for Zoning Map Amendment. When any such amendment or change relates to a change in the zoning classification of property or a change to the boundary of a zoning district, the following requirements shall be met: 
a.  The city shall publish notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall include the present and proposed zoning; the time, date, and place of the hearing; and the name, address, and phone number of the applicant and a map showing the land area proposed for rezoning. The city will also cause the notice of hearing to be posted in at least one public place within the city. 
b.  The applicant shall post signs noticing the public hearing at least once every five hundred (500) feet along the perimeter of the land area proposed for rezoning with a notice of the hearing at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall include the present and proposed rezoning; the time, date, and place of the public hearing; and the name, address, and phone number of the applicant and a map showing the land area proposed for rezoning. 
c.  However, when the zoning district map in any way is to be changed or amended incidental to, or as a part of a general revision of this code, whether such revision be made by repeal of the existing zoning and/or land use regulations and enactment of a new zoning and/or land use regulations, or otherwise, posting of notice on the land area proposed for rezoning shall not be required. 
(4)  Notification Requirements for Text Amendment. When any such amendment relates to a change of a regulation or to the text of this code not affecting specific property, the city clerk shall cause notice of the public hearing of the planning commission to be given by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city without the necessity of notifying property owners by mail. Such notice shall state the time and place of such hearing and the nature of the subject to be considered, which time shall not be earlier than fifteen (15) days from the date of publication. 
(e)  Action by City Council. If the city council adopts the zoning ordinance amendment on first reading, a public hearing and second reading shall be held by the city council before adopting any proposed amendment, supplement or change. Such amendments shall become effective upon the favorable vote of a majority of the quorum of the city council present and voting. 
(1)  Issues for Consideration. In making its determination, city council shall consider the recommendation of the planning commission, staff reports, and the written and oral testimony presented, and the considerations listed in subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(2)  Notification Requirements for Zoning Map Amendment. When any such amendment or change relates to a change in the zoning classification of property or a change to the boundary of a zoning district, the following requirements shall be met: 
a.  The city shall publish notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall include the present and proposed zoning; the time, date, and place of the hearing; and the name, address, and phone number of the applicant and a map showing the land area proposed for rezoning. The city will also cause the notice of hearing to be posted in at least one public place within the city. 
b.  The city shall mail the written notice of public hearing to all owners of real property lying within three hundred (300) feet of the property on which the change is requested. The notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date set for hearing by depositing in the mail such notice properly addressed and postage paid to each such owner as the ownership appears on the last approved county tax roll. 
c.  The applicant shall post signs noticing the public hearing at least once every five hundred (500) feet along the perimeter of the land area proposed for rezoning with a notice of the hearing at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall include the present and proposed rezoning; the time, date, and place of the public hearing; and the name, address, and phone number of the applicant and a map showing the land area proposed for rezoning. 
d.  However, when the zoning district map in any way is to be changed or amended incidental to, or as a part of a general revision of this code, whether such revision be made by repeal of the existing zoning and/or land use regulations and enactment of a new zoning and/or land use regulations, or otherwise, mailing to property owners within three hundred (300) feet and the posting of notice on the land area proposed for rezoning shall not be required. 
(3)  Notification Requirements for Text Amendment. When any such amendment relates to a change of a regulation or to the text of this code not affecting specific property, the city clerk shall cause notice of the public hearing of the planning commission to be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city without the necessity of notifying property owners by mail. Such notice shall state the time and place of such hearing and the nature of the subject to be considered, which time shall not be earlier than fifteen (15) days from the date of publication. The city will also cause the notice of hearing to be posted in at least one public place within the city. 
6.03 - Master plan amendments. 
(a)  Initiation of Amendment. Any person having a proprietary interest in any property may make application to the city council for a change or amendment to the city comprehensive plan ("master plan"), or the planning commission may on its own motion or on request from the city council, institute study and proposal for changes and amendments in the public interest. 
(1)  Application for master plan amendment. 
(2)  Any person having a proprietary interest in any property within the corporate limits of the city, requesting a change or amendment to the master plan affecting such property, shall file an application applying for such change or amendment with the zoning administrator, which petition shall clearly state the requested change or amendment and describe the property to be affected by such request by metes and bounds or by other legal description. 
(3)  A filing fee shall be submitted to cover the cost of review and processing with every private sector application in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  Review by Planning Commission. Before taking action on any proposed amendment, supplement or change, the city council shall submit the same to the planning commission for its recommendation and report. 
(1)  Public Hearing Required. Before adopting any plan, any part, amendment, extension or addition to the plan, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing prior to making its recommendation to the city council. 
(2)  Notification Requirements for Master Plan Amendment. The city clerk shall cause notice of the public hearing to be given by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city without the necessity of notifying property owners by mail. Such notice shall state the time and place of such hearing and the nature of the amendment to be considered, which time shall not be earlier than fifteen (15) days from the date of publication. 
(3)  Requirements for Approval. Such amendments shall not become effective except by resolution of the commission carried by the favorable vote of three-fifths of the entire voting membership of the commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive matter intended by the commission to form the whole or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the map and plan and descriptive matter by the identifying signature of the chairman or secretary of the commission. An attesting copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to each governmental body of the territory affected and, after the approval by each body, shall be filed with the county clerk and recorder of Montezuma County. 
(4)  Council Notification of Disapproval. In the event of disapproval by the commission of a proposed master plan or an amendment to the plan, the commission shall communicate its reasons to the city council. 
(5)  Statutory Approval Requirement. Failure of the commission to act within sixty days from and after the date of official submission to it shall be deemed approval. 
(c)  Action by City Council. A public hearing shall be held by the city council before adopting any proposed amendment, supplement or change. 
(1)  Issues for Consideration. In making its determination, city council shall consider the recommendation of the planning commission, staff reports, and the written and oral testimony presented. 
(2)  Notification Requirements for Master Plan Amendment. The city clerk shall cause notice of the public hearing to be given by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city without the necessity of notifying property owners by mail. Such notice shall state the time and place of such hearing and the nature of the amendment to be considered, which time shall not be earlier than fifteen (15) days from the date of publication. 
6.04 - Preliminary plats. 
(a)  Pre-Application Conference. Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall meet with the zoning administrator or his or her designated agent to acquaint himself or herself with the requirements of the city and the relationship of the proposed subdivision to the comprehensive plan. At such meeting, the application contents, referral agencies, review procedures, density standards, use and area standards, street requirements, utility service and the general character of the development may be discussed. At the pre-application conference, a land planner, engineer or surveyor may represent the subdivider. 
(1)  Optional Pre-Application Conference With Planning Commission. At the option of the zoning administrator or at the applicant's option, a pre-application conference may be held with the planning commission. 
(2)  Reimbursement Agreements. During the pre-application or optional pre-application process the applicant shall indicate their intention to enter into a reimbursement agreement. See Section 6.27 of the Land Use Code for reimbursement agreements. 
(b)  Submittal Requirements. The subdivider or owner shall file eight (8) copies of an application requesting preliminary plat approval, a title certificate from a licensed title company or attorney listing the name of the property owner(s) and all liens, easements and judgments of record affecting the subject property, and of the preliminary plat. Such plat shall be accompanied by or show the following information: 
(1)  Boundary Lines and Bearings. Boundary lines, bearings, and distances sufficient to locate the exact area proposed for subdivision. At least one (1) subdivision corner shall be referenced to a survey (abstract) corner. The area, in acres, of the subdivision shall also be shown. 
(2)  Adjacent Subdivisions. The name and location of a portion of adjoining subdivisions shall be drawn to the same scale and shown in dotted lines adjacent to the tract proposed for subdivisions in sufficient detail to show actually the existing streets and alleys and other features that may influence the layout and development of the proposed subdivisions. Where adjacent land is not subdivided, the name of the owner of the adjacent tract shall be shown. 
(3)  Intersecting Streets. The angle of intersection of the centerline of all intersecting streets. 
(4)  Proposed Streets, Alleys and Easements. The names, location and widths of all streets, alleys and easements proposed for the subdivision, and all known rights-of-way and/or easements within or affecting the area to be subdivided. 
(5)  Proposed Blocks, Lots and Parks. The subdivision shall show all proposed streets and alleys, easements, blocks, lots, parks, etc., with principal dimensions. 
(6)  Contours. Topographic contours at five (5) foot intervals and all easements or right-of-way necessary for drainage within or without the boundaries of the addition. 
(7)  Subdivision Title and Planner. The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, the name of the owner and the name of the engineer or land planner who prepared the plat. 
(8)  Dedicated Parks, Playgrounds and Other Public Uses. Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds or other public uses. 
(9)  Scale, North Point. Scale, north point, date and other pertinent data. The scale of the preliminary plat may be at one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet. 
(10)  Name, Address and Telephone Number. Property owner's name, address, and telephone number. 
(11)  Proposed Layout of Utilities. A proposed preliminary layout of sanitary sewer and water lines to serve the subdivision. 
(12)  Drainage Report. A drainage report as described in Section 4.06 of this code, or drainage statement shall accompany the preliminary plat. This study or report shall show the acreage draining into the subdivision, points of runoff through and away from the subdivision. 
(13)  Wetlands Identification. It is required that all wetlands be identified and delineated on any site plan that is submitted to the city as part of any application. The developer or property owner is responsible for determining the presence of wetlands on his property. At the recommendation of the parks and recreation department and the sole discretion of the city council, wetlands may be included as a portion of the public land dedication, the percentage to be determined by the director of the parks and recreation department or his designated representative. Disturbance of wetlands is subject to review by agencies such as the Army Corps of Engineers. Prior to removal or alteration of riparian vegetation, impacts of such removal or alteration shall be documented, and any other required permits (e.g. Army Corps of Engineers) shall be obtained. 
(14)  Protective Covenants. Draft of any protective covenants where the subdivider proposes to regulate land use or development standards in the subdivision. 
(15)  Proposed Land Uses. A designation of the proposed uses of land within the subdivision and any zoning amendments proposed to be requested. 
(16)  Vicinity Map. A vicinity map on a smaller scale showing the proposed subdivision and its relationship to the surrounding area and city limits. 
(17)  Application Fee. A filing fee shall be submitted to cover the cost of review and processing with every preliminary plat in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(18)  Preliminary Master Plan. If the proposed subdivision is a portion of a tract that is later to be subdivided in its entirety, then a tentative master plat of the entire subdivision shall be submitted with the preliminary plat of the portion first to be subdivided. The master subdivision plan shall conform in all respects to the requirements of the preliminary plat; except, it may be on a scale of not more than one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet. 
(19)  a.  In accordance with 10-11-123, 24-65.5-101-106, C.R.S. as amended, not less than thirty (30) days before the date scheduled for the initial public hearing before the planning and zoning commission or the city council the applicant for development of a surface estate is required to send notice by first class mail to: 
1.  Any mineral estate owner having severed mineral interests within the proposed development. The notice shall contain the time and place of the initial public hearing, the nature of the hearing, the location of the property that is the subject of the hearing and the name of the applicant. 
2.  The Zoning Administrator. Such notice shall contain the name and address of the mineral estate owner. 
b.  To identify the mineral estate owner, the applicant shall examine the records in the office of the county clerk and recorder of the county in which the real property is located. Notice shall be sent if the records establish any of the following: 
1.  The identity of the owner of the mineral estate, 
2.  That an applicable request for notification is of record, or 
3.  That the mineral estate owner has recorded an instrument satisfying any applicable dormant mineral interest act. 
c.  If records do not identify any mineral estate owners, the applicant shall be deemed to have acted in good faith and shall not be subject to further obligations or held responsible for errors or omission in such records. 
(c)  Application Review Procedures. 
(1)  Date of Filing. Ten (10) copies of the preliminary plat as described in subsection (b) of this section shall be submitted to the zoning administrator thirty (30) days prior to the planning commission meeting at which consideration is desired. The preliminary plat shall be considered officially filed after application review fees, which are established by resolution of the city council, have been paid and after it is examined and found to be in compliance with the general provisions of these regulations by the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Distribution of Preliminary Plats. The following notice shall be stamped on the face of each preliminary plat: "Preliminary Plat - for inspection purposes only, and in no way official or approved for record purposes." The zoning administrator shall distribute the preliminary plats immediately upon receipt to the following: 
a.  Zoning administrator (one copy); 
b.  Public works department (one copy); 
c.  City engineer (one copy); 
d.  Electric power association (one copy); 
e.  Natural gas provider (one copy); 
f.  Telephone provider (one copy); 
g.  Cortez-Montezuma school district (one copy); 
h.  Cortez fire protection district (one copy); 
i.  Cortez city clerk (one copy - for the public record); 
j.  Parks and recreation department (one copy); 
k.  Cortez police department (one copy); 
l.  Cortez sanitation district (one copy). 
(3)  Distribution to County. Whenever a preliminary subdivision plat, involving land in the city's urban influence area outside the corporate limits, is submitted to the planning commission for approval, two (2) additional plat copies shall be provided and forwarded for comment and recommendation to the county commissioners. One (1) of the copies shall be specifically directed to the attention of the commissioner in whose district the subdivision is located and the other to the county planning director. The transmittal to the county commissioners shall specify the date at which the planning commission will act on the preliminary plat and request a reply setting forth the improvement standards and other requirements essential to the acceptance of streets, roads and other public dedications proposed by the plat. 
(4)  Comments-Written Report. At least ten (10) days prior to the meeting of the planning commission, at which the plat is to be considered, each agency listed above shall submit their written recommendations concerning the plat in question to the zoning administrator. The recommendations shall be given to the planning commission with the plat for their consideration. A written report shall be prepared by the zoning administrator and submitted to the planning commission at the next regular meeting. Such report should include comments relative to the proposed subdivision's compliance to these regulations, the comprehensive plan or other master plans such as utility plans. The report may include comments from other municipal departments, county, or state agencies concerned with urban development. 
(d)  Review by Commission. 
(1)  Action by Commission. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat before making a decision. The planning commission shall act on the preliminary plat within thirty (30) days after the official filing date or within a reasonable time thereafter. 
(2)  Notification Requirements for Preliminary Plat. 
a.  The city shall publish notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall include the nature of the matters to be considered; the time, date, and place of the hearing; and the name, address, and phone number of the applicant. The city will also cause the notice of hearing to be posted in at least one (1) public place within the city. 
b.  The city shall mail the written notice of public hearing to all owners of real property lying within three hundred (300) feet of the property on which the change is requested. The notice shall be given not less than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing by depositing in the mail such notice properly addressed and postage paid to each such owner as the ownership appears on the last approved county tax roll. 
(3)  Items for Consideration by Commission. The planning commission shall, in its action on the preliminary plat, consider the physical arrangement of the subdivision, and determine the adequacy of street rights-of-way and alignment and the compliance with the Cortez thoroughfare plan, the street standards of the city, the existing street pattern in the area and with all applicable provisions of the comprehensive plan. The planning commission shall also ascertain that adequate easements for proposed or future utility service and surface drainage are provided, and that the lot size and area are adequate to comply with the minimum requirements for the underlying zone district and for the type of sanitary sewage disposal proposed. 
(4)  Subdivisions Outside City. If the information shown on a preliminary subdivision plat is of land located outside the corporate limits of the city and within the urban influence area, the procedure for approval, modification or disapproval, shall be the same as required for preliminary plats within the city. 
(5)  Action Within 30 Days. Following review of the preliminary plat and other materials submitted for conformity thereof to these regulations, and negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by the subdivider, the planning commission shall, within thirty (30) days, act thereon as submitted or modified, and if approved the planning commission shall express its approval as conditional approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor. 
(6)  Notation of Action. The action of the planning commission shall be noted on two (2) copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained by the planning commission. A notation of the action taken and requisite reasons therefore shall be entered in the records of the planning commission. 
(e)  Effect of Preliminary Plat Approval. 
(1)  Not Approval of Final Plat. Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. 
(2)  Lapse of Approval. Preliminary approval of the subdivision shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of approval and the general terms and conditions under which the preliminary approval was granted will not be changed. The planning commission's preliminary approval of the subdivision shall be deemed voided unless the final plat is submitted within the twelve (12) month period or unless the twelve (12) month period is extended by the planning commission at the request of the subdivider. 
(Ord. 1117 (part), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 1205 , 3-22-2016) 
6.05 - Final plats. 
(a)  Final Plat Submittal Requirements. The owner of land on which preliminary plat approval has been obtained shall prepare and submit a final plat to the city council. The owner shall provide a non-erasable Mylar copy of the original and seven (7) copies drawn to a scale of one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. The drawing shall measure twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. When necessary the plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively in sections satisfactory to the planning commission. The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Control Points-Acres. The primary control points, or descriptions and "ties" to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on the plat shall be referred shall be placed on the final plat. The area of the subdivision, in acres, shall be shown. 
(2)  Boundary Lines and Bearings. Tract boundary line sufficient to locate the exact area proposed for subdivision, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites; with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs and central angles of all curves shall be placed on the final plat. 
(3)  Streets. Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way shall be placed on the final plat. 
(4)  Easements. Location and dimensions of all easements shall be placed on the final plat. 
(5)  Lot and Block Numbers. Number to identify each lot or site and each block, and the dimensions of lots and blocks, shall be placed on the final plat. 
(6)  Purpose of Sites. The purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved shall be indicated on the final plat. 
(7)  Building Lines. Minimum building setback lines when required or approved by the planning commission shall be placed on the final plat. 
(8)  Monuments. Location and description of monuments shall be placed on the final plat. 
(9)  Adjacent Land. References to recorded subdivision plats or adjoining platted land by record name shall be placed on the final plat. 
(10)  Legal Description. A legal description and surveyor's certificate, to, in the following form, shall be placed on the final plat: 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
That I, ____________ , do hereby certify that I prepared this plat from an actual and accurate survey of the land and that the corner monuments shown thereon were properly placed under my supervision. 
____________ 
Signature 
(11)  Approval Certification. Certification of approval by the planning commission and city council, in the following form, shall be placed on the final plat. 
APPROVED this ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ , by the Planning Commission of the City of Cortez, Colorado. 
____________ 
Chairman 
APPROVED this ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ , by the City Council of the City of Cortez, Colorado. 
____________ 
Mayor 
____________ 
City Clerk 
(12)  Title-Scale. A title, scale, and north point shall be placed on the final plat. 
(13)  Street Intersections. The location of the point of intersection and points of tangency of street intersections, and the bearing and distance of each street right-of-way centerline shall be placed on the final plat. 
(14)  Plat Identification. A positive reference and identification of the plat and date of plat shall be placed on the final plat. 
(15)  Dedication Certificate. The property owner's certificate or deed of dedication shall be placed on the final plat. The dedication deed or certificate of dedication shall be executed by all persons, firms or corporations owning an interest in the property subdivided and platted, and shall be acknowledged in the manner prescribed by the laws for the state of Colorado for conveyances of real property. The spouse of all married persons executing such dedication deed or certificate of dedication shall join therein unless satisfactory proof be provided showing that the property to be subdivided does not constitute any portion of such party's homestead, in which case the instrument of dedication shall state the fact that the property subdivided and platted does not constitute a part of such partyffffffs actual homestead. In the case of surface lien holders, they may execute a subordination agreement subordinating their liens to all public streets, alleys, parks, school sites and any other public areas shown on the plat of such subdivision as being set aside for public uses and purposes. The dedication deed or certificate of dedication shall, in addition to the above requirements, contain the following: 
a.  An accurate description of the tract of land subdivided. 
b.  A statement and express representation that the parties joining in such dedication are the sole owners of such tract of land. 
c.  An express dedication without reservation to the public for public use; the streets, alleys, rights-of-way, school site and any other public areas shown on the attached plat. 
d.  A positive reference and identification of the plat of such subdivision date of plat and engineer. 
(16)  Tax Certificates. Tax certificates indicating that all taxes on the land being subdivided have been paid to the current year shall be submitted with the final plat. 
(17)  Construction Plans. Three (3) sets of plans for required improvements and a set of reproducible transparent sheets, twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches in size along with all data and calculations related to utilities, drainage or other construction in the subdivision shall be submitted with the final plat. The construction plans shall conform to all requirements of the current construction design standards for the city. Such plans shall also show all existing or proposed surface and subsurface improvements and obstruction. 
a.  Reimbursement Agreements. An applicant intending to implement a reimbursement agreement shall submit the agreement along with construction plans. See Section 6.27 of the City of Cortez Land Use Code for reimbursement agreements. 
(18)  Filing Fee. A filing fee to cover the cost of review in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  Application Review Procedures. 
(1)  Date of Filing. After approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission and city council and within twelve (12) months of the approval date unless extended for up to one (1) additional year by action of the planning commission, the subdivider may submit for approval the final plat. The application, meeting all the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator at least thirty (30) days prior to the meeting at which consideration is desired. The official filing date of the final plat shall be the date upon which the plat and construction drawings are found to be in full compliance with the provisions of the preliminary approval after examination by the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Conformance with Preliminary Plat. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat that he or she proposes to record and develop at the time, provided however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. 
(3)  Review of Construction Plans. After the presentation of the construction plans for a subdivision to the zoning administrator, the zoning administrator shall submit the construction plans to the city engineer for review. The city engineer shall review the plans and submit to the planning commission his or her report at the final plat presentation. The developer shall pay the reasonable cost of review of the construction plans before the final plat is presented to the city council. 
(c)  Review by City Council. The city council shall consider all proposals with respect to the dedication of right-of-way for public use, the construction of utilities, streets, drainage, and other improvements, and when satisfied with the proposals, shall authorize the establishment of agreements for same. 
(1)  Action by City Council. The zoning administrator shall submit the final plat to the city council, along with any preliminary plat conditions established by the planning commission preliminary plat and an appropriate recommendation. The city council shall hold a public hearing on the final plat prior to taking action. The city council shall act on the final plat within thirty (30) days after the official filing date or within a reasonable time thereafter. 
a.  The city council may, at its sole discretion and in the interest of further promoting the city's comprehensive plan, waive or modify one or more of the subdivider's financial obligations for public improvements, including the public land dedication requirements of Section 4.05 of this code. 
(2)  Notification Requirements for Final Plat. 
a.  The City clerk shall publish notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall include the nature of the matters to be considered; the time, date, and place of the hearing; and the name, address, and phone number of the applicant. The city clerk shall also cause the notice of hearing to be posted in at least one (1) public place within the city. 
b.  The city clerk shall mail the written notice of public hearing to all owners of real property lying within three hundred (300) feet of the property on which the change is requested. The notice shall be given not less than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing by depositing in the mail such notice properly addressed and postage paid to each such owner as the ownership appears on the last approved county tax roll. 
(3)  Review in Stages. An owner or subdivider, at his or her option, may obtain approval of a portion or a section of a subdivision provided he or she meets all the requirements of this code with reference to such portion or section in the same manner as is required for a complete subdivision. In the event a subdivision and the final plat thereof is approved by the city council in sections, each final plat of each section is to carry the name of the entire subdivision, but is to bear a distinguishing letter, number or subtitle. Block numbers shall run consecutively throughout the entire subdivision, even though such subdivision may be finally approved in sections. 
(4)  Approval by City Council. After the city council has determined that the plat is in proper form, that the arrangement of the development proposed for the property being subdivided is consistent with zoning regulations and that the subdivision complies with the provisions of this code, it shall act to approve the plat. 
(5)  Disapproval by City Council. Final plats that are disapproved by the city council shall be returned to the subdivider by the zoning administrator with an attached statement of the reasons for such action. 
(d)  Action Following Approval. 
(1)  Certification of Approval. The city council's approval and execution of the city council certificate of approval on the final plat shall authorize the chairman of the planning commission to execute the planning commission certificate of approval on the plat. 
a.  In no case shall additions, corrections, or modifications of any kind be made to the final plat other than signatures required after the final plat has been approved by the city council. 
(2)  Recordation of Plats. The final plat for any subdivision located within the corporate limits of the city shall then be caused to be filed of record by the subdivider in the plat records of Montezuma County, but only after the city council has officially acted upon the final plat with reference to improvements, dedications and utilities and all fees (including recording and review fees) shall be paid by the developer. 
a.  If for any reason the final plat has not been recorded within six (6) months of city council approval, the approving actions shall be deemed void. 
(Ord. 1117 (part), 2008; Ord. 1072 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 1205 , 3-22-2016) 
6.06 - Improvements agreement and performance guarantees. 
(a)  Improvements Agreement. Prior to the issuance of a building permit and the recording of a final plat, an applicant shall submit for approval to the city council an improvements agreement for construction of any required public improvements designated on the final plat. 
(b)  Performance Guarantee. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the city council shall require an applicant to file a financial guarantee in order to insure compliance with any or all requirements of the board stipulated in the improvements agreement and the final plat. 
(2)  The financial guarantee, in the judgment of the city council, shall be sufficient to make reasonable provision for completion of such improvements in accordance with design and time specifications. 
(3)  Ordinarily, a letter of credit to the city council from a commercial bank, savings and loan institution, insurance company or other qualified lending institution(s) licensed or authorized to do business in the state of Colorado in a form satisfactory to the manager shall be required. 
(4)  Nothing in subsection (b)(3) of this section shall preclude the city council from approving other forms of financial security. 
(c)  Release of Collateral. 
(1)  As public improvements are made, an applicant may apply to the board for release of part or all of the collateral deposited with the board. 
(2)  Upon inspection and approval, the board shall release collateral, provided that in the event a combination of forms of collateral has been accepted, the board shall release collateral on a priority basis it deems appropriate. 
(3)  If the board determines that any of the required improvements are not constructed in substantial compliance with specifications, it shall furnish the applicant a list of specifications and shall be entitled to withhold collateral sufficient to insure substantial compliance. 
(4)  If the board determines that the applicant will not construct any or all of the improvements in accordance with all of the specifications, the board may withdraw and employ from the deposit of collateral such funds as may be necessary to construct the improvements in accordance with the specifications. 
(d)  Form of Agreement. All improvement agreements shall utilize the standard city template (guide) for the format and content of such Agreements, with such changes as may be approved by the city council (see Appendix B set out at the end of this code.) 
6.07 - Acceptance of subdivision improvements. 
(a)  Time Frame For Completion. 
(1)  Plan Resubmittal. If construction has not commenced within one (1) year after approval of the plans, resubmittal of plans may be required by the city engineer for meeting current standards and engineering requirements. These plans will be reviewed and comments noted in fifteen (15) working days. A fee as provided for in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council is required upon the resubmittal of plans for review. "Construction" means the start or commencement of construction of city-maintained facilities. 
(2)  Expiration and Extension of Approval. If the public improvements for a subdivision have not been constructed and accepted by the city, and the corresponding final plat for such subdivision filed in the plat records of the Montezuma County within thirty-six (36) months from the date of final plat approval by the city, such final plat shall be null and void and shall conclusively be deemed to be withdrawn, without further action by the city; provided however, this provision shall not apply to final plats approved by the city prior to the adoption of this code (March 12, 1996). If the public improvements for a subdivision that was approved prior to March 12, 1996 have not been constructed and accepted by the city, and the corresponding final plat for such subdivision filed in the map and plat records of the Montezuma County by within thirty-six (36) months of the adoption of this code (March 12, 1996), such final plat shall be null and void and shall conclusively be deemed to be withdrawn, without further action by the city. An approved, unexpired final subdivision plat may be extended once for a period not to exceed thirty-six (36) months, pursuant to the following provisions: 
a.  The city council may extend the approval of the final plat, for good cause shown by the applicant, if there has been no significant change in development conditions affecting the subdivision plan and the plat continues to comply with all applicable standards and ordinances. 
b.  A request for an extension of time to complete final public improvements for a subdivision pursuant to these provisions shall be submitted to the zoning administrator no later than the date the final subdivision plat expires. The request shall be in writing, and the application shall state the reason and justification for the requested extension. 
(b)  Improvements Required. The improvement of all streets, sidewalks, alleys, and drainageways as herein required shall be in accordance with the standard specifications for installation of such improvements as described in the current construction design standards for the city. The city shall withhold all improvements and services of whatsoever nature, from all additions that have not been approved in accordance with the regulations herein contained. 
(c)  Inspection. The city public works department shall be notified three (3) days before any construction is begun on such public improvements in order that proper supervision and inspection may be provided. All construction work, such as street grading, street paving, storm sewers, curb and/or gutter work, sanitary sewers or water mains performed by the owner, developer or contractor, shall be subject to inspection during construction by the proper authorities of the city and shall be constructed in accordance with the standard specifications approved by the city council, and in accordance with the provisions of any other ordinance of the city applicable thereto. 
(d)  Street Posts and Markers. The developer shall pay the cost of purchasing and installing street posts and markers at each street intersection, which posts and markers shall be the same type as used throughout the city. The cost of such street posts and markers shall be paid to the city clerk upon final approval of construction plans for the subdivision. No subdivision construction, including but not limited to, street grading, street paving, storm sewer installation, curb and gutter work, sanitary sewer and water main installation, can begin until the cost of purchasing and installing such street posts and markers is paid to the city clerk. 
(e)  Traffic Signs. The developer shall pay the costs of purchasing and installing traffic signs at each street intersection, which traffic signs and posts shall be the same type as used throughout the city. 
(f)  Street Lighting. The developer shall pay the costs of purchasing and installing all street lighting equipment. The developer shall also pay the cost of all street lighting service for a period of two (2) years or until such time as seventy percent (70%) of the buildings for which building permits have been issued are completed, whichever is sooner. Prior to the issuance of any building permits or certificates of occupancies in the subdivision, the developer shall enter into a contract with the city, in a form approved by the city, setting forth the specific street lighting requirements for such subdivision. The type of equipment, method of installation and location of the wiring and light poles shall meet the minimum standards and requirements of the electric company from which electricity is to be purchased. 
(g)  Street Improvements. All final plats shall be subject to the following requirements regarding street improvements, provided that compliance with this subsection shall not be required for plat amendments approved and issued pursuant to Section 6.09(a) of this chapter, Plat Amendments. 
(1)  No permit will be issued on property abutting any street in a subdivision prior to the approval of street grades and street improvements by the city engineer. Construction of the street improvements as required by the provisions of this code will not be necessary where the city engineer has determined that such street improvements are not possible or practical at the time the street improvements are required to be constructed. In the event the city engineer makes such a determination, a cost estimate for the construction for the required street improvements shall be prepared by the city engineer. The developer shall enter into an agreement with the city, in a form approved by the city, for the deposit of funds in accordance with the agreement and shall have no further liability for the construction of the required street improvements. The terms and conditions under which construction shall be accomplished and a disposition of the escrow account shall be provided for in the agreement. In lieu of depositing such funds in escrow, an irrevocable letter of credit made out to the city in an amount approved by the city and in a form approved by the city attorney will be accepted. 
(2)  No permit will be issued on property in a subdivision abutting a state highway until compliance with this subsection has been met. 
a.  The zoning administrator shall make a determination whether the state of Colorado will require participation in the cost of the improvements, and shall prepare a cost estimate for the required participation of the improvement of the state roadway. 
b.  In the event participation in the cost of improvements is required, the developer shall enter into an agreement with the city, in a form approved by the city, to deposit funds equal to the required cost of participation, including the cost for curbs, gutters, parallel storm sewer system, right-of-way, and utility adjustments. 
c.  The developer shall then deposit funds in accordance with the agreement and shall have no further liability for the construction of the required street improvements. The terms and conditions under which construction shall be accomplished and a disposition of the escrow account shall be provided for in the agreement. 
(3)  Guarantee for Construction or Maintenance of Streets. Approval of the plat shall not impose any duty upon the city or county concerning the maintenance of improvements of any such dedicated parts until the proper authorities of the city or county have made acceptance of the same by entry, use or improvement. 
(h)  As-Built Plans. Prior to the acceptance of a subdivision by the city, the engineer for the developer shall submit to the city staff a complete set of drawings of the paving, drainage, water, and sewer improvements showing all changes made in the plans during construction and containing on each sheet an "As-Built" stamp bearing the signature of the engineer and the date. In addition, one (1) reproducible drawing of the utility plan sheets, containing the "As-Built" information, shall be submitted. 
(i)  Maintenance Bond. Prior to the acceptance of a subdivision by the city, the subdivider shall furnish a good and sufficient maintenance bond in the amount of ten (10) percent of the contract price with a reputable and solvent corporate surety in favor of the city, to indemnify the city against any repairs that may become necessary to any part of the construction work performed in connection with the subdivision arising from defective workmanship or materials used therein, for a full period of two (2) years from the date of final acceptance of the entire project. 
(j)  Inspection Fee. Prior to the acceptance of a subdivision by the city, the subdivider shall reimburse the city for all design review and inspection costs incurred by the city for design review and inspection of the water and sewer utilities, drainage facilities, and streets and other public improvements in each subdivision. 
6.08 - Mandatory homeowners' association. 
(a)  Applicability. When a residential subdivision contains any physical facilities, structures, improvements, systems, areas or grounds held in common and necessary or desirable for the welfare of the area or subdivision, or that are of common use or benefit and that are not or cannot be satisfactorily maintained by the city or another public agency, the city may require the establishment and creation of a mandatory homeowners' association to assume and be responsible for the continuous and perpetual operation, maintenance and supervision of such facilities, structures, improvements, systems, areas or grounds. 
(b)  Approval. If the establishment and creation of a mandatory homeowners' association is required by the city, a copy of the agreements, covenants and restrictions establishing and creating the association must be approved by the city attorney and city council prior to the approval of the final plat of the subdivision and must be filed of record with such final plat in the map and plat records of Montezuma County, Colorado. Such final plat shall clearly identify all facilities, structures, improvements, systems, areas or grounds that are to be operated, maintained and/or supervised by such association. 
(c)  Responsibilities. Such mandatory homeowners' associations shall be responsible for the continuous and perpetual operation, maintenance and/or supervision of landscape systems, features or elements located in parkways, common areas, between screening walls or living screens and adjacent curbs or street pavement edges, adjacent to drainageways or drainage structures, or at subdivision entryways. Subdivision entryway treatments or features shall not be allowed unless a mandatory homeowners' association as required herein is established and created. 
(d)  Dedications to Association. All facilities, structures, improvements, systems, areas or grounds that are to be operated, maintained and/or supervised by a mandatory homeowners' association, other than those located in public easements or right-of-ways, shall be dedicated by easement or deeded in fee simple ownership interest to such association. Such easements or ownership shall be clearly identified on the final plat of the applicable subdivision. 
(e)  Contents of Agreements. At a minimum, the agreements, covenants and restrictions establishing and creating a mandatory homeowners' association required herein shall contain and/or provide for the following: 
(1)  Definitions of terms contained therein; 
(2)  Provisions acceptable to the city for the establishment and organization of the mandatory homeowners' association and the adoption of by-laws for such association, including provisions requiring that the owner(s) of any lot or lots within the applicable subdivision and any successive buyer(s) shall automatically and mandatorily become a member of the association; 
(3)  The initial term of the agreements, covenants and restrictions establishing and creating the association shall be for a twenty-five (25) year period and shall automatically renew for successive ten (10) year periods, and the association may not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the city; 
(4)  Provisions acceptable to the city to ensure the continuous and perpetual use, operation, maintenance, and/or supervision of all facilities, structures, improvements, systems, areas or grounds that are the responsibility of the association and to establish a reserve fund for such purposes; 
(5)  Provisions prohibiting the amendment of any portion of the association's agreements, covenants or restrictions pertaining to the use, operation, maintenance and/or supervision of any facilities, structures, improvements, systems, areas or grounds that are the responsibility of the association without the prior written consent of the city; 
(6)  The right and ability of the city or its lawful agents, after due notice to the association, to remove any landscape systems, features or elements that cease to be maintained by the association; to perform the responsibilities of the association if the association fails to do so in compliance with any provisions of the agreements, covenants or restrictions of the association or of any applicable city codes or regulations; to assess the association for all costs incurred by the city in performing such responsibilities if the association fails to do so; and/or to avail itself of any other enforcement actions available to the city pursuant to state law or city codes or regulations; and 
(7)  Provisions indemnifying and holding the city harmless from any and all costs, expenses, suits, demands, liabilities or damages, including attorney's fees and costs of suit, incurred or resulting from the city's removal of any landscape systems, features or elements that cease to be maintained by the association or from the city's performance of the aforementioned operation, maintenance or supervision responsibilities of the association due to the association's failure to perform such responsibilities. 
6.09 - Replats and plat amendments. 
(a)  Replats and plat amendments shall be subject to all of the requirements of this code regarding preliminary plats and final plats, provided, however, that the city council shall be authorized to approve a replat or plat amendment without notice or hearing where the replat or plat amendment is solely for one or more of the following purposes and does not remove any covenants or restrictions or increase the number of lots. Such approval and issuance shall not require notice, hearing, or approval of other lot owners. Allowable purposes for a replat or plat amendment include to: 
(1)  Correct an error in any course or distance shown on the prior plat. 
(2)  Add any course or distance that was omitted on the prior plat. 
(3)  Correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the prior plat. 
(4)  Indicate monuments set after death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer responsible for setting the monuments. 
(5)  Show the proper location or character of any monument that has been changed in location or character or that originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character on the prior plat. 
(6)  Correct any other type of clerical error or omission in the previously approved plat. 
(7)  Correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two (2) adjacent lots where both lot owners join in the application for plat amendment and neither lot is abolished, provided that such amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the owners in the plat. 
(8)  Relocate a lot line in order to cure an inadvertent encroachment of a building or improvement on a lot line or on an easement. 
(9)  Relocate or vacate one (1) or more lot lines between one (1) or more adjacent lots and /or parcels or tracts where the owner or owners of all such property join in the application for the plat amendment. 
(b)  Limitation. In no case shall a plat amendment result in the creation of a lot with less than the minimum lot area required in underlying zone district (see Section 3.06 of this code). 
6.10 - Conditional use permits. 
(a)  General. A conditional use is a use that may be permitted subject to conditions imposed upon the approval of the use that are designed to reasonably mitigate any adverse impacts upon surrounding properties. Conditional use permits may be approved for the uses indicated in the use regulations of the zoning district of the property for which the conditional use permit is requested. 
(b)  Pre-Application Conference. Prior to the filing of a conditional use permit application, the applicant shall meet with the zoning administrator or his or her designated agent to acquaint himself or herself with the requirements of the city. At such meeting, the application contents, referral agencies, review procedures, use and area standards, and the general character of the development may be discussed. At the pre-application conference, the applicant may be represented by a land planner, engineer or surveyor. 
(c)  Submittal Requirements. The applicant shall file four (4) copies of an application requesting a conditional use permit and of a title certificate from a licensed title company or attorney listing the name of the property owner(s) and all liens, easements and judgments of record affecting the subject property. The petition shall be accompanied by or show the following information: 
(1)  The street address and legal description of the property affected; and 
(2)  Any and all plans, information, operating data and expert evaluation necessary to clearly explain the location, function and characteristics of any building or use proposed; 
(3)  A filing fee to cover the cost of review in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  Planning Commission Review Criteria and Processing. In reviewing a conditional use, the planning commission shall utilize the criteria listed in subsection (f) of this section. 
(1)  Public Hearing Required. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for conditional use permit prior to making its recommendation to the city council. 
(2)  Notification Requirements. 
a.  The city clerk shall cause notice of the public hearing of the planning commission to be given by one (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Such notice shall state the time and place of such hearing and the nature of the subject to be considered and the hearing date shall be at least ten (10) days and not earlier than twenty (20) days from the date of publication. 
b.  The city clerk shall cause written notice of public hearing to be mailed to all owners of real property lying within three hundred (300) feet of the property on which the change is requested. The notice shall be mailed not less than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing by depositing in the mail such notice properly addressed and postage paid to each such owner as the ownership appears on the last approved county tax roll. 
(e)  City Council Review Criteria and Processing. In reviewing a conditional use, the city council shall utilize the criteria listed in subsection (f) of this section. 
(1)  Public Hearing Required. The city council shall hold a public hearing on any application for a conditional use permit prior to taking any final action on the application. 
(2)  Notification Requirements. The city clerk shall cause notice of the public hearing of the city council to be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Such published notice shall state time and place of such hearing and the nature of the subject to be considered and the hearing date shall be at least ten (10) days and not earlier than twenty (20) days from the publication of the notice. 
(f)  Conditions of Approval. Both the planning commission and the city council shall use the following criteria in reviewing conditional use permit requests. It is specifically understood that certain criteria listed below may not apply to a particular application. The applicant shall adequately demonstrate that the applicable criteria have been met: 
(1)  The proposed conditional use is compatible with adjacent existing uses and other allowed uses in the zoning district. Such compatibility shall be expressed in terms of appearance, architectural scale and features, site design and scope, landscaping, as well as the control of adverse impacts including noise, vibration, smoke, fumes, gas dust, odor, lighting, glare, traffic circulation, parking, or other undesirable or hazardous conditions. 
(2)  The proposed conditional use has incorporated design features sufficient to protect adjacent uses including but not limited to: service areas, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, safety provisions, access ways to and from the site, buffering, fencing and site building placement. 
(3)  All proposed accessory uses must demonstrate that they are necessary and desirable. All proposed accessory uses shall comply with the requirements of subsections(f)(1) and (2) of this section. Undesirable impacts created by these uses shall be controlled or eliminated. 
(4)  Adequate public services (such as: streets, off-street parking, pedestrian facilities, water, sewer, gas, electricity, police and fire protection) must be available without the reduction of services to other existing uses. 
(5)  Provisions for proper maintenance of the building, parking and loading areas, drives, lighting, signs, landscaping, etc. shall be provided. 
(6)  The proposed conditional use shall conform to adopted plans, hours of operation, polices and requirements for parking and loading, signs, highway access, and all other applicable regulations of this code and other applicable regulations. 
    After considering the public comment relating the criteria listed above in relation to the conditional use permit being requested, the planning commission and the city council, respectively, shall adopt a resolution stating their findings of the applicant's demonstrated ability to meet the criteria for a conditional use permit. A determination that the applicant has not met one or more of the applicable criteria shall be sufficient to deny the request. The planning commission and the city council, respectively, may establish additional conditions of operation, location, arrangement and construction in the issuance of a conditional use permit if deemed to be in the public interest or to assure compliance with other aspects of this code. 
(g)  Records. The city clerk shall maintain a file containing all documents relevant to the application and disposition of such conditional use permits. 
(h)  Maximum Density. The maximum density allowed by conditional use permit shall be no greater than that permitted in the underlying zone district. 
(i)  Specific Performance. The permitted conditional use shall be established within one (1) year of its approval by city council. 
(1)  Failure to demonstrate due diligence may require the applicant to appear before the commission to show cause why the permit should not be revoked. In the event the permit is revoked and the previously permitted conditional use is not abated, discontinued, or removed, the property owner shall be subject to the penalties described in Section 1.09 of this code. 
( Ord. No. 1205 , 3-22-2016) 
6.11 - Minor subdivision plat. 
(a)  General. Not withstanding any other provision of this code, a minor subdivision plat may be approved by the city council without notice or hearing where all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A parcel of land may be subdivided into no more than four (4) parcels. 
(2)  No new streets, roads, extensions or access easements need to be widened, dedicated or developed. 
(3)  No utilities, other than individual service lines, need to be extended to serve the parcel and the necessary utilities are in place immediately adjacent to the parcel. 
(4)  The resulting lots shall be in compliance with all zoning provisions, area and bulk requirements and any other applicable requirements of this code. 
(5)  These procedures may be utilized only one (1) time for each parcel of land. 
(6)  There are no other problems of public concern. 
(b)  Pre-Application Conference. Prior to the filing of a minor subdivision plat application, the applicant shall meet with the zoning administrator to acquaint himself or herself with the requirements of the city. At such meeting, the application contents, referral agencies, review procedures, use and area standards, and the general character of the development may be discussed. The applicant may be represented by a land planner, engineer or surveyor. 
(1)  Minor Subdivision Plat Submittal Requirements. The applicant shall file nine (9) copies of an application requesting approval of a minor subdivision plat that shall include all submittal requirements for preliminary and final plats in accordance with Sections 6.04(b) and 6.05(a) of this chapter, respectively, along with evidence of compliance with subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Application Review Procedures. 
(1)  Date of Filing. Nine (9) copies of the minor subdivision plat as described in subsection (b) of this section shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. The minor subdivision plat shall be considered officially filed after application review fees which are established by resolution of the city council have been paid and after it is examined and found to be in compliance with the general provisions of these regulations by the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Distribution of Minor Subdivision Plats. The zoning administrator shall distribute the minor subdivision plats immediately upon receipt to the following: 
a.  Zoning administrator (one copy); 
b.  Public works department (one copy); 
c.  City engineer (one copy); 
d.  Electric power association (one copy); 
e.  Natural gas provider (one copy); 
f.  Telephone provider (one copy); 
g.  Cortez-Montezuma school district (one copy); 
h.  Cortez fire protection district (one copy); 
i.  Cortez city clerk (one copy - for the public record). 
(3)  Comments-Written Report. Within twenty (20) days, each agency listed above shall submit their written recommendations concerning the plat in question to the zoning administrator. The recommendations shall be given to the city manager along with the plat and the zoning administrator's written report. Such report should include comments relative to the proposed subdivision's compliance to these regulations, the comprehensive plan or other master plans such as utility plans. The report may include comments from other municipal departments, county, or state agencies concerned with urban development. 
(d)  Review by City Manager. After the city manager has determined that the conditions of subsection (a) of this section are satisfied, and that the plat is in proper form, the lot size and area are adequate to comply with the minimum requirements for the underlying zone district and for the type of sanitary sewage disposal proposed, he shall submit the plat to the city council for approval. 
(1)  Notification Requirements for Minor Subdivision Plat. There shall be no notification requirements for minor subdivision plats. 
(2)  Approval by City Council. The city manager shall notify the city council at the next council meeting of his recommendation on the minor subdivision plat. At that time, the council may vote to review the application at their regular meeting or it may vote to approve the plat and authorize the mayor to sign the plat. 
(3)  Disapproval by City Council. Minor subdivision plats that are disapproved by the city council shall be returned to the subdivider by the zoning administrator with an attached statement of the reasons for such action. 
(4)  Review Pursuant to Preliminary and Final Plat Procedures. If the minor subdivision plat is not approved within thirty days of its submission, or is disapproved by the city, it shall automatically be processed pursuant to preliminary plat subdivision requirements unless withdrawn by the applicant. 
(e)  Action Following Approval. 
(1)  Certification of Approval. The city council's approval of the minor subdivision plat shall be evidenced by the execution of the city council certificate of approval on the plat. In no case shall additions, corrections, or modifications of any kind be made to the minor subdivision plat other than signatures required after the minor subdivision plat has been approved by the city council. 
(2)  Recordation of Plats. The minor subdivision plat for any subdivision located within the corporate limits of the city shall then be caused to be filed of record by the subdivider in the plat records of Montezuma County, but only after the city council has officially acted upon the minor subdivision plat with reference to improvements, dedications and utilities and all fees (including recording, review fees and cash-in-lieu of public land dedication) shall be paid by the developer. 
a.  If for any reason the minor subdivision plat has not been recorded within six (6) months of city council approval, the approving actions shall be deemed void. 
(Ord. 1072 (part), 2006) 
6.12 - Condominium subdivisions. 
(a)  General. This section provides review procedures, submittal requirements and standards for review to ensure that the creation or conversion of condominium subdivisions will comply with the currently adopted city construction codes as amended by the city and other provisions of this code. 
(b)  Pre-Application Conference. Prior to the filing of a condominium subdivision or conversion application, the applicant shall meet with the zoning administrator or his or her designated agent to acquaint himself or herself with the requirements of the city. 
(c)  Submittal Requirements. The applicant shall file nine (9) copies of an application requesting approval of a condominium subdivision and of a title certificate from a licensed title company or attorney listing the name of the property owner(s) and all liens, easements and judgments of record affecting the subject property. 
(1)  The application shall be accompanied by nine (9) copies of a preliminary condominium plat/map showing: 
a.  Name and Heading. The exact name of condominium subdivision shall be placed on the plat. The heading of the final condominium plat shall include the complete name of the condominium subdivision, the land sections, township, range, principal meridian, "City of Cortez, Montezuma County, Colorado." 
b.  Scale, Arrow and Date. The written and graphic scale, north arrow and date of preparation shall be placed on the plat. 
c.  Location. The location of the condominium subdivision by reference to streets, lots and blocks shall be placed on the plat. 
d.  Lot and Property Lines. The lot lines and property lines to the hundredth ( 1/100 ) foot shall be placed on the plat. 
e.  Zoning and Densities. The zoning and existing densities on adjacent properties shall be placed on the plat. 
f.  Parking and Trash. The required parking spaces and the joint trash collection areas shall be identified on the plat. 
g.  Separate, Common and Limited Common Elements. 
1.  Floor plans, elevations and site plan shall be included as required to show separate ownership of all separate units, common elements and limited common elements labeled as such and numbered for ease of identification (all dimensions shall be to the nearest hundredth ( 1/100 ) of a foot, or other scale specified by the zoning administrator); and 
2.  Number, type and floor area of units, common elements and limited elements, delineated in square feet and fractions thereof; proposed use for each unit; land area; percentage of open space; and lot coverage shall be shown. 
h.  Statement of the Number of Units. A statement of the total number of units shall be shown on the proposed plat. 
(2)  The application shall be accompanied by nine (9) copies of the following: 
a.  Condominium Declarations. Condominium declarations shall be submitted establishing a unit owners' association that shall be responsible for the maintenance of common elements and limited elements and in accordance with the requirements of Section 6.08 of this chapter. 
1.  The condominium declarations shall incorporate clear provisions for giving notice by third parties to the unit owners' association or corporation on behalf of the unit owners of special declarant rights issued to the declarant. 
b.  Articles of Incorporation. 
c.  Bylaws. Bylaws of the unit owners' association or corporation, unless exempt under C.R.S. 38-33-106, as amended. 
(3)  Traffic Mitigation Plan. A traffic mitigation plan, if the condominium subdivision will increase the total number of dwelling units on the parcel or lot, may be required by the planning commission. 
    In addition to the above submittal requirements, the following statements shall be required on the final condominium plat: 
(4)  Legal Description. A legal description of the subject property shall be required on the final plat. 
(5)  Surveyor's Certificate. A surveyor's certificate, in the following form, shall be placed on the final plat: 
I, (printed name of Land Surveyor) being a Registered Land Surveyor in the State of Colorado, do certify that this plat and survey of (NAME OF CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION IN CAPITAL LETTERS) was made by me and under my supervision and that both are accurate to the best of my knowledge. I further certify that monuments and markers were set as required by the applicable provisions of Articles 50 and 51 of Title 38, C.R.S. 
(6)  Dedication Certificate. The property owner's certificate or deed of dedication shall be placed on the final plat. The dedication deed or certificate of dedication shall be executed by all persons, firms or corporations owning an interest in the property subdivided and platted, and shall be acknowledged in the manner prescribed by the laws for the state of Colorado for conveyances of real property. The spouse of all married persons executing such dedication deed or certificate of dedication shall join therein unless satisfactory proof be provided showing that the property to be subdivided does not constitute any portion of such party's homestead, in which case the instrument of dedication shall state the fact that the property subdivided and platted does not constitute a part of such party's actual homestead. In the case of surface lien holders, they may execute a subordination agreement subordinating their liens to all public streets, alleys, parks, school sites and any other public areas shown on the plat of such subdivision as being set aside for public uses and purposes. The dedication deed or certificate of dedication shall, in addition to the above requirements, contain the following: 
a.  An accurate description of the tract of land subdivided. 
b.  A statement and express representation that the parties joining in such dedication are the sole owners of such tract of land. 
c.  An express dedication without reservation to the public for public use; the streets, alleys, rights-of-way, school site and any other public areas shown on the attached plat. 
d.  A reference to the recording location (book and page) for the condominium declarations, articles of incorporation and subdivision plat. 
e.  Identification of the plat of such subdivision, date of plat and engineer, if applicable. 
(7)  Treasurer's Certificate. Tax certificates indicating that all taxes on the land being subdivided have been paid to the current year shall be submitted with the final plat. 
(8)  Approval Certification. Certification of approval by the planning commission and city council, in the following form, shall be placed on the final plat. 
APPROVED this ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ , by the Planning Commission of the City of Cortez, Colorado. 
____________ Chairman 
APPROVED this ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ , by the City Council of the City of Cortez, Colorado. 
_____
Mayor 
_____
City Clerk 
(9)  Filing Fees. A filing fee to cover the cost of review shall be submitted with the preliminary, final, and as-built condominium subdivision application in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. 
    In addition to the above submittal requirements, after final plat approval and prior to the issuance of a certificate(s) of occupancy the applicant shall submit three (3) copies of an as-built plat, showing: 
(10)  As-Built Plats. As built plats shall include all information required in subsections (c)(1) through (8) of this section, with the following exceptions: 
a.  The title "As-Built Plat" shall appear at the top, with "Final Plat (prior reception number) Amendment" directly underneath. 
b.  The location shall be indicated for all completed improvements, such as buildings, parking, easements, service lines and mains. 
c.  The planning commission certificate block shall be omitted. 
(d)  Application Review Procedures for Preliminary and Final Condominium Subdivision Plats. 
(1)  The procedures and standards for review and approval of a condominium subdivision shall be the same as that specified for other subdivisions in Sections 6.04(c) through (e) and 6.05(b) through (d) of this chapter. 
(2)  Condominium conversion shall be reviewed as a minor subdivision regardless of the number of units proposed for conversion (see Section 6.11(c) through (e) of this chapter for procedures; and Chapter 4 of this code for subdivision standards). A conversion may be executed on a multi-unit structure that was constructed and completed for a period of not less than three (3) years prior to the time of application. 
(3)  Any subsequent change in the approved use(s) for a condominium subdivision shall be subject to the same review procedures as would be applied to a new condominium subdivision. 
(4)  Notwithstanding anything in this code to the contrary, no requirement for public improvements, dedication of land to public use or cash-in-lieu, or other subdivision requirement shall be imposed as a condition of approval for a condominium subdivision or common interest community, which would not be imposed upon a physically-identical development under a different form of ownership. This provision shall not be construed to prevent the city from imposing the review requirements of this code upon any change of use, expansion of use, increase in intensity of use, or other change in a condominium or common interest community unrelated to its form of ownership. The condominium regulations established in this section shall be used to process townhome developments, timeshares, or other types of development contemplated by the Colorado Common Ownership Act. At the request of the developer and the approval of the city, the use of the normal subdivision process may be used to process common ownership developments in lieu of these regulations. 
(e)  Application Review Procedures for As-built Condominium Subdivision Plats. 
(1)  The zoning administrator shall review as-built plats within 15 days of the submittal of the plat. If the zoning administrator is satisfied that the proper dedications have been made and that the plat accurately depicts the completion of the improvements in a manner that is substantially consistent with the approved final plat, the zoning administrator shall present the as-built plat to the mayor for signature and shall cause the as-built plat and other appropriate documents to be filed of record by the developer in the plat records of Montezuma County. 
(f)  Standards for Review of Condominium Subdivisions. 
(1)  Condominium subdivisions shall comply with the review standards applied to other subdivisions in Chapter 4 of this code and to mandatory owners' associations in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.08 of this chapter. 
(2)  Condominium subdivisions shall comply with the following supplemental review standards: 
a.  The density of the development as proposed for condominium subdivision shall not be greater than the maximum density as allowed by the underlying zone district; and 
b.  If the condominium subdivision will increase the total number of dwelling units on the parcel or lot, the traffic impacts of the proposed condominium subdivision shall be evaluated and any impacts to the neighborhood must be mitigated. 
(3)  As-built plats shall accurately depict the location of all completed improvements, and such improvements shall be substantially consistent with the improvements shown on the approved final plat. 
(g)  Additional Standards for Review of Condominium Conversions. In addition to complying with the review standards applied to other subdivisions and condominium subdivisions by this code, condominium conversions shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Prior to the submission of a preliminary plat, which would convert an existing multi-unit development to condominium units, the owner of such property shall meet with the zoning administrator regarding the proposed conversion and shall demonstrate that the following provisions have been met. 
a.  The structure subject to the proposed condominium conversion shall meet current off-street parking requirements for the underlying zone district found in Section 5.02 of this code. Each residential condominium unit shall be considered a separate dwelling unit for purposes of determining parking compliance. 
b.  A minimum one (1) hour firewall may be required between units as a condition of city approval of any condominium plat involving a condominium conversion. 
c.  The multi-unit structure must have been in use for a period of at least three (3) years prior to the filing of application for conversion. 
(2)  Owners of properties proposed for condominium conversion shall notify all residential tenants in writing of the conversion at least ninety (90) days prior to termination of any residential tenancy in accordance with C.R.S. 38-33-112, as amended. Copies of such notification shall be filed with the city clerk as proof of notification. 
6.13 - Annexations. 
(a)  Authority. In annexation proceedings, the city may exercise all statutory powers it may lawfully assume, specifically the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended. This section shall be interpreted so as to extend such exercise of powers as is reasonable and necessary for the public welfare. The city will impose terms and conditions of annexation to protect the public interest, and to that goal shall ensure that the following policies are accomplished: 
(1)  All annexations shall be consistent with the Cortez comprehensive plan and the Cortez thoroughfare plan and street standards for the city. 
(2)  The Cortez thoroughfare plan and street standards for the city identifies a master plan boundary area surrounding the city as an area appropriate for the future residential, commercial and industrial growth of the city. Consent to annexation by benefiting landowners within the master plan boundary and conformance with the comprehensive plan as amended by the Cortez thoroughfare plan and standards for the city and the implementation zoning shall be a condition of extension or expansion of the municipal utility service. 
(3)  There will be no annexations of areas outside the boundaries of the master plan boundary identified by the Cortez thoroughfare plan and street standards for the city, with the possible exception of annexation of any acquired open space. 
(4)  Applicants and developers should identify revenues adequate to pay the long term costs for maintenance of their developments, and the city should agree that the revenues will be adequate prior to approval of an application for annexation. 
(b)  Pre-Application Conference. Prior to the filing of an annexation petition, the applicant shall meet with the zoning administrator or his or her designated agent. The purpose for the meeting is to allow an applicant non-binding information regarding the general annexation policies and requirements of the city, the relationship of the proposed annexation to the comprehensive plan and to prevent unnecessary expenditures for preparation of annexation applications which may not be consistent with city policies and requirements. At such meeting, the application contents, referral agencies, review procedures, density standards, use and area standards, street requirements, utility service, long term maintenance costs of the annexation, and the general character of the land desired to be annexed may be discussed. At the pre-application conference, the applicant may be represented by an attorney, land planner, engineer or surveyor. Any applicant may request a non-binding pre-application conference with the planning commission and/or the city council. 
(c)  Submittal Requirements. The application shall be accompanied by or show the following information: 
(1)  Petition for Annexation. An application for annexation containing allegations that all requirements as provided under Colorado Revised Statutes for annexation can or will be met prior to submission for final annexation and further including the following information: 
a.  The names and mailing addresses of all landowners in the proposed area to be annexed; 
b.  The legal description of the land owned by each signer to the petition of the area proposed for annexation; 
c.  An allegation that it is desirable and necessary that such an area be annexed to the city; 
d.  A statement that at least one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of the perimeter of the area to be annexed is contiguous with the city; 
e.  An allegation that a community of interest exists between the area proposed to be annexed and the city, that such area is urban or will be urbanized in the near future, and that such area is integrated with or is capable of being integrated with the city; 
f.  A statement that the petitioning landowners own more than fifty percent (50%) of the area proposed to be annexed, excluding public streets and alleys; 
g.  An affidavit of each circulator of each petition that each signature in the petition is a true signature; and 
h.  The witnessed or acknowledged signatures, and mailing addresses of the landowners signing the petition (signature(s) on the petition are invalid if dated more than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the date of filing the petition for annexation). 
(2)  Annexation Map. An annexation map drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet with a north point, date, any other pertinent data and containing the following information: 
a.  A written legal description of the boundaries of the area proposed to be annexed. 
b.  The boundary of the area proposed to be annexed, and next to it a drawing of the contiguous boundary of the city and the dimensions of the boundaries. 
c.  Within the annexation boundary map, designation of the location of each ownership tract in unplatted land and, if part or all of the area is platted, the boundaries and the plat numbers of plots or of lots and blocks. 
d.  The existing and proposed land use pattern in the vicinity of the proposed annexation. 
(3)  Vicinity Map. A vicinity map on a smaller scale showing the relationship of the area to be annexed and the existing city boundaries. 
(4)  Master Plan. A written report describing the proposed land use and requested zoning of the area to be annexed, including: 
a.  General information including gross acreage of annexation, approximate number and type of units, acreage of streets and parking; acreage and percentage of open space to be created (analyzed as to the amount to be deeded or dedicated to the city, the amount to be retained in public ownership and the estimated city maintenance costs), density ratio (acres to be developed with lots and units compared to acres in streets and open space), and a statement of effect upon the school district including estimated number of students generated and capital construction required to serve; 
b.  Traffic impacts including projected vehicle trips to enter or depart the site (calculated on a peak and daily basis); 
c.  Environmental analyses including soil types and bearing capacities, geologic hazard areas, high groundwater tables, potential erosion problems, flood-prone areas, effects on wildlife and vegetation, aesthetic considerations and wetland designations; 
d.  A statement addressing consistency with the city comprehensive plan, the Cortez thoroughfare plan and the street standards for the city; 
e.  A copy of any draft or final pre-annexation agreement, if available; 
f.  Estimates of the current and projected population, assessed property value and the costs of providing public services such as fire protection, police protection, trash removal, and street maintenance; 
g.  The names(s) of special district(s) providing services that would be affected by the annexation. If the unincorporated area to be annexed is part of a special district or county service area whose responsibilities are to be assumed by the municipality, a statement shall be required indicating what steps will be taken to ensure a smooth transition in service delivery; 
h.  A statement and timetable of how the applicant will develop and finance the extension and under-grounding, where necessary, of utilities and services including, but not limited to, water and sewer, electricity, gas, cable television, and telephone; 
i.  A statement and description of what land areas are to be dedicated for public use, or what equivalent benefit in money will be paid, and what other types of public benefit will be provided within a contracted period of time, specifically addressing affordable housing, park lands and facilities, school sites, and conveyance of water rights; 
j.  A statement of how the extension of municipal services, other than utilities, will be financed. 
(5)  Annexation Impact Report. The city shall prepare an annexation impact report for all annexations involving more than 10 acres of land at least 25 days prior to the date of the hearing held in accordance with the requirements of subsection (f) of this section, and shall file one (1) copy with the board of county commissioners within five (5) days thereafter. Such report shall include the following: 
a.  A map or maps of the municipality and adjacent territory to show the following information: 
1.  The present and proposed boundaries of the municipality in the vicinity of the proposed annexation; 
2.  The present streets, major trunk water mains, sewer interceptors and outfalls, other utility lines and ditches, and the proposed extension of such streets and utility lines in the vicinity of the proposed annexation; and 
3.  The existing and proposed land use pattern in the areas to be annexed; 
b.  A copy of any draft or final preannexation agreement, if available; 
c.  A statement setting forth the plans of the municipality for extending to or otherwise providing for, within the area to be annexed, municipal services performed by or on behalf of the municipality at the time of annexation; 
d.  A statement setting forth the method under which the municipality plans to finance the extension of the municipal services into the area to be annexed; 
e.  A statement identifying existing districts within the area to be annexed; and 
f.  A statement on the effect of annexation upon local-public school district systems, including the estimated number of students generated and the capital construction required to educate such students. 
(6)  Filing Fee. A filing fee shall be submitted to cover the cost of review and processing with every petition in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  Application Review Procedures. 
(1)  Date of Filing. The applicant shall file one (1) copy of the annexation application with the county clerk and submit ten (10) copies of the annexation application to the zoning administrator as described in subsection (c) of this section thirty (30) days prior to the planning commission meeting at which consideration is desired. The annexation application shall be considered officially filed after application review fees which are established by resolution of the city council have been paid and after the application is examined and found to be in compliance with the general provisions of these regulations by the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Proof of Taxes Paid. Before an application is presented to the city council for final approval, the party requesting the annexation shall obtain tax certificates showing all taxes then due have been paid on the property to be annexed. 
(3)  Distribution of Annexation Application. The zoning administrator shall distribute the annexation application immediately upon receipt to the following: 
a.  Zoning administrator (one copy); 
b.  Public works department (one copy); 
c.  City engineer (one copy); 
d.  Electric power association (one copy); 
e.  Natural gas provider (one copy); 
f.  Telephone provider (one copy); 
g.  Cortez-Montezuma school district (one copy); 
h.  Cortez fire protection district (one copy); 
i.  Parks and recreations department (one copy); 
j.  Cortez city clerk (one copy - for the public record). 
(4)  Comments-Written Report. At least ten (10) days prior to the meeting of the planning commission, at which the annexation application is to be considered, each agency listed above shall submit their written recommendations concerning the plat in question to the zoning administrator. The recommendations shall be given to the planning commission with the annexation petition for their consideration. A written report shall be prepared by the zoning administrator and submitted to the planning commission at the next regular meeting. Such report should include comments relative to the proposed annexation's compliance to these regulations, the comprehensive plan or other master plans such as utility plans. The report may include comments from other municipal departments, county, or state agencies concerned with urban development. 
(e)  Review by Planning Commission. 
(1)  Public Hearing Required. The commission shall hold a public hearing on an annexation application prior to making its recommendation to the city council. 
(2)  Notification Requirements of Commission Hearing. When a hearing is to be held on annexation of property, notification shall be made as follows: 
a.  The city clerk shall mail the written notice of public hearing before the planning commission on the proposed amendment or change to all owners of real property lying within one hundred (100) feet of the property on which the change is requested. The notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date set for hearing by depositing in the mail such notice properly addressed and postage paid to each such owner as the ownership appears on the last approved county tax roll. 
(3)  Items for Consideration by Commission. The planning commission shall, in its action on the annexation application, consider the annexation review standards of subsection below. 
(4)  Action Within 30 Days. Following review of the annexation application and other materials submitted for conformity thereof to these regulations, and negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by the subdivider, the planning commission shall, within thirty (30) days, act thereon as submitted or modified, and if approved the planning commission shall express its approval as conditional approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor. 
(5)  Notation of Action. The action of the planning commission and any conditions of approval or reasons for disapproval shall be noted in a resolution. One (1) copy of the resolution shall be returned to the applicant and the other retained in the records of the planning commission. 
(f)  Review by City Council. 
(1)  Public Hearing Required. The city council shall hold a public hearing on a preliminary annexation application prior to making its final decision on an annexation application. 
(2)  Notification Requirements of City Council Hearing. When a hearing is to be held on an annexation of property, the city clerk shall cause to be published a notice that on an assigned date and at the assigned time and place, the city council shall hold a public hearing upon the annexation petition, recommendation of the planning commission, and consideration of any ordinances annexing, zoning, and subdividing the area proposed to be annexed. Such notice shall incorporate the petition, exclusive of signatures. 
a.  The city clerk shall publish the notice and petition once a week for four (4) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The first publication of such notice shall be at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing. The proof of publication of the notice and petition shall be returned when the publication is completed and evidenced by the certificate of the owner, editor, or manager of the newspaper in which the notice is published. 
b.  The city clerk shall mail a copy of the notice and petition shall also be mailed to the board of county commissioners and to the county attorney of the county wherein the territory presently is located at least twenty (20) days prior to the date fixed for the hearing. 
c.  The city clerk shall mail written notice of public hearing before the city council to all owners of real property lying within one hundred (100) feet of the property on which the change is requested. The notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date set for hearing by depositing in the mail such notice properly addressed and postage paid to each such owner as the ownership appears on the last approved county tax roll. 
d.  The final annexation hearing shall be initiated not less than thirty days (30) nor more than sixty (60) days after review and recommendation by the planning commission. 
(3)  Items for Consideration by City Council. The city council shall, in its action on the annexation application, consider the annexation review standards of subsection (g) of this section. 
(4)  Action Within 30 Days. Following review of the annexation application and other materials submitted for conformity thereof to these regulations, and negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by the subdivider, the city council shall, within thirty (30) days, act thereon as submitted or modified, and if approved the city council shall express its approval as conditional approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor. 
(5)  Action by City Council. The city council shall approve or disapprove the annexation application either with or without special provisions. 
(6)  Notation of Action. The action of the city council and any conditions of approval or reasons for disapproval shall be noted in a resolution. One (1) copy of the resolution shall be returned to the applicant and the other retained in the records of the city council. 
(g)  Annexation Review Standards. The planning commission and the city council shall find that the following criteria have been met before finally recommending approval or approving an annexation request: 
(1)  Use. That the master plan for the use of the area to be annexed is consistent with the adopted land use plan for the city, in harmony with the intent of city zoning and policies of the city, and compatible with adjacent neighborhoods; 
a.  Upon annexation, lots that have less than the minimum area required by the respective zone districts that implement the comprehensive plan and would be nonconforming shall be subject to the provisions of Section 1.08(b) of this code. 
(2)  Open Space. That the open spaces have a workable program established for maintenance and up-keep; 
(3)  Necessary. That the proposed annexation is necessary or desirable and will contribute to the general well being of the community; 
(4)  Health, Safety and General Welfare. That the proposed annexation will in no way be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing within the corporate boundaries or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity; 
(5)  Logical Road System. That the area has incorporated in its design, if a design has been developed, a logical extension of roads; 
(6)  Utilities and Roads. That the extension of services is feasible and will be financed totally by the applicant; and that the applicant will post performance guarantees to assure the completion of public improvements; 
(7)  Water Rights. That all water rights associated with land areas proposed for annexation shall be dedicated to the city; 
(8)  Revenues. That the revenue and/or public benefit to be gained from the city's portion of increased tax base is equal to or greater than the cost of services required; 
(9)  Public Lands Dedication. At least five percent (5%) of the gross land area approved for annexation shall be dedicated to the city in fee simple, or other equivalent consideration pursuant to Section 4.05 of this code; and 
(10)  Costs to the City. That the applicant shall pay all costs incurred by the city for reviewing annexation proposals, including fees charged by consultants and specialists needed to address important issues. 
6.14 - Site plans. 
(a)  Purpose. Site plans are reviewed to ensure compliance with federal, state and local laws, rules, and regulations that govern property development and construction. The purpose of the site plan review process is to protect the public health, safety and welfare; to promote balanced growth; to ensure adequate provision of public services and facilities; and to guide the character of development of the city. Site plans are to be prepared and signed by an engineer or architect licensed in the state of Colorado. Approval of a site plan shall be required for all development in the CBD, central business district; C, commercial highway; I, industrial; NB, neighborhood business; and/or the PUD, planned unit development zone districts, Section 3.16 of this code, unless expressly exempted. The approval of a site plan shall also constitute the approval of a site-specific development plan pursuant to Section 1.11 of this code. 
(b)  Preliminary Site Plan. For the purpose of assisting the city in assessing the impacts of rezoning and all commercial and large multi-family developments (four (4) or more units) a preliminary site plan shall be submitted for the planning and zoning commission's consideration. Such site plan may contain any or all of the site plan requirements and must be drawn to scale, submitted in adequate quantity and titled "Preliminary Site Plan." The approval of a preliminary site plan will not imply approval of all elements of a site plan. It is unlawful to issue a building permit on a preliminary site plan. Such preliminary site plan shall not constitute a site-specific development plan and the developer shall not rely upon such review, approval, or conditional approval as a vesting of property rights. 
(c)  General Requirements. 
(1)  Site development regulations shall apply to all new buildings or structures or additions thereto or major alterations of buildings approved as part of a previous site plan submittal within the city to which at least one (1) of the following applies: 
a.  All uses located within the following zone districts: 
CBD Central business district I Industrial C Commercial highway NB Neighborhood business  
b.  All uses allowed in the PD, planned development zone district with the exception of those uses relating to single-family detached development. 
c.  Uses which are located or to be located within any other zone district which are specifically made subject to this section by the city council. 
d.  Uses which are located or to be located on property within any other zone district, and the owner or developer of the property requests an application of these site plan requirements, subject to this section. 
(2)  A site plan review may be required for a change in use or expansion of an existing site when any of the following occurs: 
a.  The proposal involves new construction. 
b.  The proposal involves the expansion of a building or intensification of use that would result in a change in traffic volume or patterns in the area, noise, parking, lighting, etc. 
c.  The proposal involves deviations or variances from the applicable development standards. 
(3)  No site plan will be approved prior to the platting of the subject property. A final plat or minor development plat may be submitted simultaneously with the proposed site plan upon approval of the zoning administrator. In such cases, approval of the site plan application may be made conditional upon the final approval of the subdivision plat by city council. 
(4)  No building permit for any use described in subsection (a) of this section shall be issued for the construction of any new building, structure or improvement to the site or any addition or alteration to the structure or site, without first obtaining the approval of a site plan for the proposed use. 
(5)  No over lot grading, drainage work, parking lot construction or other site improvements will be allowed, unless specifically provided for by the city council, without first obtaining approval of a site plan for the proposed use. 
(6)  No certificate of occupancy will be issued until all improvements approved as part of the site plan have been completed. 
(7)  The site development standards outlined by this section apply throughout the zone districts and uses outlined in subsection (a) of this section. These standards are in addition to any other development or design standard that may otherwise be applicable to a particular property or specific area within the city. In the case of any perceived conflict among applicable development standards, the more restrictive standard will apply. 
(8)  Each site plan shall show how rooftop mechanical structures will be fully screened, either separately or by a parapet height to a point level with the tops of such structures. 
(9)  The city may require public improvements to be constructed as a condition of site plan approval. Any such improvements shall be reasonably related to the proposed use and may include, but not be limited to, street widening, accel/decel lanes, access control devices, traffic signals, water and sewer lines, pedestrian/bicycle trails or other related improvements. 
(d)  Application Requirements. Prior to the issuance of any building permit for any development for which a site plan is required, there shall be submitted to the planning commission for its approval, twenty (20) copies of the site plan drawn to a scale not less than 1? = 50', submitted folded to 9? × 12? and titled "Preliminary Site Plan." An application provided by the zoning administrator with the appropriate fees shall accompany the site plan drawing. Applicants that submit amendments to approved site plans shall be required to submit properly prepared site plan drawings, elevations, or landscape plans that clearly depicts the proposed amendments. The site plan scale drawing shall contain, but not be limited to, the following, together with any other requirements of this code. 
(1)  Drives, streets, and rights-of-way; 
(2)  Easements; 
(3)  Location and dimensions of structures and signs; 
(4)  Dimension sketch of building interior; 
(5)  Typical elevations of such buildings; 
(6)  Access ways, including points of ingress, egress; 
(7)  Parking, loading, and refuse areas; 
(8)  Common open space; 
(9)  Landscaping and open spaces; 
(10)  Topography; 
(11)  Specific areas proposed for specific types of land use; 
(12)  Lots or plots; 
(13)  Area proposed for dedication; 
(14)  Parks and parkways; 
(15)  School sites; 
(16)  Wetlands; and 
(17)  In addition, a narrative describing the proposed development, lot and block and subdivision description, and name(s), address and phone number of the property owner(s) must be attached to the plat. 
(18)  A copy of the warranty deed and title commitment current within thirty (30) days of submittal. 
(19)  Five (5) copies of the drainage plan. 
(20)  Five (5) copies of the landscape plan. 
(21)  Five (5) copies of building elevations of all sides to include rooftop mechanical structures and showing screening of rooftop mechanical devices. 
(22)  Surface and subsurface soils report. 
(23)  Additional copies may be requested for the referral process. 
(24)  Certification of notification of mineral estate owners as described in Section 6.04(b)(19) of this chapter. 
(e)  Review Procedures and Requirements for Approval. Failure to provide all required documentation will result in a delayed application. Additional information may be requested after the formal application is received. 
(1)  The site plan submittal, narrative, application form and fee and accompanying information shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. The applicant will be issued a receipt acknowledging the date of the submittal package. 
(2)  The zoning administrator will review the submittal package and indicate any deficiency found in the application. Once the application is found to be complete, the review procedures shall begin. 
(3)  The zoning administrator will have ten (10) working days after the application is found to be complete to review the proposal and make comment on the technical merits of the submittal. This review includes setbacks, building heights, parking and landscape requirements. 
(4)  Drainage plans will be forwarded by the zoning administrator to the city engineer and will be reviewed by this office in accordance with the city storm drainage criteria manual. The city engineer shall be in receipt of these plans within the first ten (10) working days of the review procedure. 
(5)  After the initial ten (10) working day review, the zoning administrator will contact the applicant, if necessary, to discuss any modifications that may be required. Minor modifications (up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross site area) are allowed throughout the entire review process. Major modifications, as recommended by the zoning administrator, may be required to resubmit a new application with the proposed changes. 
(6)  After the initial ten (10) working day review, the zoning administrator shall have five (5) working days to prepare a report based upon the findings. This report shall be in the form of a recommendation to the planning commission. This report shall be made available to the applicant upon request, and shall be sent to the members of the planning commission for their review. 
(7)  When the application is deemed to be complete, in accordance with Section 2.02 of this code, the zoning administrator shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission to consider the application and accompanying report during a regularly scheduled meeting. The public hearing shall be the next available date on the planning commission's agenda. The zoning administrator shall cause the required advertising to appear in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days, but not more than thirty (30) days, prior to the meeting. If the application is referred to the city council, the zoning administrator shall schedule the hearing before the council for the next available regular meeting. The zoning administrator shall cause the required advertising to appear in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days, but not more than thirty (30) days, prior to the meeting. 
(8)  The planning commission shall then consider the application for approval, denial, continuance for additional information or approval subject to specific conditions being met by the applicant and verified by the zoning administrator. 
(9)  On tracts of property of one-half (1/2) acre or less it shall be at the sole discretion of the zoning administrator whether the application should be referred by the planning commission to the city council. 
(10)  The applicant in site plan review may appeal to the city council any decisions made by the planning commission. The applicant shall initiate this appeal to the city council in a written report outlining the nature of the appeal request for the next available date on the city council's agenda. The applicant's report shall be submitted no later than ten (10) working days prior to the city council's meeting on the request. The city council, after review of the record created before the planning commission, may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the appeal. 
(11)  If and when the application is approved or conditions for approval have been met a building permit may be issued upon the request of the applicant. 
(12)  The certificate of occupancy will be issued, provided that: 
a.  Landscaping requirements have been met by the applicant. 
b.  A final drainage plan is approved by the city engineer. 
c.  Parking lots and drainage facilities are in, and are useable. 
d.  Sufficient fire flows or protection are present and accepted by the Cortez fire district. 
e.  Any other requirements made by the city's building officials, utilities or other agencies are satisfied. 
(f)  Action of Commission. The planning commission in its consideration shall use the standards set forth in Chapter 5 of this code and shall include paving and layout of streets, alleys and sidewalks; means of ingress and egress, provisions for drainage, parking spaces, protective screening and open spaces; areas designated for landscaping; and other aspects deemed by the planning commission necessary to consider in the interest of promoting the public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare. If during the course of considering the site plan, the planning and zoning commission is of the opinion that proper approval or disapproval cannot be granted without a detailed design drawing, the planning and zoning commission is authorized to request the applicant to submit detailed design drawings and further authorized to withhold action on the site plan until the submission of acceptable design drawings. 
(g)  City Council Review Criteria and Processing. In reviewing a site plan, the city council shall utilize the standards listed in Chapter 5 of this code and those items listed in subsection (f) of this section. The zoning administrator shall cause the required advertising to appear in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days, but not more than thirty (30) days, prior to the meeting. 
(h)  Building Permits in Conformance with Site Plan. It is unlawful to issue a building permit prior to the approval of the site plan by the planning commission. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the approved site plan or in accordance with authorized minor changes, including all conditions of approval applied by the planning commission. 
(i)  Administrative Approval. Subsequent to approval of a site plan, minor changes may be authorized by the zoning administrator when such minor changes will not cause any of the following circumstances to occur: 
(1)  A change in the character of the development; 
(2)  A change in the scale or impact of the existing use; 
(3)  An increase in the residential density of the proposed development; 
(4)  An increase in the gross floor area of nonresidential uses by more than five percent (5%); 
(5)  A reduction in the originally approved separations between buildings; 
(6)  An increase in the external effects on adjacent property; 
(7)  A reduction in the originally approved setbacks from property lines; 
(8)  An increase in the demand for public facilities; 
(9)  An increase of more than five percent (5%) or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is less, in ground coverage by structures; 
(10)  A reduction in the ratio of off-street parking and loading space to gross floor area in structures; 
(11)  A decrease of more than five percent (5%) or one thousand (1,000) feet whichever is less, in the percentage of common open space and/or landscaped area; or 
(12)  A change in the subject, size, lighting or orientation of originally approved signs; 
    The zoning administrator's evaluation shall compare the proposed amendment to the original approval and if any other amendments have been approved since the original approval, shall consider the cumulative impact of all approvals granted. Any such approvals granted administratively shall be compiled in a report to be forwarded to the planning commission. 
(j)  Other Changes. Any other changes shall be treated as a new application and shall follow the procedure for and be considered a new site as set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1130, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 1205 , 3-22-2016) 
6.15 - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  Creation and Organization. There is created a board known as the board of adjustment, which shall be organized as follows. 
(1)  The board of adjustment and appeals shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the city council. Not more than two (2) members may be current members of the city planning commission. No member of the city council shall serve on the board of adjustment and appeals. The city council shall also appoint two (2) alternate members to the board, designating the alternate members as the first or second alternate. An alternate member shall vote only in the absence of one (1) or more regular members according to his or her priority (i.e., the first alternate shall vote if one (1) regular member is absent and both alternates shall vote in the absence of two (2) regular members of the board). When a regular member resigns, the first alternate member shall automatically be designated as a regular member in replacement and the second alternate member shall automatically be designated as the first alternate. 
(2)  Appointments to the board shall be for a period of three (3) years; except when vacancies occur prior to the expiration of a regular term, they shall be filled in the same manner as regular appointments but shall serve only until the expiration of the term in which the vacancy occurred. 
(3)  The city council shall have the power to remove any member of the board for cause after official public hearing. 
(b)  Officers and Procedures. 
(1)  Members of the board shall elect from their members a chairman to serve for a term of one (1) year and may adopt such rules as may be necessary for the conduct of its business. 
(2)  The chairman shall preside over meetings. In the event a question over procedures arises, Robert's Rules of Order shall apply. 
(3)  The recording of the minutes of the board of adjustment meetings shall be the responsibility of the staff. 
(4)  The board of adjustment may adopt rules to govern its proceedings and conduct of the business before the board provided, however, that such rules are not inconsistent with this code or statutes of the state of Colorado. 
(5)  Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman, and at such other times as the board may determine. Such chairman or, in his or her absence, the vice-chairman shall administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. Minutes of its proceedings shall be kept by the staff showing the vote of each member upon such question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(6)  The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the city staff, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the board is required to act under this code or to grant any variance authorized by this code. 
(7)  The filing fee for every petition to be submitted to the board of adjustment shall be calculated to cover the cost of legal publications, accumulation of data, administrative cost and all other costs incurred by the city in the review and processing of the petition or as provided for in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(8)  In the event any person appealing to the board is dissatisfied with the ultimate decision of the board of adjustment and appeals, the expense of reproducing the record before that board shall be at the expense of the appellant. 
(c)  Jurisdiction. The board of adjustment shall have the following powers, and shall have the power to impose reasonable conditions to insure compliance and protect adjacent property: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official of the city in the enforcement of this code, pursuant to Section 6.16 of this chapter, Appeals. 
(2)  To permit variance or modifications of the height of structures, yard, area, and lot coverage, pursuant to Section 6.17 of this chapter, Variances. Except, no variances shall be granted for the construction of a carport in the front yard setback in Section 3.05(b)(4) of this code. The design standards as set forth in Section 3.05(b)(4)g shall be met. 
(3)  To grant variances from flood hazard standards. The board shall follow the guidelines set forth in the flood hazard ordinance (Appendix C set out at the end of this code) when considering such variances. 
(Ord. 1043 (part), 2005; Ord. 1025, 2004) 
6.16 - Appeals. 
(a)  Authority of Board. In exercising its powers, the board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of the statutes of the state of Colorado as existing or hereafter amended, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination appealed from and make such order, requirement, decision or determination in the board's opinion, as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(b)  Application for Appeal. Appeals to the board of adjustment can be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department or board of the municipality affected by the decision of the building official or zoning administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after the decision has been rendered by the administrative officer, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  Filing Fee. A filing fee shall be submitted to cover the cost of review and processing with every appeal in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  Stay of Proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, other than by a restraining order that may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(e)  Hearing and Notice. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give the public notice as follows: 
(1)  The city clerk shall mail the written notice of public hearing before the board of adjustment on the appeal to all owners of real property lying within one hundred (100) feet of the property on which the appeal is made. The notice shall be given not less than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing by depositing in the mail such notice properly addressed and postage paid to each such owner as the ownership appears on the last approved county tax roll. 
(2)  The city clerk shall cause notice of the public hearing of the board of adjustment to be given by one (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city without the necessity of notifying property owners by mail. Such notice shall state the time and place of such hearing and the nature of the subject to be considered, which time shall not be earlier than ten (10) days from the date of publication. 
(f)  Appeals to Court. Every decision of the board shall be subject to review by certiorari, as provided by Rule 106(a)(4) Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. Such appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality. Such appeal shall be taken within such time as provided by the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. A notice of appeal, in writing, specifying the grounds for such an appeal, shall also be filed with the board within thirty (30) days of the final written decision of the board. 
( Ord. No. 1205 , 3-22-2016) 
6.17 - Variances. 
(a)  Authority. The board of adjustment shall be authorized to permit such variance or modifications of the height, yard, area, and lot coverage as may be necessary to secure appropriate development of a parcel of land that differs from other parcels in the district by being of such restricted area, shape or slope that it cannot be appropriately developed without such modification. 
(1)  City Council Approval of Variances. In conjunction with the review of subdivision applications, the city council shall be authorized to grant variances subject to the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Submittal Requirements. The applicant shall file three (3) copies of an application requesting a variance. The application shall be accompanied by or show the following: 
(1)  The street address and legal description of the property affected; 
(2)  A site plan and any and all other information necessary to clearly demonstrate eligibility for the requested variance based upon the required findings in subsection 6.17(c), below; and 
(3)  A filing fee to cover the cost of review in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  Required Findings. In exercising its power to grant a variance in accordance with this code, the board of adjustment shall make finding and show in its minutes that: 
(1)  There are special circumstances existing on the property on which the application is made related to size, shape, area, topography, surrounding conditions and location that do not apply generally to other property in the same area and zone district; 
(2)  That a variance is necessary to permit the applicant the same rights in the use of this property that are presently enjoyed under this code, by other properties in the vicinity and zone, but which rights are denied to the subject property; 
(3)  That the granting of the variance on the specific property will not adversely affect the land use pattern as outlined by the land use plan and will not adversely affect any other feature of the comprehensive plan of the city; 
(4)  That the variance, if granted, will be no material detriment to the public welfare or injury to the use, enjoyment or value of property in the vicinity; 
(5)  That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant; and 
(6)  That the proposed use is a permitted use in the underlying zone district. 
(d)  Administrative Adjustments. 
(1)  Purpose. Administrative adjustments are intended to provide flexibility with respect to the numerical standards of this code and where development is proposed that would be: 
a.  Compatible with surrounded land uses; 
b.  Harmonious with the public interest; and 
c.  Consistent with the purposes of this code. 
(2)  Applicability. Pursuant to the requirements of this section, the city planner may authorize adjustment of up to ten percent (10%) from any numerical standard related to height, bulk, setback, or lot coverage. 
(3)  Administrative Adjustment Application Process. 
a.  Application Submittal. A complete application for an administrative adjustment shall be submitted to the city planner as set forth in applications, forms and fees, as below: 
1.  Property Owner Identification and Endorsement. All applications shall include the names and signatures of the current property owner and agent, as applicable. 
2.  Forms and Content. 
(A)  Applications required under this code shall be submitted on city-provided forms, with any requested information and attachments, and in such numbers, as required by the city, including any checklists for submittals. 
(B)  City staff shall provide a specific list of minimum submittal requirements for each application type. All applications shall meet the minimum submittal requirements and include sufficient information to demonstrate compliance with all applicable standards of this code. 
(C)  Should additional information be necessary to clarify or facilitate the review of an application, the city planner may request any other pertinent information required to ensure compliance with this code. 
3.  Fees. 
(A)  Filing fees shall be established from time to time by the city council through resolution. 
(B)  All required fees shall be made payable to the "City of Cortez." 
(C)  Applicants who pay the appropriate application fee for the submission of an application and subsequently choose to withdraw such application prior to the city expending time in review shall be entitled to a refund of fifty percent (50%) of the total amount paid upon written request. 
(4)  Public Notification. Upon receipt of a complete application, public notices, at a minimum, shall be mailed to adjacent property owners within one-hundred (100) feet. City planner discretion for additional notice may be warranted. Additional notice may also be provided to parties having specific interest in the matter in accordance with the provisions of additional notice, as below: 
a.  The city clerk shall cause written notice of the request for an administrative adjustment to be mailed to all owners of real property lying within one hundred (100) feet of the property on which the adjustment is requested. The notice shall be mailed not less than ten (10) days before the date set for review of the request by depositing in the mail such notice properly addressed and postage paid to each such owner as the ownership appears on the last approved county tax roll. 
b.  The city planner may require, at his discretion, applicants not otherwise required by state statutes or code requirements to post or mail notices, and/or to attend area meetings with surrounding residents when deemed warranted. 
c.  The costs of all notices and advertising shall be borne by the applicant. 
(5)  City Planner Action. The city planner shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application and may confer with the city manager or other city officials prior to issuing a statement of determination. A written notification of the decision shall be mailed, or otherwise provided, to the applicant. 
(6)  Written Decision. The decision to approve or approve with conditions, or deny shall be communicated in writing to the applicant within fifteen (15) days from the decision. 
(7)  Administrative Adjustment Criteria. To approve an application for an administrative adjustment, the city planner shall consider the following criteria: 
a.  Granting the adjustment will ensure the same general level of land use compatibility as the otherwise applicable standards; 
b.  Granting the adjustment will not materially and adversely affect adjacent land uses and the physical character of uses in the immediate vicinity of the proposed development because of inadequate buffering, screening, setbacks, and other land use considerations; 
c.  Granting the adjustment will be generally consistent with the purposes and intent of this code; and 
d.  Granting the adjustment will be based on the physical constraints and land use specifics, rather than on economic hardship of the applicant. 
(8)  Referral to the Board of Adjustment. In the event that the city planner denies the administrative adjustment, the applicant may seek a variance from the board of adjustment in accordance with the provisions set forth in Sections 6.15, Board of adjustment, 6.16, Appeals, and 6.17, Variances, of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1028, 2004) 
( Ord. No. 1205 , 3-22-2016) 
6.18 - Special exceptions. 
(a)  The planning commission shall have the power to hear and decide the following special exceptions to the terms of this code. In granting any special exception, the planning commission may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this code. 
(1)  Reconstruction of Nonconforming Uses. The planning commission shall be authorized to permit the reconstruction of a building occupied by a nonconforming use on the lot or tract occupied by such building or the reconstruction of a structure destroyed by fire or the elements not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of its reasonable value and the addition of off-street parking or off-street loading to a nonconforming use. 
(2)  Repair of Nonconforming Uses. The planning commission shall be authorized to permit the repair to a building that has been officially declared unsafe to restore it to a safe condition provided no structural alterations are made except as are required by law or ordinance or authorized by the planning commission. 
(3)  Discontinuance of Nonconforming Use. The planning commission shall be authorized to require the discontinuance of nonconforming uses of land or structures under any plan whereby the full value of the structure and facilities can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general character of the neighborhood and the necessity of all property to conform to the regulations of this code. All actions to discontinue a nonconforming use of land or structure shall be taken with due regard to the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the light of the public welfare and the character of the area surrounding the designated nonconforming use and the conservation and preservation of the property. 
(4)  Status of Nonconforming Uses. The planning commission shall, from time to time, on its own motion or upon cause presented by interested property owners or on request of the city council inquire into the existence, continuation or maintenance of any nonconforming use within the city. 
(b)  The planning commission shall have the power to hear and decide special exceptions to the height of fences, the number of required off-street parking spaces and the sizes and locations of signs where all of the following conditions in so far as applicable are met: 
(1)  That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions such as irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot, or exceptional topographical or other conditions peculiar to the affected property; 
(2)  That the unusual circumstances or conditions do not exist throughout the neighborhood or district in which the property is located; 
(3)  That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, the property cannot reasonably be developed in conformity with the provisions of this code; 
(4)  That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant; 
(5)  That the exception, if granted, is a minimum exception that will afford relief and is the least modification possible of the provisions of this code which are in question; and 
(6)  That the exception, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property. 
6.19 - Historic preservation. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to enhance our community's local resources and to promote the public interest in historic preservation through: 
(1)  The protection and preservation of the city's architectural, historic and cultural heritage, as embodied in designated historic structures, sites and districts, by appropriate regulations and incentives; 
(2)  The establishment of a city register listing designated structures, sites and districts; and 
(3)  The provision of educational opportunities to increase public appreciation of Cortez's unique heritage. 
(b)  Board Established. The city council creates an historic preservation board, referred to in this section as the "board," which shall have principal responsibility for matters of historic preservation. 
(1)  Membership. The board shall consist of seven (7) members, which shall be made up from representatives from Montezuma County Historical Society, Cortez Cultural Center, planning and zoning, and the chamber of commerce, as well as three (3) at large positions. There shall be no requirement that the three (3) at large positions be property owners within the city of Cortez, nor shall there be any requirement that the three at large members be residents of the city of Cortez. Specific membership guidelines are that at least forty (40) percent of commission members shall be professionals in preservation-related disciplines, such as architecture, landscape architecture, architectural history, archaeology, history, planning, American studies, American civilization, cultural geography, or cultural anthropology. . 
(2)  Appointments and Terms of Office. Members of the board shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve three (3) year staggered terms from the date of their appointment. 
a.  Members may continue to serve until their successors have been appointed. Appointments to fill the vacancies on the board shall be made by the city council. All members of the board shall serve without compensation except for such amounts determined appropriate, in advance, by the city council to offset expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. Members of the board may be removed by the city council without cause being stated. 
b.  Until such time that the members of the board are appointed, city council shall act as the board. 
(3)  Quorum and Voting. A quorum for the board shall consist of three (3) members. A quorum is necessary for the board to conduct business, including holding a public hearing. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member. A tie vote shall be deemed a denial of the motion or recommended action. 
(4)  Officers. The board shall, by majority vote, elect one (1) of its members to serve as chairperson to preside over the board's meetings and one (1) member to serve as the vice-chairperson. The members so designated shall serve in these capacities for terms of one (1) year. 
(5)  Meetings. The board shall establish a regular meeting schedule. Minutes shall be kept of all board proceedings. The board shall conduct its business in accordance with the Public Meetings Acts, Public Records Act and other laws applicable to local public bodies. 
(6)  Powers and Duties. The board shall after solicitation of public comment and at a properly noticed public meeting: 
a.  Recommend eligibility criteria for the review and designation of historic resources and for review of proposals to alter designated resources. 
b.  Recommend to city council the establishment of construction and design standards which would apply to new construction within designated historic districts as well as to the renovation or alteration of designated historic structures. Prior to the adoption of any such standards, the board shall forward said standards to the planning commission for a courtesy review, prior to final review by city council. 
c.  Review and determine qualifications of properties nominated for designation as either an historic structure, site or district and recommend that city council designate by ordinance those properties qualifying for such designation. 
d.  Review and make recommendations on any application for alterations to a designated historic structure, landmark, site or district. 
e.  Advise and assist owners of historic properties on physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and reuse, including nomination to the city register, the state register and the National Register of Historic Places. 
f.  Develop and assist in public education programs including, but not limited to, walking tours, brochures, and a marker program for historic properties, lectures, exhibits and conferences. 
g.  Conduct surveys of historic sites, properties, and areas for the purpose of defining those of historic significance, and prioritizing the importance of identified historic areas. 
h.  The board may create a list of structures of historical or archaeological merit, which have not been designated. 
i.  Advise the city council on matters related to preserving the historic character and substance of the city and recommend easements, covenants, licenses and other methods which would implement the completion of purposes of this code. 
j.  Actively pursue financial assistance for preservation-related programs. 
k.  The board shall propose to the city council by laws, as the board deems necessary. 
(c)  City Registry Established. The city council establishes the city register of historic sites; structures or districts may be listed on the register only if the site, structure or district has been designated by the city council following recommendation by the board. All properties listed on the national or state register are eligible for the city register but are not designated until approval, pursuant to this section, is obtained. 
(d)  Designation of Historic Structures, Sites and Districts. Pursuant of the procedures set forth in this section, the city council may, by resolution: 
(1)  Designate as historic an individual structure, site or other feature or an integrated group of structures and features on a single lot or site having a special historical or architectural value; or 
(2)  Designate as an historic district an area containing a number of structures or sites having a special historical or architectural value. 
(3)  Each such designation shall include a description of the characteristics of the structure, site or historic district which justify its designation and a description of the particular features that should be preserved, and shall include a legal description of the location and boundaries of the historic structure, site or district. The property included in any such designation shall be subject to the provisions set forth in this section. 
(4)  No individual structure or site will be designated without the consent of all owners of record and the provisions of this section. 
(5)  The purpose and effect of designation is: 
a.  To assist local groups interested in preservation of physical structures, sites or districts, and to recognize locally significant structures, sites or districts; 
b.  To provide a mechanism to educate the public on local history, development of the community, architectural styles, and housing and business development; 
c.  To enable the owners of the property in the city to take advantage of historic preservation programs and opportunities; and 
d.  To make all properties listed on the city registry eligible for such incentive programs as may be developed. 
(e)  Procedures for Designating Historic Structures, Sites and Districts for Preservation. A nomination for designation listing in the city register may be made by the board or by any citizen by filing an application with the department of planning and building. Where nominated by the historic preservation board the department and at least one (1) member of the historic preservation board shall contact the owner or owners of such historic resources or historic district, either in person or in writing, outlining the reasons and effects of designation as a historic resource and, if possible, shall secure the consent of the owner or owners to such designation before the nomination is accepted as complete for review. The applicant shall pay all public notice expenses, recording fees and any other fees established by resolution of the city council. 
(1)  Board Review. 
a.  Once it has been determined that the application for historical designation is complete, and the requirement for public hearing has been met, the city planner shall forward the request to the board of historic preservation to be placed on the agenda for the next regularly-scheduled meeting. The hearing on the requested designation will occur not more than ninety (90) days from the date of determination that the application is complete. 
b.  The board shall review the application for conformance with the established criteria for designation and with the purposes of this section. 
c.  Within ten (10) days after the conclusion of the public meeting, but in no event more than thirty (30) days after the meeting, unless mutually agreed by the board, the applicant and the owner or owners other than the applicant, the board shall recommend either approval, modification and approval or disapproval of the application. The board may recommend approval conditional upon the execution of certain easements, covenants, or licenses. 
d.  If the board approves an application, the board shall forward the application with a copy of its report and findings of approval to city council, including any requirements as to easements, covenants, or licenses that must be met by the property owner to receive and/or maintain the designation. The board shall also notify city council within thirty (30) days of any decision disapproving a designation. 
(2)  City Council Review. 
a.  The city council shall hold a public hearing to consider adopting by ordinance those properties qualifying for historic designation no more than thirty (30) days after receipt of the board's recommendation. 
b.  The city council shall review the application for conformance with the established criteria for designation and with the purpose of this section. 
(3)  Owner Notification. When a structure, site or historic district has been designated as provided herein, the department of planning and building shall promptly notify the record owners of the property, according to the county Assessor's records or other available information, and record the designation with the county clerk and recorder. 
(4)  Limitation on Resubmission and Reconsideration of Proposed Designation. Whenever the historic preservation board or the city council disapproves a proposed designation, no person shall submit an application that is the same or substantially the same for at least one (1) year from the effective date of the final action on the denied application. 
(f)  Criteria for Designation. The board and city council will consider the following criteria in reviewing nominations of properties for designation. 
(1)  Structures. Structures must be at least fifty (50) years old and meet one (1) or more of the following criteria for architectural, cultural or geographic/environmental significance. A structure can be exempted from the age standard if the council finds it to be exceptionally important in other criteria. 
(2)  Architectural, Cultural or Geographic/ Environmental Criteria. Historic structures or sites shall meet one (1) or more of the following criteria in order to be considered for designation. 
a.  Architectural: 
1.  Exemplifies specific elements of an architectural style or period; 
2.  Is an example of the work of an architect or builder who is recognized for expertise nationally, state-wide, regionally or locally; 
3.  Demonstrates superior craftsmanship or high artistic value; 
4.  Represents an innovation in construction, materials or design; 
5.  Represents a built environment of a group of people in an era of history; 
6.  Exhibits a pattern or grouping of elements representing at least one (1) of the above criteria; 
7.  Is a significant historic remodel. 
b.  Cultural: 
1.  Is a site that of historic event that had an effect upon society; 
2.  Exemplifies cultural, political, economic or ethnic heritage of the city; or 
3.  Is associated with a notable person or the work of a notable person. 
c.  Geographic/Environmental: 
1.  Enhances the sense of identity of the city; or 
2.  Is an established and familiar natural setting or visual feature of the city. 
(3)  Prehistoric and Historic Archaeological Structures or Sites. Prehistoric and historic archaeological structures or sites shall meet one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  Architectural: 
1.  Exhibits distinctive characteristics of a type, period or manner of construction; or 
2.  Is a unique example of structure. 
b.  Cultural: 
1.  Has the potential to make an important contribution to the knowledge of the area's history or prehistory; 
2.  Is associated with an important event in the area's development; 
3.  Is associated with a notable person(s) or the work of a notable person(s); 
4.  Is a typical example or is associated with a particular ethnic or other community group; or 
5.  Is a unique example of an event in local history. 
c.  Geographic/Environmental: 
1.  Is geographically or regionally important. 
(4)  General Criteria. Each property will also be evaluated based on physical integrity using the following criteria (a property need not meet all the following criteria): 
a.  Shows character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the community, region, state or nation; 
b.  Retains original design features, materials and/or character; 
c.  Is in the original location or same historic context if it has been moved; 
d.  Has been accurately reconstructed or restored. 
(g)  Historic Districts. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, a district is a geographically definable area including a concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures and/or objects. A district is related by a pattern of either physical elements or social activities. 
(2)  Significance is determined by applying criteria to the pattern(s) and unifying element(s). 
(3)  Nominations will not be approved unless the application contains written approval from owners of at least seventy (70) percent of the properties within the district boundaries. 
(4)  Properties that do not contribute to the significance of the historic district may be included within the boundaries as long as the noncontributing elements do not noticeably detract from the district's sense of time, place and historical development. Noncontributing elements will be evaluated for their magnitude of impact by considering their size, scale, design, location, and/or information potential. 
(5)  District boundaries will be defined by visual changes, historical documentation of different associations or patterns of development, or evidence of changes in site type or site density as established through testing or survey. 
(6)  When districts are designated, applicable design guidelines and other appropriate restrictions may be included as part of the designation. 
(7)  In addition to meeting at least one (1) of the criteria outlined in subsection (g)(8) of this section, the designated contributing sites and structures within the district must be at least fifty (50) years old. The district could be exempt from the age standard if the resources are found to be exceptionally important in other significant criteria. 
(8)  Historic districts shall meet one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  Architectural: 
1.  Exemplifies specific elements of an architectural style or period; 
2.  Is an example of the work of an architect or builder who is recognized for expertise nationally, state-wide, regionally or locally; 
3.  Demonstrates superior craftsmanship or high artistic value; 
4.  Represents an innovation in construction, materials or design; 
5.  Represents a built environment of a group of people in an era of history; 
6.  Exhibits a pattern or grouping of elements representing at least one of the above criteria; or 
7.  Is a significant historic remodel. 
b.  Cultural: 
1.  Is the site of an historic event that had an effect on society; 
2.  Exemplifies cultural, political, economic or social heritage of the community; or 
3.  Is associated with a notable person(s) or the work of a notable person(s). 
c.  Geographic/Environmental: 
1.  Enhances sense of identity of the community; or 
2.  Is an established and familiar natural setting or visual feature of the community. 
d.  Archaeology/Subsurface: 
1.  Has the potential to make an important contribution to the area's history or prehistory; 
2.  Is associated with an important event in the area's development; 
3.  Is associated with a notable person(s) or the work of a notable person(s); 
4.  Has distinctive characteristics of a type, period or manner of construction; 
5.  Is of geographical importance. 
(h)  Review of Alterations. Before making any alterations to the exterior of structures or resources designated as historic, the owner of such building/structure or other historic resource shall submit an application to the board describing the project, including any plans or specifications. The board shall determine if the alteration is compatible with the designation. Property owners making alterations or constructing new buildings adjacent to registered building, landmarks, or districts are requested to consult with the board prior to beginning construction. For this section, the term "alteration" shall mean any proposed modification to a designated historic site, structure or district, which could have an affect on the character of the historic resources relative to the criteria by which it was designated. Examples of alterations for structures may include additions, any exterior modifications, including signage to be affixed to the facade, and any interior modifications that may affect the characteristics for which the structure was designated. The board shall make its review as per the time line in subsection (e)(1) of this section. 
(1)  Criteria to Review Alterations. In reviewing a proposed alteration, the board shall consider the project in terms such as design, finish, material, scale, mass and height. When the subject site is in an historic district, the board must also find that the proposed development is visually compatible with the development on adjacent properties, as well as any guidelines adopted as part of the given historic district designation. For this section, the term "compatible" shall mean consistent with, harmonious with and/or enhances the mixture of complementary architectural styles either of the architecture of an individual structure or the character of the surrounding structures. The board will use the following criteria to determine compatibility of a proposed alteration: 
a.  The effect upon the general historical and architectural character of the structure and property; 
b.  The architectural style, arrangement, texture and material used on the existing and proposed structures and their relation and compatibility with other structures; 
c.  The size of the structure, its setbacks, its site, location and the appropriateness thereof, when compared to existing structure and the site; 
d.  The compatibility of accessory structures and fences with the main structure on the site, and with other structures; 
e.  The effects of the proposed work in creating, changing, destroying, or otherwise impacting the exterior architectural features of the structure upon which such work is done; 
f.  The condition of existing improvements and whether they are a hazard to public health and safety; or 
g.  The effects of the proposed work upon the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of the property. 
h.  The ability to comply with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation. 
(2)  It is the intent of the alteration review criteria process to encourage work on any of the structures or properties designated as historic to be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this chapter; however, the board shall only have the power to review and make suggestions as appropriate to maintain compliance with the criteria found in Section 6.19(h)(1). Compliance with the review process by the applicant shall be mandatory for any structures or resources designated as historic after the adoption of Ordinance No. 1140, Series 2010. Compliance with the review criteria for structures or resources designated as historic prior to the adoption of said ordinance shall be voluntary. Notwithstanding, any alterations to historic resources that are made which are not in keeping with the review criteria may be subject to revocation of designation. 
(i)  Revocation of Designation. If a building or special feature on a designated site has been altered in such a way so as to negate the features necessary to retain designation, the owner may apply to the board for a revocation of the designation or the board shall recommend revocation of the designation to the city council in the absence of the owner's application to do so. 
(Ord. 1086, 2007; Ord. 1038, 2005) 
(Ord. No. 1140, 5-25-2010) 
6.20 - Temporary use permits. 
(a)  Permits. Temporary use permits shall be issued by the zoning administration, subject to the following provisions. 
(1)  Zoning. The use for which the permit is requested shall be authorized as a temporary use in the district in which the use is to be located. 
(2)  Conditions. The applicant shall meet all conditions for such temporary use permit set forth in this code. 
(3)  Time Limit. A time limit for the discontinuance of the temporary use shall be specified on the temporary use permit. 
6.21 - Sign permits. 
(a)  Permits. It is unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, paint, or repaint, or change the use of any sign as defined in this section without first obtaining a sign permit; however, a sign permit shall not be required to repaint a sign exactly as it was permitted for the purpose of maintenance. 
(1)  A one-time sign permit fee according to the currently adopted city construction codes permit fee schedule shall be charged for each sign. 
(2)  In addition, an annual permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged for each billboard. 
(b)  Sign Permit Application. Application for a sign permit, where such permit is required by Section 5.06 of this code, Signs, shall be made upon forms provided by the city and shall include the following information: 
(1)  A drawing to scale of the proposed sign. 
(2)  A drawing to scale of the site plan or building facade showing the proposed location of the sign. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(4)  Name, address and telephone number of the owner. 
(5)  Name, address and telephone number of the person or firm responsible for the erection of the sign. 
(6)  Location of the building, structure or tract to which, or upon which, the sign is to be attached or erected. 
6.22 - Zoning development permits. 
(a)  Applicability. No building permit may be issued and no person(s) may engage in any development (including grading) within the incorporated area of the city without obtaining a zoning development permit (Appendix A set out at the end of this code). The zoning administrator shall require that every application for a zoning permit be accompanied by two (2) copies of a plan or plat showing the building, structure, or sign in sufficient detail to enable the zoning administrator to ascertain whether the proposed construction, reconstruction or conversion, moving and/or alteration is in conformance with the provisions of the applicable zone district and this code. 
(1)  No zoning development permit shall be issued for a building or structure on a lot which abuts a street dedicated to a portion of its required width and located on that side thereof from which all dedication has not been made according to the street plans and standards as adopted from time to time by the city. 
(b)  Revocation of Zoning Development Permits. Failure to comply with any condition(s) of approval, as determined by the city council, shall result in inability to obtain any rights granted conditionally thereunder, in accordance with Section 1.11(b)(1) of this code, and city revocation of the development permit upon 30-day notice to the developer and opportunity for hearing and city determination of noncompliance with conditions. 
(c)  Denial of Zoning Development Permit. If an application for a zoning development permit is not approved, the zoning administrator shall return the zoning development permit to the applicant with a written statement detailing the reasons for such disapproval. 
(d)  Conflict. Any zoning permit or building permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this code shall be null and void, and may not be construed as waiving any provision of this code. 
6.23 - Certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  Applicability. No building hereafter erected, converted or structurally altered shall be used or occupied and no land or nonresidential building may be changed in use unless or until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building official of the city stating that the building or proposed use of land or building complies with the provisions of this code and other building and health laws of the city. 
(b)  Application. A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and will be issued within ten (10) days after the completion of the erection, alteration or conversion of such building or land provided such construction or change has been made in complete conformity to the provisions of this code. 
(c)  Record. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the building official, and copies shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the land or building affected. 
6.24 - Administrative officials. 
(a)  Zoning Administrator. There is created an official administrative position known as the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall be the city planner and shall be appointed by, directed by, and serve at the pleasure of the city manager, except in such cases as noted in Section 2.02 of this code, Definitions. 
(1)  Issue Zoning Development Permits. The zoning administrator shall issue zoning development permits as required by Section 6.22 of this chapter prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
(2)  Administer the Land Use Code. The zoning administrator administers the land use code and has those powers and duties expressly assigned to him/her under this code and otherwise delegated or assigned to him/her in accordance with city policy. 
(3)  Enforce the Land Use Code. The zoning administrator shall enforce the provisions of this code. 
(4)  Interpret the Land Use Code. The zoning administrator shall have the authority to make all interpretations of the land use code and the boundaries of the zoning district map. 
(5)  Administer Flood Hazard Ordinance. The zoning administrator administers the flood hazard ordinance (Appendix C set out at the end of this code) and has those powers and duties expressly assigned to him/her therein. 
(b)  Building Official. There is created an official administrative position know as the building official. In addition to the jurisdiction, authority and duties which may be conferred on the building official by the currently adopted city construction codes, the building official shall have the following jurisdiction, authority and duties: 
(1)  Issue Building Permits. The building official shall issue applicable permits to allow construction activities that have received a zoning development permit pursuant to the procedures in the code and deny building permits for activities that have not received a zoning development permit. 
(2)  Interpret and Enforce the Currently Adopted City Construction Codes. The building official shall interpret and enforce the applicable currently adopted city construction codes. 
(3)  Enforce the Land Use Code. The building official shall enforce the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 1026 (part), 2004) 
6.25 - Vacation of rights-of-way and easements. 
    Purpose. From time to time and at the city's discretion, it may be prudent or necessary to vacate specific dedicated rights-of-way. This action may be necessary to promote the health and well being of the citizens of Cortez and/or to allow specific necessary development upon those public ways that are deemed unnecessary or obsolete to the traffic pattern or access to properties. This section provides a means to grant flexibility for developers and the city to attain development that may not be conductive to strict street grid development. 
(a)  Initiation. Any citizen(s), department(s) of the city, the planning commission, or the city council may request an abandonment of a right-of-way or an easement. 
(b)  Application Filing and Processing. The following procedures shall be used for processing an application for vacation of a public right-of-way or easement of record: 
(1)  Prior to filing an application, an applicant shall schedule a conference with the zoning administrator, the director of public works, and any other appropriate member of city staff to informally discuss the desired vacation of right-of-way or easement, and to establish the type of information and the number of copies needed to adequately review the application. 
(2)  An application, with the required materials as listed in this section, shall be filed with the zoning administrator. Staff shall review the application in accordance with the submittal requirements established in subsection (f) of this section and staff shall solicit review comments from the following agencies, distributed by the zoning administrator: 
a.  Zoning administrator (one copy); 
b.  Public works department (one copy); 
c.  City engineer (one copy); 
d.  Electric power association (one copy); 
e.  Natural gas provider (one copy); 
f.  Telephone provider (one copy); 
g.  Cortez-Montezuma school district (one copy); 
h.  Cortez fire protection district (one copy); 
i.  Cortez city clerk (one copy - for the public record); 
j.  Parks and recreations department (one copy). 
(3)  At least ten (10) days prior to the meeting of the planning commission, at which the plat is to be considered, each agency listed above shall submit their written recommendations concerning the plat in question to the zoning administrator. The recommendations shall be given to the planning commission with the plat for their consideration. A written report shall be prepared by the zoning administrator and submitted to the planning commission at the next regular meeting. Such report should include comments relative to the proposed vacation to these regulations, the comprehensive plan or other master plans such as utility plans. The report may include comments from other municipal departments, utility providers, the county, or other agencies concerned with urban development. 
(c)  Notification Requirements of Public Hearings for Vacation. 
(1)  The city clerk shall publish notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall include the nature of the matters to be considered; the time, date, and place of the hearing; and the name, address, and phone number of the applicant. The city clerk shall also cause the notice of hearing to be posted in at least one (1) public place within the city. 
(2)  The city clerk shall mail the written notice of public hearing to all owners of real property lying within three hundred feet (300') of the property on which the change is requested. The notice shall be given not less than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing by depositing in the mail such notice properly addressed and postage paid to each such owner as the ownership appears on the last approved county tax roll. 
(d)  Planning Commission. The zoning administrator shall present the application to the planning commission within ninety (90) days from the date that the application is filed. Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall consider the testimony and evidence presented at the hearing and evaluate the application in accordance with subsection 6.25(g) of this section and recommend approval or deny the application no later than thirty-five (35) days from the initial date of the hearing, unless the applicant agrees, in writing, to an extension. The recommendation of the planning commission, including the reasons for the action and any conditions of an approval, shall be set forth in the minutes of the meeting. The recommendations of the planning and zoning commission and any conditions for approval shall be memorialized through adoption of a resolution. 
(e)  City Council. The city council shall consider the recommendation of the planning commission within forty-five days of the planning commission action. The decision of the city council, including the reasons for the action and any conditions of an approval shall be set forth in the minutes of the meeting. An action of approval by the city council shall be stated in an adopted ordinance. Denial shall be expressed in a resolution and must state the reasons for denial. 
(f)  Submittal Requirements. The applicant shall submit to the zoning administrator the following materials. Only complete submittals shall be accepted. 
(1)  A completed application (see Appendix D set out at the end of this code) for the right-of-way vacation with required materials (see subsection (f)(2) of this section) and the appropriate fee as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  A vicinity map showing the following: 
a.  The location of all adjacent properties and any structures within 150 feet of the boundaries of the proposed vacation. 
b.  Zoning and land uses for those adjacent properties. 
c.  Locations of all existing utilities in/or adjacent to the proposed vacation. 
d.  Existing rights-of-way within a one-quarter mile radius of any right-of-way proposed for vacation. 
e.  A survey and map, as may be requested by the city prepared in original form to be recorded at the office of the Montezuma County clerk and recorder. The survey map is to be submitted prior to the second reading by the city council of an approving ordinance. 
(3)  Any additional materials necessary to adequately review the application as determined by staff within five working days following the pre-application conference. 
(4)  A written statement addressing the reasons for requesting the vacation. 
(5)  A letter from any involved utility company stating the company's position on the proposed vacation. 
(6)  Names and addresses of all property owners within a radius of three hundred (300) feet of all boundaries of the rights-of-way or easement requested for abandonment. 
(g)  Criteria for Review, Recommendation, and Approval. The following criteria shall be used in the evaluation of all applications for the vacation of rights-of-way or easement: 
(1)  Must not conflict with adopted policies or plans; 
(2)  Shall not create a landlocked parcel of land; 
(3)  Shall not restrict the access of any parcel so that access is unreasonable or economically prohibitive; and 
(4)  Shall not result in adverse impacts on the health, safety, and/or general welfare of the general community, and reduce the quality of public facilities or services provided to any parcel of land, i.e., fire/police protection, accesses, and/or utility services. 
(h)  Recording of Vacation Ordinance. Within ninety (90) days of approval of a vacation by the city council, the city clerk shall cause the ordinance of vacation and an amended plat, two mylar copies furnished by the applicant, showing the adjusted lot lines to be recorded at the office of the county clerk and recorder. The applicant shall bear all costs associated with the recording of the ordinance and plat. If for any reason the final plat and ordinances have not been recorded within ninety (90) days of city council approval, the approving actions shall be deemed void. 
( Ord. No. 1205 , 3-22-2016) 
6.26 - Encroachment permits. 
(a)  General. An encroachment may be permitted by new construction or identified as an inadvertent encroachment by an existing building that was constructed prior to city regulations for setback requirements or inspections. It may also occur when something was unknowingly constructed so as to encroach into a public right-of-way. The permit does not provide for a variance or exemption to any regulations for development that may cause adverse impacts upon surrounding properties. Encroachment permits may be approved for the uses indicated in the use regulations of the zoning district of the property for which the encroachment permit is requested. 
(b)  Pre-Application Conference. Prior to the filing of an encroachment permit application, the applicant shall meet with the zoning administrator or his/her designated agent to acquaint him/herself with the requirements of the city. At such meeting, the application contents, review process, use and area standards, and the general character of the construction may be discussed. At the pre-application conference, the applicant may be represented by an engineer or surveyor. 
(c)  Submittal Requirements. The applicant shall file a petition requesting an encroachment permit and a title certificate from a licensed title company or attorney listing the name of the property owner(s) and all liens, easements and judgments of record affecting the subject property. The petition shall be accompanied by or show the following information: 
(1)  The street address and legal description of the property affected; 
(2)  Any and all plans, information, operating data and expert evaluation necessary to clearly explain the location, function and characteristics of any building or use proposed; and 
(3)  A filing fee to cover the cost of review in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  Planning Commission Review Criteria and Processing. In reviewing an encroachment permit, the planning commission shall utilize the criteria listed in Section 6.10(f) of this chapter. 
(1)  Hearing Required. The planning commission shall hold a hearing without notice or advertisement on any application for an encroachment permit prior to making its recommendation to the city council. 
(e)  City Council Review Criteria and Processing. In reviewing an encroachment permit, the city council shall utilize the criteria listed in Section 6.25(f) of this chapter. 
(1)  Hearing Required. The city council shall hold a hearing without notice or advertisement on any application for an encroachment permit prior to taking any final action on the application. 
(f)  Conditions of Approval. Both the planning commission and the city council shall use the following criteria in reviewing encroachment permit requests. It is specifically understood that certain criteria listed below may not apply to a particular application. The applicant shall adequately demonstrate that the applicable criteria have been met: 
(1)  The proposed encroachment is compatible with adjacent existing uses and construction in the zoning district. Compatibility shall be expressed in terms of appearance, architectural scale and features, site design and scope, as well as the control of adverse impacts including noise, vibration, smoke, fumes, gas, dust, odor, lighting, glare, traffic circulation, parking, or other undesirable or hazardous conditions. 
(2)  The proposed encroachment has incorporated design features sufficient to protect adjacent uses including but not limited to: service areas, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, safety provisions, access ways to and from the site. 
(3)  Proposed structures must demonstrate that they are necessary and desirable. Undesirable impacts created by these structures shall be controlled or eliminated. 
(4)  Provisions for proper maintenance of the structure, parking and loading areas, drives, lighting, and signs, shall be provided. 
(5)  The proposed encroachment shall not prove to be a restriction on safety, city or other business, or impact adjacent businesses and properties. Potential safety hazards, adequate protection of pedestrian traffic and benefits to the downtown area must be assessed during the review process. 
(6)  The council must determine whether this proposed awning is in keeping with city policy that has been applied to other encroachment permits for similar applications. 
(7)  The encroachment into the right-of-way does not interfere with any city function, or with neighboring residents. There will be sufficient head-room above the sidewalk area as indicated on the submitted drawing and the encroachment is minimal and will not impose a lighting problem for the walking surface. 
    After considering the public comment relating the criteria listed above in relation to the encroachment permit being requested, the planning commission and the city council shall adopt a resolution stating their findings of the applicant's demonstrated ability to meet the criteria for an encroachment permit. A determination that the applicant has not met one or more of the applicable criteria shall be sufficient to deny the request. The planning commission and the city council may establish additional conditions of location, arrangement and construction in the issuance of an encroachment permit if deemed to be in the public interest or to assure compliance with other aspects of this code. 
(g)  Records. A file containing all documents relevant to the application and disposition of such encroachment permits shall be maintained by the zoning administrator. 
6.27 - Reimbursement agreements. 
(a)  Definitions. Words defined in this section shall be given the meanings set forth here. All other words shall be given their common, ordinary meanings, as the context may reasonably suggest. In case of dispute over the meaning of a term not defined here or over the application of a definition set forth here, the zoning administrator shall give a written interpretation in accordance with Section 2.03 of this code. 
    "Connector" means a party seeking to connect to the city infrastructure and who benefits from the infrastructure constructed by an initial developer that is eligible for the fair share reimbursement procedure established by the city. 
    "Drainage/storm water infrastructure" means and includes, but is not limited to, storm water collection system pipelines, inlets, box culverts, combination box culvert and pedestrian underpass, regional detention ponds, improved open channel conveyances and other appurtenances designed and constructed by the initial developer which are off site and, in the judgment of the city engineer, are improvements that a connector would have been required to construct at the time of development of connector's property. 
    "Initial developer" means the party constructing or contracting for construction of infrastructure required by the city to provide service to a development. 
    "Reimbursement construction cost" means all costs associated directly and solely with the design and construction of the street, water or drainage infrastructure which includes the costs of engineering, surveying, and testing, cost of permits and cash in lieu payments, costs of any rights-of-way (ROW) or easement acquisitions necessary for construction of the street, water or drainage infrastructure, and costs of reasonable and necessary construction change orders. Administrative costs, which will include costs incurred by the initial developer for construction management including bidding, home office overhead, attorney's fees and all other expenses other than those direct expenses identified herein, shall not exceed five percent of the total direct construction costs for the infrastructure, all as detailed in a sworn affidavit from the initial developer. 
    "Street infrastructure" means and includes, but is not limited to, pavement, sub base, over excavation, backfill, soil stabilization, re-compaction, right-of-way costs, curbs, gutters, medians, landscaping, sidewalks, pedestrian underpasses, combination pedestrian underpass and box culvert, traffic signals, street lighting, bus pads, deceleration lanes, and other appurtenances as determined by the city engineer, which are designed and constructed by the initial developer in accordance with the city's most current infrastructure master plans and the City of Cortez Construction Design Standards, as amended from time to time, and which are adjacent to the property that would derive benefit from use of or connection to the street infrastructure upon development of the property. 
    "Water infrastructure" means and includes, but is not limited to, water transmission and distribution lines, all other water lines and related appurtenances, and pressure reducing valves and booster pump stations which are sized to a capacity which the city engineer determines is in excess of that required by the initial developer. Notwithstanding the above, the cost of constructing a booster pump station shall not be eligible for reimbursement when the city engineer requires that a booster pump station be constructed to a capacity which is the minimum required by the Standards and Specifications for the City of Cortez Construction Design Standards, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Reimbursement Agreement. Public improvement infrastructure construction costs or portions thereof may be recovered by the initial developer. Upon approval of construction drawings by the city engineer, the initial developer of any property who constructs drainage, street or water infrastructure may file with the city engineer an application for a reimbursement agreement. The complete application, or portions thereof, may be submitted; however, incomplete applications, as determined at the sole discretion of the city engineer, will not be reviewed or acted upon by the city. In order for the city to approve estimated reimbursement payments prior to the final execution of a reimbursement agreement, the initial developer shall submit fair share construction costs. Upon submission of these items, provided they are acceptable to the city as described herein, the city will require connectors to pay estimated reimbursement amounts. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the application for reimbursement agreement shall not be considered complete until all application requirements are submitted. Once the submitted application is determined complete and acceptable to the city, the city will provide the initial developer with a reimbursement agreement; however, the reimbursement agreement shall not be executed until after the time to file a request for a public hearing has expired and any public hearings which were requested are resolved. 
1.  Reimbursable Costs. The initial developer shall be reimbursed by connectors for infrastructure construction cost, on the following basis: 
a.  Water infrastructure constructed by the initial developer shall be eligible for reimbursement by connectors based on the ratio of the connector's linear front footage to the total linear footage of the infrastructure. If the connector's property is fronting or contiguous on only one side of the infrastructure, the connector shall pay 50 percent of the construction cost for that front footage. If the connector's property is fronting or contiguous on both sides of the infrastructure, the connector shall pay 100 percent of the construction cost for that front footage. In the event that a connector desires to connect to water infrastructure that is not contiguous or front water infrastructure constructed by the initial developer and it is determined by the city engineer that the subdivision plat for the initial developer will require less capacity than projected in the initial developer's reimbursement agreement, then the construction cost to be reimbursed, shall be adjusted based on the projected capacity required by the connector's subdivision plat and not based on the initial developer's projected capacity. The reimbursement amounts for the remaining properties not yet connected will not be changed from the amounts shown in the reimbursement agreement as a result of this event. 
b.  Drainage infrastructure constructed by the initial developer shall be eligible for reimbursement by connectors. The reimbursable cost will be attributed entirely to the property in which the infrastructure eligible for reimbursement is situated. In the event the infrastructure is situated on more than one property, the cost shall be prorated between the properties as determined by the city engineer. 
c.  Street infrastructure constructed by the initial developer per the Master Thoroughfare Plan in the City Limits to full width and in accordance with the City of Cortez Construction Design Standards, as amended from time to time, shall be eligible for reimbursement by connectors based on the ratio of the connector's linear front footage to the total linear footage of the infrastructure. If the connector's property is fronting or contiguous on only one side of the infrastructure, the connector shall reimburse 50 percent of the construction cost for that front footage. If the connector's property is fronting or contiguous on both sides of the infrastructure, the connector shall reimburse 100 percent of the construction cost for that front footage. 
2.  No property will be permitted to connect to infrastructure constructed pursuant to this section or to any other part of the city's infrastructure until the obligations associated with such property under any reimbursement agreements have been paid in full. No service without payment of reimbursement amounts. 
3.  Connector shall pay the entire reimbursement amount applicable to the entire property which is subject to a reimbursement agreement regardless of whether the property is subdivided. Payment shall be made upon execution of the developer's agreement or at time of connection, whichever occurs sooner. However, if prior to payment of the reimbursement amount, the property owner has subdivided the property and sold a portion or portions to other owners, the connector shall be required to pay only their pro rata reimbursement amount for their entire remaining property as determined by the city engineer. Notwithstanding the foregoing, payment by individual residential lots is not allowed unless the individual lot existed and was occupied but not connected to the infrastructure at the time the reimbursement agreement was executed. Refunds or credits of reimbursement amounts will not be made as a result of reducing the number of lots in a subdivision plat. 
4.  Time Limitation, Interest, and Depreciation. There shall be no reimbursement payments on or after the expiration of fifteen (15) years from the date of initial acceptance of the water, wastewater, drainage or street infrastructure eligible for reimbursement. Connectors shall similarly have no obligation to make reimbursement payments on or after the expiration of said periods. Interest and depreciation shall be applied in the following manner. A set interest rate of 3% appreciation per year shall be allowed for each year 1 through 10 to account for inflation, and a depreciation of 3% per year shall be applied for each year 11 through 15. 
5.  The city specifically will not guarantee payment of any portion of the reimbursable amount. Nothing shall be deemed or construed to be a pledge of the city's faith and credit in facilitating the equitable apportionment of the construction cost of the infrastructure. It shall be the initial developers obligation to be aware of the city's publicly conducted development approval process, and to timely apply for a reimbursement agreement. Notwithstanding the above, the initial developer acknowledges that in the event he does not submit a complete and correct application for reimbursement agreement within 120 days of initial acceptance of the infrastructure or within 120 days of the adoption of this section, whichever is later, he will be forever barred from making such application and shall not be eligible for reimbursement. 
6.  Appeals. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, decision or requirement made in the enforcement of this section shall be pursuant to Section 6.16 of this chapter, Appeals. 
(Ord. 1117 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 7 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
ARTICLE I. - TITLE AND PURPOSE 

7.010 - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the state of Colorado has, in Title 29, Article 20 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the Cortez City Council of the city of Cortez, Colorado, does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.020 - Findings of fact. 
1.  The flood hazard areas of the city of Cortez are subject to periodic inundation, which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. 
2.  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains that cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.030 - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
1.  Protect human life and health; 
2.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
3.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5.  Minimize damage to critical facilities, infrastructure and other public facilities such as water, sewer and gas mains; electric and communications stations; and streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
6.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
7.  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is located in a flood hazard area. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter uses the following methods: 
1.  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
2.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
4.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
5.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert flood waters or that may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

7.050 - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    "100-year flood" means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (1-percent-annual-chance flood). The terms "one hundred-year flood" and "one percent chance flood" are synonymous with the term "100-year flood." The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every one hundred (100) years. 
    "100-year flood plain" means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a one hundred-year flood. 
    "500-year flood" means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (0.2-percent-chance-annual-flood). The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every five hundred (500) years. 
    "500-year flood plain" means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a five hundred-year flood. 
    "Addition" means any activity that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the square footage of an existing structure. 
    "Alluvial fan flooding" means a fan-shaped sediment deposit formed by a stream that flows from a steep mountain valley or gorge onto a plain or the junction of a tributary stream with the main stream. Alluvial fans contain active stream channels and boulder bars, and recently abandoned channels. Alluvial fans are predominantly formed by alluvial deposits and are modified by infrequent sheet flood, channel avulsions and other stream processes. 
    "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated zone AO or AH on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    "Base Flood Elevation (BFE)" means the elevation shown on a FEMA flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, AI-MO, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    "Basement" means any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    "Channel" means the physical confine of stream or waterway consisting of a bed and stream banks, existing in a variety of geometries. 
    "Channelization" means the artificial creation, enlargement or realignment of a stream channel. 
    "Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)" means the codification of the general and permanent Rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government. It is divided into fifty (50) titles that represent broad areas subject to federal regulation. 
    "Community" means any political subdivision in the state of Colorado that has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations through zoning, including, but not limited to, cities, towns, unincorporated areas in the counties, Indian tribes and drainage and flood control districts. 
    "Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR)" means FEMA's comment on a proposed project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map, that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain. 
    "Critical facility" means a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Article V, Section 7.260, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. See Article V, Section 7.260. 
    "Development" means any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    "DFIRM database" means database (usually spreadsheets containing data and analyses that accompany DFIRMs). The FEMA Mapping Specifications and Guidelines outline requirements for the development and maintenance of DFIRM databases. 
    "Digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM)" means FEMA digital floodplain map. These digital maps serve as "regulatory floodplain maps" for insurance and floodplain management purposes. 
    "Elevated building" means a non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. 
    "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    "Federal register" means the official daily publication for rules, proposed rules, and notices of federal agencies and organizations, as well as executive orders and other presidential documents. 
    "FEMA" means Federal Emergency Management Agency, the agency responsible for administering the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    "Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of water from channels and reservoir spillways; 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or 
3.  Mudslides or mudflows that occur from excess surface water that is combined with mud or other debris that is sufficiently fluid so as to flow over the surface of normally dry land areas (such as earth carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current). 
    "Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    "Flood insurance study (FIS)" means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains the flood insurance rate map as well as flood profiles for studied flooding sources that can be used to determine base flood elevations for some areas. 
    "Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated as the result of a flood, including the area of land over which floodwater would flow from the spillway of a reservoir. 
    "Floodplain administrator" means the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    "Floodplain development permit" means a permit required before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area (SFHA). If FEMA has not defined the SFHA within a community, the community shall require permits for all proposed construction or other development in the community including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may determine whether such construction or other development is proposed within flood-prone areas. Permits are required to ensure that proposed development projects meet the requirements of the NFIP and this floodplain management ordinance. 
    "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    "Floodplain management regulations" means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    "Flood control structure" means a physical structure designed and built expressly or partially for the purpose of reducing, redirecting, or guiding flood flows along a particular waterway. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and/or non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    "Floodway (regulatory floodway)" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. The Colorado statewide standard for the designated height to be used for all newly studied reaches shall be one-half foot (six inches). Letters of map revision to existing floodway delineations may continue to use the floodway criteria in place at the time of the existing floodway delineation. 
    "Freeboard" means the vertical distance in feet above a predicted water surface elevation intended to provide a margin of safety to compensate for unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood such as debris blockage of bridge openings and the increased runoff due to urbanization of the watershed. 
    "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    "Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    "Letter of map revision (LOMR)" means FEMA's official revision of an effective flood insurance rate map (FIRM), or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
    "Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F)" means FEMA's modification of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. 
    "Levee" means a man-made embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. For a levee structure to be reflected on the FEMA FIRMS as providing flood protection, the levee structure must meet the requirements set forth in 44 CFR 65.10. 
    "Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). Any floor used for living purposes which includes working, storage, sleeping, cooking and eating, or recreation or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could be converted to such a use such as a basement or crawl space. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home or business. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    "Manufactured home" means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    "Material safety data sheet (MSDS)" means a form with data regarding the properties of a particular substance. An important component of product stewardship and workplace safety, it is intended to provide workers and emergency personnel with procedures for handling or working with that substance in a safe manner, and includes information such as physical data (melting point, boiling point, flash point, etc.), toxicity, health effects, first aid, reactivity, storage, disposal, protective equipment, and spill-handling procedures. 
    "Mean sea level" means for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the "North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    "National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)" means FEMA's program of flood insurance coverage and floodplain management administered in conjunction with the Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. The NFIP has applicable Federal regulations promulgated in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The U.S. Congress established the NFIP in 1968 with the passage of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. 
    "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    "No-rise certification" means a record of the results of an engineering analysis conducted to determine whether a project will increase flood heights in a floodway. A no-rise certification must be supported by technical data and signed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer. The supporting technical data should be based on the standard step-backwater computer model used to develop the 100-year floodway shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM). 
    "Physical map revision (PMR)" means FEMA's action whereby one or more map panels are physically revised and republished. A PMR is used to change flood risk zones, floodplain and/or floodway delineations, flood elevations, and/or planimetric features. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single cassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    "Special flood hazard area" means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, i.e., the 100-year floodplain. 
    "Start of construction" means the date the building permit was issued, including substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    "Structure" means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure just prior to when the damage occurred. 
    "Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. The value of the structure shall be determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority in the area of interest. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    "Threshold planning quantity (TPQ)" means a quantity designated for each chemical on the list of extremely hazardous substances that triggers notification by facilities to the state that such facilities are subject to emergency planning requirements. 
    "Variance" means a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations). 
    "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    "Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

7.060 - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    The chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas and areas removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) within the jurisdiction of the city of Cortez, Colorado. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.070 - Basis for establishing the special flood hazard area. 
    The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Montezuma County, Colorado, and Incorporated Areas," dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. These special flood hazard areas identified by the FIS and attendant mapping are the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies designated and approved by the Cortez City Council. The floodplain administrator shall keep a copy of the flood insurance study (FIS), DFIRMs, and/or FIRMS on file and available for public inspection. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.080 - Establishment of floodplain development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.090 - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed within the special flood hazard area without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Nothing herein shall prevent the Cortez City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. These regulations meet the minimum requirements as set forth by the Colorado Water Conservation Board and the National Flood Insurance Program. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.100 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    The ordinance from which this chapter is derived is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and another ordinance, easement, covenant, nor deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.110 - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.120 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. 
    This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard area or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.130 - Severability. 
    This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

7.140 - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The Cortez City Manager, or his duly-appointed representative, is hereby appointed as floodplain administrator to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.150 - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter, including the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and any floodproofing certificate required by Article IV, Section 7.080. 
2.  Review, approve, or deny all applications for floodplain development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
3.  Review floodplain development permit applications to determine whether a proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
4.  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
5.  Inspect all development at appropriate times during the period of construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter, including proper elevation of the structure. 
6.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard area (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
7.  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Article III, Section 7.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article V. 
8.  For waterways with base flood elevations for which a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half foot at any point within the community. 
9.  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (conditional letter of map revision), fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12 and receives FEMA approval. 
10.  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the Colorado Water Conservation Board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. 
11.  Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.160 - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to special flood hazard area. Additionally, the following information is required: 
1.  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
3.  A certificate from a registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of Article V, Section 7.200(2); 
4.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
5.  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with Article IV, Section 7.150. 
    Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
1.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
2.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
3.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
4.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
5.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
6.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
7.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
8.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
9.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
10.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.170 - Variance procedures. 
1.  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
2.  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
3.  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
4.  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
5.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
6.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in Section 7.160 of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
7.  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter as stated in Article I, Section 7.030. 
8.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
9.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
10.  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
a.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
i.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
ii.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
iii.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
11.  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
a.  The criteria outlined in Article IV, subsections 7.170(1)-(9) are met, and 
b.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.180 - Penalties for violation. 
    A person who violates a provision of this chapter shall be punished as set forth in Section 17-16A Sentencing Municipal Court Violation Penalty Cortez Municipal Code now in effect and as may be amended from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
ARTICLE V. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

7.190 - General standards. 
    In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
1.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
2.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
3.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
4.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
5.  All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
6.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
7.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and 
8.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.200 - Specific standards. 
    In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) Article III, Section 7.070, (ii) Article IV, Section 7.150(7), or (iii) Article V, Section 7.250, the following provisions are required: 
1.  Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated to one-foot above the base flood elevation. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer, architect, or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential construction. With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in Article V, Section 7.260, new construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated to one-foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that at one-foot above the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
    A registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. Such certification shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator, as proposed in Article IV, Section 7.160. 
3.  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot above grade 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
4.  Manufactured Homes. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), are elevated to one-foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
    All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of the above paragraph, shall be elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), are one-foot above the base flood elevation, or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
5.  Recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of Article IV, Section 7.160, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this section. 
    A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
6.  Prior Approved Activities (Optional). Any activity for which a floodplain development permit was issued by the city of Cortez or a CLOMR was issued by FEMA prior to January 14, 2014, may be completed according to the standards in place at the time of the permit or CLOMR issuance, and will not be considered in violation of this chapter if it meets such standards. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.210 - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
    Located within the special flood hazard area established in Article 3, Section 7.070, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
1.  Residential Construction. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one-foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified). Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer, architect, or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential Construction. With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in Article 5, Section 7.260, all new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures, must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three feet if no depth number is specified), or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure is watertight to at least one foot above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. A registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in Article IV, Section 7.160, are satisfied. 
    Within zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are required to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.220 - Floodways. 
    Floodways are administrative limits and tools used to regulate existing and future floodplain development. The state of Colorado has adopted floodway standards that are more stringent than the FEMA minimum standard (see definition of floodway in Article II). Located within special flood hazard area established in Article III, Section 7.070, are areas designated as floodways. Since the Floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed by a licensed Colorado Professional Engineer and in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase (requires a no-rise certification) in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
2.  If Article V, Section 7.220(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article V. 
3.  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision through FEMA. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.230 - Alteration of a watercourse. 
    For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a special flood hazard area, the following standards apply: 
1.  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition, and channel migration and properly mitigate potential problems through the project as well as upstream and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability should be considered, when appropriate, to assist in determining the most appropriate design. 
2.  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the residual 100-year floodplain. 
3.  Any channelization or other stream alteration activity proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local floodplain rules, regulations and ordinances. 
4.  Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer or Certified Professional Hydrologist. 
5.  All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all applicable federal, state and the city of Cortez floodplain requirements and regulations. 
6.  Within the regulatory floodway, stream alteration activities shall not be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a floodway analysis and report, sealed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer, that there is not more than a 0.00-foot rise in the proposed conditions compared to existing conditions Floodway resulting from the project, otherwise known as a no-rise certification, unless the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision in accordance with Section 7.220 of this article. 
7.  Maintenance shall be required for any altered or relocated portions of watercourses so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.240 - Properties removed from the floodplain by fill. 
    A floodplain development permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure or addition to an existing structure on a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F), unless such new structure or addition complies with the following: 
1.  Residential Construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one-foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill. 
2.  Nonresidential Construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one-foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that the structure or addition is watertight to at least one-foot above the base flood level that existed prior to the placement of fill with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.250 - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
1.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision or other development proposal is in a flood-prone area, the proposal shall minimize flood damage. 
2.  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of Article III, Section 7.080; Article IV, Section 7.160; and the provisions of Article V of this chapter. 
3.  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Article III, Section 7.070 or Article IV, Section 7.150 of this chapter. 
4.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
5.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.260 - Standards for critical facilities. 
    A critical facility is a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Rule 6 of the Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. 
1.  Classification of Critical Facilities. It is the responsibility of the Cortez City Council to identify and confirm that specific structures in their community meet the following criteria: 
    Critical Facilities are classified under the following categories: (a) essential services; (b) hazardous materials; (c) at-risk populations; and (d) vital to restoring normal services. 
a.  Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities, and transportation lifelines. 
    These facilities consist of: 
i.  Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle and equipment storage, and, emergency operation centers); 
ii.  Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent care centers having emergency treatment functions, and non-ambulatory surgical structures but excluding clinics, doctors offices, and non-urgent care medical structures that do not provide these functions); 
iii.  Designated emergency shelters; 
iv.  Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio, and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines, cables, and conduits); 
v.  Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution (hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines, transmission lines, distribution lines, and service lines); and 
vi.  Air transportation lifelines (airports (municipal and larger), helicopter pads and structures serving emergency functions, and associated infrastructure (aviation control towers, air traffic control centers, and emergency equipment aircraft hangars). 
    Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), non-potable water treatment and distribution systems, and hydroelectric power generating plants and related appurtenances. 
    Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Cortez City Council that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with the provisions of this Article, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the Cortez City Council on an as-needed basis upon request. 
b.  Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. 
    These facilities may include: 
i.  Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical manufacturing); 
ii.  Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials; 
iii.  Refineries; 
iv.  Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and 
v.  Above ground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers. 
    Facilities shall be determined to be critical facilities if they produce or store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to keep a material safety data sheet (MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the work place, AND the chemical(s) is stored in quantities equal to or greater than the threshold planning quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that facility shall be considered to be a critical facility. The TPQ for these chemicals is: Either five hundred (500) pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is lower) for the three hundred fifty-six (356) chemicals listed under 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010), also known as extremely hazardous substances (EHS); or ten thousand (10,000) pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the Colorado Department of Health and Environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found in 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010). The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulation "Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification," 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010) and OSHA regulation "Occupational Safety and Health Standards," 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010) are incorporated herein by reference and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation of this chapter, but exclude later amendments to or editions of the regulations 
    Specific exemptions to this category include: 
i.  Finished consumer products within retail centers and households containing hazardous materials intended for household use, and agricultural products intended for agricultural use. 
ii.  Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local authority having jurisdiction by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified professional (as determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a major threat to the public. 
iii.  Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage, and distribution centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products. 
    These exemptions shall not apply to buildings or other structures that also function as critical facilities under another category outlined in this article. 
c.  At-risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care, and schools. 
    These facilities consist of: 
i.  Elder care (nursing homes); 
ii.  Congregate care serving twelve (12) or more individuals (day care and assisted living); 
iii.  Public and private schools (pre-schools, K-12 schools), before-school and after-school care serving twelve (12) or more children); 
d.  Facilities vital to restoring normal services including government operations. 
    These facilities consist of: 
i.  Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails, building permitting and inspection services, community administration and management, maintenance and equipment centers); 
ii.  Essential structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories, offices, and classrooms only). 
    These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the Cortez City Council that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with this chapter, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the Cortez City Council on an as-needed basis upon request. 
2.  Protection for Critical Facilities. All new and substantially improved critical facilities and new additions to critical facilities located within the special flood hazard area shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be critical facilities. For the purposes of this chapter, protection shall include one (1) of the following: 
a.  Location outside the special flood hazard area; or 
b.  Elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
3.  Ingress and Egress for New Critical Facilities. New critical facilities shall, when practicable as determined by the Cortez City Council, have continuous non-inundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a 100-year flood event. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
7.270 - Certification. 
    If the ordinance from which this chapter is derived conflicts with any other floodplain, damage control ordinance, regulation, or uniform code adopted by the city, this chapter shall be controlling and take precedence over any other conflicting city ordinance, regulation, or uniform code. 
    It is hereby found and declared by the city of Cortez that flooding has occurred in the past within its jurisdiction and will certainly occur within the future; that flooding is likely to result in infliction of serious personal injury or death, and is likely to result in substantial injury or destruction of property within its jurisdiction; in order to effectively comply with minimum standards for coverage under the National Flood Insurance Program; and in order to effectively remedy the situation described herein, it is necessary that the ordinance from which this chapter is derived become effective immediately. 
    Therefore, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, and this chapter, being necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health and safety, shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval. 
( Ord. No. 1186, 1-14-2014 ) 
APPENDIX A - CITY OF CORTEZ - ZONING DEVELOPMENT PERMIT 
The Zoning Administrator and Building Official must verify compliance with applicable City Land Use Code criteria for each of the categories listed in Sections 3 and 4 prior to consideration of applications for Building Permits. 
1. APPLICANT SHALL COMPLETE: 
_____Property Owner Mailing Address Phone _____Subject Property Street Address _____Legal Description; or ____________ Attached _____Existing Use(s) _____Proposed Use(s) Sq. ft. Lot Coverage _____Lot Size Proposed Bldg. Height No. Off-street Parking Spaces _____Proposed Setbacks:       Front Side Rear _____Water Department Approval? Sanitation District Approval? I hereby certify, subject to penalty of perjury, that the above is true and accurate to the best of my knowledge and that I understand all provisions of City and State codes applicable to the proposed development, any and all conditions placed upon the proposed development by the City Council and all information requested by this document. I also understand that if I violate any applicable provisions of City and/or State codes, I may be required to remedy such violation(s) through appropriate legal process imposed by the City, including moving or removing structures and ceasing of construction and/or uses. _____Signature of Applicant Date  
2. APPLICANT SHALL ATTACH TWO (2) COPIES OF A COMPLETE SITE AND ACCESS PLAN OR PLAT SHOWING THE BUILDING OR STRUCTURE IN SUFFICIENT DETAIL TO DEMONSTRATE THAT THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION OR CONVERSION, MOVING AND/OR ALTERATION IS IN CONFORMANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THE APPLICABLE ZONE DISTRICT. 
3. ZONING ADMINISTRATOR SHALL VERIFY COMPLIANCE WITH : 
Application Completeness ____________ (If incomplete, return to Applicant) 
Zoning ____________ Conditional Use Permit # ____________ 
Floodplain Development Permit # ____________ Board of Adjustment Resolution # _____ 
List Conditions of Approval or Attached: _____ 
_____
_____ 
Should Bldg. Permit Application Be Considered? YES ____________ NO ____________ Comments _____ _______________Signature of Zoning Administrator Date  
4. BUILDING OFFICIAL SHALL VERIFY COMPLIANCE WITH: 
Use _____Height _____Setbacks _____Access _____Driveway width _____Parking Spaces _____ 
Water Supply _____ 
Sanitation _____ 
Can Bldg. Permit Be Applied For? YES ____________ NO ____________ Comments _____ __________Signature of Building Official       Date  
5. IF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL SO AUTHORIZES, APPLICATION(S) FOR A BUILDING PERMIT THAT CONFORM MATERIALLY WITH ALL INFORMATION PROVIDED ABOVE MAY BE SUBMITTED TO THE BUILDING DEPARTMENT. 
APPENDIX B - THE SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT FOR 
____________ ____________ 
THIS AGREEMENT is entered into this ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ , between CITY OF CORTEZ ("City"), a governmental entity, and ____________ ("Developer"). 
WHEREAS, Colorado Revised Statutes require that prior to the recording of a Final Plat, the City Council of the City of Cortez ("City") must enter into a subdivision improvements agreement wherein the Developer agrees to construct those public improvements required by the City and which agreement requires the pledging of collateral that is sufficient, in the judgment of the Board, to make reasonable provision for the completion of the required improvements in accordance with design and time specifications set forth in the agreement; and 
WHEREAS, Colorado Revised Statutes require that a condition of Board approval of any preliminary or final plat is the Developer's compliance with City subdivision regulations, including making all payments, dedications and exactions provided therein; and 
WHEREAS, the Developer is the subdivider of the real property development ("Development") known and described as ____________ ____________ (legal description) - located in the City of Cortez Colorado, and has presented to the City a Final Plat for this Development; and 
WHEREAS, the City of Cortez Land Use Code and State Statutes require the execution of a Subdivision Improvements Agreement ("Agreement") between the Developer and the City whereby the Developer shall agree to construct certain improvements, the completion of which are guaranteed to the City, prior to filing the Final Plat; and 
WHEREAS, the City seeks to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community by requiring the completion of various improvements in the Development and thereby limit the harmful effects of substandard development and subdivision; and 
WHEREAS, the purpose of this Subdivision Improvements Agreement ("Agreement") is to protect the City from incurring the cost of completing the improvements under this Subdivision Improvements Agreement and not to benefit those providing work, services or material or the lot or home buyers in the Development; and the purpose of this Agreement is further to guarantee performance of Developer's other obligation. 
NOW, THEREFORE, IN CONSIDERATION OF THE MUTUAL PROMISES CONTAINED HEREIN, IT IS AGREED AS FOLLOWS: 
(1)  Construction of Improvements . The Developer agrees to construct or to enter into a contract with such person, firm or corporation as is chosen by the Developer to construct the required improvements, including water distribution system (for commercial, municipal and domestic uses, and for landscaping and fire protection), sanitary sewers, drainage facilities, street improvements (roads, bridges and associated improvements), traffic signs, fire protection system, street posts and markers, electrical system, street lighting, landscaping (hereinafter referred to as "Improvements"); more specifically described in Exhibit "A" that is attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference. The required Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the Plans and Specifications submitted by the Developer and in accordance with all applicable legal standards. The Developer's obligation to complete the Improvements will arise upon final plat approval by the City and will be independent of any obligations of the City contained herein and will not be conditioned upon the commencement of construction in the Development or sale of any lots or Improvements within the Development. 
In addition, the Developer will ensure that telephone service will be available within the immediately adjacent easements and/or rights-of-way of each platted lot in the Development prior to or at the time the Certificate of Occupancy or satisfactory final building inspection is issued by the City for the respective lot. No security will be required to ensure the availability of telephone service. 
(2)  Regulations and Specifications . The required Improvements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the City's regulations and specifications in effect as to the date of this Agreement, other applicable state or federal regulations, if any, the Final Plat of the Development, and the Plans and Specifications retained by the City's Public Works Director, all of which are hereby incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this Agreement. All Plans and Specifications shall have been submitted to and reviewed for exceptions by the City's Public Works Director prior to submission of the Final Plat for approval or execution. 
(3)  Completion Date . The required Improvements shall be completed no later than ____________ , 20 ____________ , (two years from date of approval) , unless the City, in its sole discretion, grants in writing an extension of this completion date to the Developer. A written extension agreement shall be signed by the Chairman of the Board and the Developer. No less than sixty (60) days prior to the above scheduled completion date, or any extension thereof, the Developer shall notify the Public Works Director in writing of the upcoming completion deadline and include a progress report which shall include a statement of whether the Developer expects to complete the required Improvements by the completion date. The Developer's failure to provide this notice shall be grounds for the City to withdraw from the commitment guarantee in accordance with this Agreement (See e.g. par. 11, 16, 23, etc.). 
(4)  Estimated Cost . The cost of constructing the Improvements is estimated to be $____________ . This cost estimate is based upon the assumption that the work will be performed by an independent contractor, was prepared by and bears the seal of an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Colorado, which shall be attached hereto as Exhibit "B." 
This estimated construction cost includes the estimated present construction cost, plus an estimate inflation factor determined by the City and calculated to the completion date. If change orders are required during the course of construction that increase the cost by more than five percent (5%) of the estimated cost of any subsequently agreed amount that may result from increased costs of material or labor, the amount of the commitment guarantee shall be adjusted accordingly. The Developer shall notify the City in writing of any such change and supply the City with the adjusted commitment guarantee. 
(5)  Commitment Guarantee . Developer's performance under this Agreement is guaranteed by ____________ . The commitment guarantee will be retained by the City until released or used as provided in this Agreement. Should the Improvements not be completed at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of any commitment guarantee, the Developer agrees to the extension of said guarantee and designates the City his agent to request said extension. The Developer shall pay all costs of guarantee extension; and it is mutually understood and agreed that the City will pay no interest to the Developer on the commitment guarantee. If the City determines guarantee is insufficient to warrant construction of Improvements, the City shall notify the Developer who shall produce such additional security as the City determines necessary. 
(6)  Transfer of Title . If the City is to have any ownership interest or maintenance responsibility in the Improvements, before commencing the construction of any of the required Improvements, the Developer shall acquire, at its own expense, good and sufficient title to all lands and facilities traversed by any required Improvements. In addition, if City is to have ownership in dedications of parks, right-of-ways, covenants, etc., for this Development, Developer shall acquire at its own expense good and sufficient title to all such property. All such property, lands and facilities so required shall be conveyed to the City and all necessary documents of conveyance shall be furnished to the City prior to and for recording with the Final Plat. 
(7)  Release of Liability-Insurance . The Developer shall indemnify and save harmless the City from any and all suits, actions or claims of every nature and description occurring during the period of construction of the required Improvements and for one year thereafter, and caused by, arising from, or on account of the construction process or any other Developer obligations hereunder, and pay any and all judgments rendered against the City on account of any such suit, action or claim, together with all reasonable expenses and attorney's fees incurred by the City in prosecuting or defending such suit, action or claim. 
(8)  Insurance . The Developer shall ensure that all contractors and other employees engaged in the construction of the required Improvements will maintain workmen's compensation insurance. Before proceeding with any construction of the required Improvements, the Developer shall provide the City with written evidence of Public Liability Insurance with limits not less than Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily injury, One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage in coverage forms approved by the City Attorney and protecting the City against any and all claims for damages to persons or property resulting from or installation of any required Improvements on public property. If the insurance is going to be modified or cancelled, the developer shall show the City adequate proof of a new policy, which is subject to approval by the City. Proof of reinsurance shall be provided to the City within 15 days of the notice. If the developer cannot do so then the City may insure the project as to liability insurance and charge the cost back to the developer. The policy will provide that the City shall be notified at least thirty (30) days in advance of any reduction in coverage, termination or cancellation of the policies. Such notice shall be sent certified mail. The Developer also warrants that any contractors engaged by or for the Developer to construct the required Improvements shall maintain Public Liability Insurance coverage in limits not less than those mentioned above. 
(9)  Warranty . The Developer hereby warrants that all required Improvements will be installed in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 hereof. 
(10)  Release of Commitment Guarantee . From time to time, as required Improvements are completed, the Developer may apply in writing to the Public Works Director for a partial release of the commitment guarantee. The application must show: 
a. Dollar amount of commitment guarantee; 
b. Work completed, including dollar value; 
c. Work not completed, including dollar value; 
d. Amount of previous releases; and 
e. Amount of commitment guarantee requested released. 
f. Release or waivers of mechanics liens of all persons who have furnished work, services or materials. 
Upon receipt of the application, the City or its agent shall inspect the Improvements both completed and those uncompleted. If the City determines from the inspection that the Improvements shown on the application as being completed have been completed as provided herein, a portion of the commitment guarantee shall be released. The release shall be made in writing signed by the City's Public Works Director. The amount to be released shall be the total amount of the commitment guarantee less (i) twenty percent (20%) of the original amount of the commitment guarantee and (ii) one hundred percent (100%) of the projected costs of the Improvements not completed. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the Developer shall not apply for a partial release of the commitment guarantee in the amount less than twenty percent (20%) of the total original amount, except for the last such release. 
(11)  Failure to Comply with Specification-Agreement Cancellation . If the required Improvements are not constructed in accordance with the Plans and Specifications provided to and reviewed by the City's Public Works Director pursuant to paragraph 2 above, the City shall notify the Developer of noncompliance setting forth in writing the reasons for noncompliance. Reasonable schedules for correction of noncompliance shall be established by mutual agreement of the parties. Should the City determine at any time that the guarantee on deposit is insufficient to complete construction of said Improvements, the City may require the Developer to deposit additional funds which the City deems necessary to complete the Improvements. If the City determines that the Developer will not construct any or all of the Improvements in accordance with this Agreement, the City may cancel and annul this Agreement with respect to such Improvements upon written notification to the Developer and the commitment guarantor, and without the necessity of public hearing, withdraw from the commitment guarantee such funds as may be necessary, in the opinion of the City, to construct or complete said Improvements in accordance with the agreed specifications. 
The City may further, upon its determination and notification to Developer that Developer has failed to meet obligations hereunder, with or without cancellation of this Agreement, withdraw such funds as may be necessary and perform Developer's obligations hereunder. 
(12)  Completion Procedures and Inspections . Upon completion of the Improvements, or any logical separable portion thereof, the Developer shall notify the Public Works Director in writing and request preliminary inspection of the completed Improvements or part thereof. The City or its agent shall inspect said Improvements and shall notify the Developer in writing of nonacceptance or preliminary approval of the completed Improvements. If the Improvements are not approved, the reasons for non-approval shall be stated in writing and corrective measures shall be developed by the City with the assistance of the Developer and at the Developer's sole expense. Should the developer fail to take corrective measures required by the City, the City, at its discretion, may revoke preliminary approval of the Improvements. 
The period of preliminary approval shall be one year for all Improvements or until final inspection occurs. All periods of preliminary acceptance shall run from the date of written notification of preliminary acceptance. During the period of preliminary acceptance, the Developer shall, at its own expense, make all needed repairs or replacements due to defective materials or workmanship and be responsible for all maintenance of said Improvements. It is specifically understood that the Developer will be responsible for road maintenance or care, including snow removal or street cleaning, unless and until the road maintenance or care is finally accepted and that the Developer is responsible for maintenance of all Improvements as provided in Paragraph 13. In the event of default of any of these obligations by the Developer, the City, without notice to the Developer, may do the same at the sole expense of the Developer and withdraw from the commitment guarantee to pay for such expenses. 
Upon preliminary acceptance by the City of all Improvements, the security may be reduced pro rata in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 13 above to ten percent (10%) of the amount estimated for said Improvements. Said ten percent (10%) retention shall be for the purpose of insuring the correction of the Improvements due to deficiencies in workmanship and/or material during the ensuing one-year period by the Developer. As-built engineering drawings shall be submitted for all utility installments and roads upon completion of all required utility and road improvements and prior to request for or issuance of, Certificates of Occupancy. Nothing herein shall be construed to require the City to make inspections during periods when climatic conditions make thorough inspections unfeasible. 
(13)  Final Acceptance and Maintenance for Improvements . Following the period of preliminary approval for the Improvements, the City or its agent shall inspect said Improvements for final approval. Landscaping shall be inspected at least three (3) months after preliminary approval. The City shall notify the Developer in writing of non-approval or of final approval. If the Improvements are not approved, the reasons for non-approval shall be stated in writing and corrective measures shall be developed by the City, with the assistance of the Developer and at Developer's sole expense. 
If the Improvements are found to be in compliance with plans and specifications, the City, following a Resolution of Approval of Improvements by the City Council, shall release the remaining retained balance of the commitment guarantee for such approved Improvements. 
All improvements intended or designated for common use within the development and not dedicated to and accepted by the City, shall be maintained in perpetuity by the Developer or an association of homeowners in the development. Until a homeowners' association has been formed, and is legally bound to provide perpetual maintenance of the Improvements, as determined by the City, the Developer is obligated to maintain the Improvements in the Development. 
(14)  Recording Agreement . After receiving Final Plat approval, the Developer shall record this Agreement with the Clerk and Recorder of Montezuma County, Colorado, and with the Final Plat of the above-referenced development. However, both this Agreement and the Final Plat shall be submitted to the Public Works Director for final review immediately prior to recording. 
(15)  Events of Default . The following conditions, occurrences or actions will constitute a default by the Developer during the completion period: 
a.  Developer's failure to commence construction of the improvements within 45 days of final subdivision plat approval. 
b.  Developer's failure to complete construction of the Improvements within two years of final plat approval. 
c.  Developer's failure to cure the defective construction of any improvement within the applicable cure period. 
d.  Developer's failure to perform work within the Development for a period of more than 30 consecutive days, except during the winter season (Nov. 1 - April 15) when doing such work is impractical. 
e.  Developer's insolvency, the appointment of a receiver for the Developer or the filing of a voluntary or involuntary petition in bankruptcy respecting the Developer. 
f.  Foreclosure of any lien against the development or a portion of the development or assignment or conveyance of the development in lieu of foreclosure. 
g.  Developer's failure to comply with any other material provision of this Agreement or with any federal, state or City law or regulation affecting the property, including the City of Cortez Land Use Code. 
(16)  City's Rights Upon Default . In the event of a default by the Developer occurs, the City may draw on the commitment guarantee. The City will have the right, but no obligation, to complete Improvements itself or contract with a third party for completion, and the Developer hereby grants to the City, its successors, assigns, agents, contractors, and employees, a nonexclusive right and easement to enter the Development for the purposes of constructing, maintaining, and repairing such Improvements. Alternatively, the City may assign the proceeds of the guarantee to a subsequent developer (or lender) who has acquired the Development, or a portion, by purchase, foreclosure or otherwise who will then have the same rights of completion as the City, if and only if, the subsequent developer (or lender) agrees in writing to complete the unfinished Improvements. In addition, the City may also suspend Final Plat approval during which time the Developer will have no right to sell, transfer, or otherwise convey lots or homes within the Development without the express written approval of the City or until the Improvements are completed and accepted by the City. 
(17)  Enforcement . If the City determines that there is a violation of present State laws, City regulations, Planning Commission requirements, and/or the terms and provisions of this Agreement, the Public Works Director may issue a cease and desist order. Thereafter, the Developer acknowledges irreparable harm and injury to the City for purposes of an application by it to the Courts for a restraining order hereunder. Should the City deem the collateral on deposit insufficient to guarantee completion of the required Improvements, the City may require the Developer or successors to post additional collateral to guarantee completion of Improvements. The City has the right to pursue any remedy provided by this Agreement or by law and, if the City obtains any such remedy, attorney's fees and costs. As an alternative to the remedies provided by this paragraph and paragraph 11, the City has the right to withdraw its approval of the Development. 
(18)  Miscellaneous . This Agreement runs with the land and is binding on and inures to the benefit of the heirs, representatives, transferee, successors and assignees of the parties. The paragraph headings are descriptive only and neither amplify nor limit the substantive material. The failure to enforce or the waiver of any specific requirements of this Agreement by either party shall not be construed as a general waiver of this Agreement of any provision herein, nor shall such action act to stop either party from subsequently enforcing this Agreement according to the terms hereof. This Agreement shall be subject to and deemed to incorporate all present and future ordinances and regulations of the City applicable thereto. Should any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Agreement be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, said decisions shall not affect the validity of this Agreement as a whole or any part hereof other than the part declared to be invalid, and the parties hereby affirm that they would have entered into this Agreement and each of its provisions independently of each of its other provisions. The Developer is not an agent or employee of the City. 
(19)  Disclosure to and Consent of Mortgagee and Lender . The Developer hereby represents that he has disclosed the terms of this Agreement to any mortgages of the Development involved and to all lenders who have provided financing to the Developer for the construction of this project and that said mortgagees and lenders consent to this Agreement as evidenced by their authorized signatures below: 
Name & Address Mortgagee/Lender Signature of 
Authorized Officer _______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Execution of this Agreement by a lender or holder(s) of Deed(s) of Trust signifies their consent to this Agreement but does not obligate them to perform any of the terms of this Agreement unless they or one of them takes title to all or a portion of the subject Development. 
(20)  Notice . All notices, demands or writings in this Agreement provided to be given or made or sent that may be given or made or sent by either party hereto to the other, shall be deemed to have been fully given or made or sent when made in writing and deposited in the United States mail, certified and postage pre-paid, and addressed to the party at the following address: 
City of Cortez (developer) _____ City Council _____210 East Main St. _____Cortez, CO 81321 _____With copies to: With copies to: City Public Works Director Cortez City Manager 110 W. Progress Circle 210 East Main St. Cortez, CO 81321 Cortez, CO 81321  
The address to which any notice, demand or writing may be given or made or sent to any party as above provided may be changed by written notice given by such party as above provided. 
(21)  Subsequent Plats . Approval of subsequent Final Plats by the Board will be based, in part, upon the extent to which the terms and conditions of this Agreement have been met by the Developer. Approval may be withheld if substantial compliance is not had with the terms hereof and the submissions required herein. 
(22)  Cumulative Remedies . The Developer acknowledges that the Board reserves the right to sue for specific performance and to seek other remedies allowed by law or in equity if Developer does not strictly comply with all the provisions of this Agreement and any plans, specifications or other approvals granted as a result of this Agreement or in any subsequent agreement entered into by the parties. 
(23)  City-No Duty . If the Improvements are not installed or are not properly installed pursuant to this Agreement, then the City shall have the right, but not the duty or obligation to either the Developer or any third party, to complete the construction of the Improvements. The parties acknowledge and agree that if the City, in its sole discretion, chooses to attempt to complete the Improvements, then: 
(24)  Use of Collateral Proceeds . The City Council shall use all liquid collateral and all net proceeds from the sale of any collateral pledged pursuant to this Agreement for the purpose of completing the Improvements and for no other purpose; and 
(25)  No Obligation . The Board shall have no obligation to utilize any other funds or assets of the City to pay for the completion of any Improvements; the parties acknowledge that the City has no duty or obligation of any nature, to either the Developer or any third party, to complete or repair any or all of the Improvements. 
(26)  Financial Disclosure . Subject to the provisions of paragraph 24, from time to time upon the written request of the Board, the Developer shall allow the City to review its then most recent audited financial statements. 
(27)  Confidentiality . All financial information provided by the Developer to the City shall be done in absolute and strict confidence. Under no circumstance shall any of the financial information provided by Developer be disclosed in any manner to any person other than a member of the Board, the Cortez City Attorney, City Manager, Public Works Director and one certified public accountant employed by the City to assist it in its review of the financial statements. 
(28)  Return of Material . After the completion of the review of the financial information, all statements, reports, copies, notes and paperwork of any kind which was prepared for or in conjunction with the financial review shall be returned to the Developer. Neither the City nor any officer, agent or employee of the City shall retain any personal notes, information or paperwork of any nature in regard to the financial disclosure. 
(29)  Annual Limit . The City may only request to review an audited financial statement once during each calendar year. The parties acknowledge that often times delays occur in the preparation of audited financial statements and; therefore, subject to the limitation set forth in the following sentence, if the audited financial statements have been completed, then the Developer shall provide them to the City within five (5) days of the City's request. Nothing to the contrary withstanding, the Developer shall have no obligation to have the audited financial statements completed before November 1st following the end of the applicable fiscal year. 
(30)  Executive Sessions . The financial information disclosed to the City pursuant to this paragraph shall only be discussed in executive sessions properly called in conjunction with the regular meetings of the Board. 
(31)  Solvency Representation . The Developer represents to the City that, at the time of execution of the Agreement, it is solvent. 
(32)  Vested Rights . The City does not warrant by this Agreement that the Developer is entitled to any other approvals required by the City, if any, before the Developer is entitled to commence development or to transfer ownership of property in the Development. Developers vested rights for this Development, if any, are determined by the vested rights sections of the City of Cortez Land Use Code Subsection 1.11 and by C.R.S. 24-68-101, et seq. 
(33)  Third Party Rights . No person or entity that is not a party to this Agreement will have any right of action under this Agreement. Provided, however, that any purchaser of land subject to a plat restriction which is the security portion of this Agreement or the purchaser of land within the Development may bring an action to enforce this Agreement and the conditions of the Development permit as provided in the Land Use Code and State statutes. 
(34)  Benefits . The benefits of this Agreement to the Developer are personal and may not be assigned without the express written approval of the City. Such approval may not be unreasonably withheld, but any unapproved assignment is void. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the burdens of this Agreement are personal obligations of the Developer and also will be binding on the heirs, successors, and assigns of the Developer. There is no prohibition of the right of the City to assign its rights under this Agreement. The City will release the original Developer's guarantees if it accepts new security from any developer or lender who obtains the Development. However, no act of the City will constitute a release of the original Developer from his liability under this Agreement. 
(35)  Governmental Immunity . Nothing contained in this Agreement constitutes a waiver of the City's immunity under applicable state law. 
(36)  Personal Jurisdiction and Venue . Personal jurisdiction and venue for any civil action commenced by either party to this Agreement whether arising out of or relating to this Agreement or guarantees will be deemed to be proper only if such action is commenced in District Court for Montezuma County, Colorado. The Developer expressly waives his right to bring such action in or to remove such action to any other court whether state or federal. 
(37)  Amendments . If the City determines that certain provisions of this Agreement fail to achieve the goal of limiting the City's liabilities and/or obligations under this Agreement, the City may modify the Agreement without the consent of the Developer. 
EFFECTIVE DATE: ____________ , 20 ____________ . By: ____________  (developer) COUNTY OF MONTEZUMA ) ) ss STATE OF COLORADO )  
    Acknowledged, subscribed and sworn to before me this ____________ day of ____________ 20 ____________ , by ____________ , representing ____________ (developer), for ____________ (subdivision). 
Witness my hand and official seal. 
My commission expires: ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
 Notary Public 
CITY OF CORTEZ CITY COUNCIL By: _________________ , Mayor ATTEST: By: _________________ , City Clerk  
  
COUNTY OF MONTEZUMA ) ) ss STATE OF COLORADO )  
    Acknowledged, subscribed and sworn to before me this ____________ day of ____________ 20 ____________ by ____________ , as Mayor of the City Council for the City of Cortez, and by ____________ , City Clerk for the City of Cortez. 
Witness my hand and official seal. 
My commission expires: ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Notary Public 
APPENDIX D - CITY OF CORTEZ APPLICATION FOR ZONING ACTION 
This application is for: ? Conditional Use Permit ? Special Exception ? Right-Of-Way or Easement Vacation ? Site Plan Review ? Replat or Plat Amendment ? Variance ? Condominium Subdivision/Conversion ? Minor Subdivision  
1. APPLICANT SHALL COMPLETE: 
_____Property Owner Mailing Address Phone _____Subject Property Street Address _____Legal Description; or ____________ Attached _____Existing Use(s) _____Proposed Use(s) Square Footage Lot Coverage (%) _____Lot Size Proposed Building Height Off-Street Parking Spaces _____Proposed Setbacks:       Front Side Rear _____Public Works Department Approval? Sanitation District Approval?  
Oath of Applicant I hereby certify, subject to penalty of perjury, that the above is true and accurate to the best of my knowledge and that I understand all provisions of City and State codes applicable to the proposed development, any and all conditions placed upon the proposed development by the City Council and all information requested by this document. I also understand that if I violate any applicable provisions of City and/or State codes, I may be required to remedy such violation(s) through appropriate legal process imposed by the City, including moving or removing structures and ceasing of construction and/or uses _____Signature of Applicant Date  
2. APPLICANT SHALL ATTACH____________COPIES OF A COMPLETE SITE AND ACCESS PLAN OR PLAT SHOWING THE BUILDING OR STRUCTURE IN SUFFICIENT DETAIL TO DEMONSTRATE THAT THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION OR CONVERSION, MOVING AND/OR ALTERATION IS IN CONFORMANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THE APPLICABLE ACTION. 
Other Items Required: _____
_____
_____ 
3. ZONING ADMINISTRATOR SHALL VERIFY COMPLIANCE WITH : 
Application Completeness ____________ (If incomplete, return to Applicant) 
Zoning ____________ Conditional Use Permit # ____________ 
Floodplain Development Permit # ____________ Board of Adjustment Resolution # _____ 
List Conditions of Approval or Attached: _____ 
_____
_____ 
Should Bldg. Permit Application Be Considered? YES ____________ NO ____________ Comments _____ _______________Signature of Zoning Administrator Date  
4. BUILDING OFFICIAL SHALL VERIFY COMPLIANCE WITH: 
Use _____Height _____Setbacks _____Access _____Driveway width _____Parking Spaces _____ 
Water Supply _____ 
Sanitation _____ 
Can Bldg. Permit Be Applied For? YES ____________ NO ____________  
Comments _____ 
_____
_____ 
Signature of Building Official Date  
5. IF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL SO AUTHORIZES, APPLICATION(S) FOR A BUILDING PERMIT THAT CONFORM MATERIALLY WITH ALL INFORMATION PROVIDED ABOVE MAY BE SUBMITTED TO THE BUILDING DEPARTMENT. 
For Official Use Only: Date Received: _____Date Of Public Hearing(s): _____Date Of Approval: _____ 
APPENDIX E - CITY OF CORTEZ APPLICATION FOR A VENDING PERMIT 
Applicant Name ____________ Business Name (D/B/A) ____________ 
Mailing Address ____________ City ____________ State ____________ Zip ____________ 
Telephone ____________ Fax ____________ Email ____________ 
Public Property: Site Location: 
1st Choice: Street Name ____________ East Side ____________ West Side ____________ 
2nd Choice: Street Name ____________ East Side ____________ West Side ____________ 
PLEASE ATTACH THE FOLLOWING TO THIS APPLICATION: 
1.  Drawing of vending apparatus (drawn to scale with dimensions indicated) 
2.  Drawing of signage (to scale) 
3.  Application fee 
4.  Evidence of ability to provide Certificate of Insurance for liability 
5.  Trash plan 
6.  Indemnification agreement 
7.  Sales tax number 
    I hereby apply for a permit from the City of Cortez for the site specified in this application. I am familiar with the City of Cortez Land Use Code and hereby state that my vending activity will be consistent with the purposes and requirements of that document. 
_____Applicant Date  
_____
FOR OFFICE USE (Indicate when received): 
  
Application _____Vending fee _____Drawing of apparatus _____Sales tax certificate _____Drawing of signage _____County health permit _____Indemnification agreement _____Trash disposal plan _____Liability insurance _____Business license _____ 
OTHER _____
Comments 
_____
_____
_____
(Ord. 982 (part), 2003) 
APPENDIX F - CITY OF CORTEZ INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT 
    The undersigned vendor agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Cortez, its officers, agents and employees, from and against all liability, claims and demands on account of injury, loss or damage, or any other loss of any kind whatsoever, which arise out of or resulting from the permittee's actions or omissions in the permitted use. 
MADE this ____________ day of ____________ 20 ____________ . 
SIGNATURE: 
_____
COUNTY OF MONTEZUMA ) ) ss STATE OF COLORADO )  
Signed and sworn to before me on this ____________ day of ____________ 20 ____________ , 
by ____________ . 
_____(Seal) Notary Public  
(Ord. 982 (part), 2003) 
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, 3-10, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Ordinance 
Number Land use code adopted 3/12/96 Adopts land use code; repeals zoning ordinance adopted 3/7/46 by Ord. 184 and subdivision regulations adopted 5/24/83 by Ord. 600, zoning and subdivisions (Chs. 1-6, Appx. A-D) 816 Adds [amends] § 5.06(c)(4); amends § 5.06(c)(1)(h), site development standards (5.06) 971 Amends §§ 2.02 and 3.05(a), definitions and use regulations (2.02, 3.05) 973 Adds § 3.05(b)(22); amends §§ 2.02 and 3.05(a), definitions and use regulations (2.02, 3.05) 982 Adds Appendices E and F; amends §§ 2.02, 3.05(a) and 3.05(b)(11), definitions and use regulations (2.02, 3.05, Appx. E, Appx. F) 984 Amends §§ 2.02 and 3.05(a), definitions and use regulations (2.02, 3.05) 991 Amends §§ 3.16(b) and (c), planned unit developments (3.16) 1014 Adds §§ 3.16(j)(2)(a)-(e); amends §§ 3.16(d) and (e); repeals Ord. 834, planned unit developments (3.16) 1015 Amends §§ 2.02 and 3.05(a), definitions and use regulations (2.02, 3.05) 1016 Amends § 3.05(a), use regulations (3.05) 1024 Amends §§ 1.08(a)(5)b.3, 2.02, 3.02, 3.05(a), 3.05(b)(2)b.3, 3.05(b)(3), 3.06, 3.10 and 3.16(i), amends name of MH district to residential manufactured home district; amends references to "mobile homes" to be "manufactured housing" (1.08, 2.02, 3.02, 3.05, 3.16) 1025 Amends § 6.15(a)(1), board of adjustment (6.15) 1026 Amends §§ 2.02 and 6.24(a), city planner and zoning administrator (2.02, 6.24) 1028 Adds § 6.17(d), variances (6.17) 1037 Amends § 2.02, definitions (2.02) 1038 Amends § 6.19(e)(1)(a), historic preservation board review (6.19) 1043 Amends §§ 3.05(b)(4), 3.06(d)(4), 3.06(e)(2)(a) [3.06(e)(3)], 3.06(f)(1) and 6.15(c)(2), accessory carports (3.05, 3.06, 6.15) 1050 Amends §§ 2.02 and 3.05(a), definitions and use regulations (2.02, 3.05) 1051 Amends §§ 3.05(b)(20)(a) and 3.05(b)(20)(e), use regulations (3.05) 1059 Amends § 5.05 and renames all references to "Cortez tree commission" to "parks, recreation, and forestry advisory board," site development standards (5.05) 1069 Amends § 4.11, subdivision standards (4.11) 1072 Amends §§ 6.05(d)(2)(a) and 6.11(e)(2)(a), administration and procedures (6.05, 6.11) 1086 Repeals and replaces § 6.19(b)(1), administration and procedures (6.19) 1091 Amends § 4.11, subdivision standards (4.11) 1096 Adds § 4.05(h), subdivision standards (4.05) 1113 Repeals and replaces § 6.19(c)(4) [amends § 5.06(c)(4)], site development standards (5.06) 1117 Adds §§ 6.04(a)(2), 6.05(17)(a) [6.05(a)(17)a.] and 6.27, administration and procedures (6.04, 6.05, 6.27) 1119 Repeals and replaces Ords. 814 and 850 [Appendix C], flood hazard ordinance (Appx. C)  
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, 3-10, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE AND DISPOSITION LIST 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of Cortex, Colorado beginning with Supplement No. 4, 3-10, included in this Code. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Description Section Section 
this Code 1129  8-22-2009 Amends historic signs Added 5.06(c)(4)e. 1130  9- 8-2009 Amends schedule of use regulations, 3.05(a) Amends parking exemption in the CBD 5.02(c)(1) Amends administrative review of site plans 6.14 1135  1-12-2010 Adopts regulations pertaining to medical marijuana dispensaries Added 3.05(b)(23) Adds a definition of "medical marijuana dispensary" 2.02 Amends table of use regulations 3.05(a) 1140  5-25-2010 Signs, historic preservation 5.06(c)(4) 6.19 1141  4-13-2010 Medical marijuana dispensaries 3.05(b)(23) 1150  6-28-2011 Public land dedication 4.05(f)(2) 1155  2-28-2012 Manufactured home parks, recreational vehicle parks 2.02, 3.05 1166  5-22-2012 Medical marijuana 2.02, 3.05 1167  9-11-2012 Community gardens 2.02, 3.05 1186  1-14-2014 Flood damage prevention       Rpld App. C, §§ C-1-C-15       Added 7.010-7.270 1191  9- 9-2014 Mobile food vendors and flea markets 3.05 1192  8-26-2014 Retail marijuana Rpld 3.05(b)(23) Added 3.05(b) 
(23A), (23B) 1197 11-25-2014 Distance requirements for medical and retail marijuana establishments 3.05(b) 
(23A)b. 3.05(b) 
(23B) 1201  8-25-2015 Outdoor cultivation of marijuana Added 3.05(b) 
(24)m. 1205  3-22-2016 Shortening the time of notice 2.01(c) 6.04(d)(2), 6.05(c)(2). 6.10(d)(2), (e), 6.14(e)(7), (g), 6.16(e), 6.17(d)(4), 6.25(c) 1212  8- 9-2016 Micro-breweries, micro-wineries, micro-distilleries 2.02 3.05(a)       Added 3.05(b)(27) 1220  3-28-2017 Mobile food vendors 3.05(a) 3.05(b)(11) 1239  3-27-2018 Schools in the open zone 3.05(a)  
